A SERMON Preached at St. Mary's Truro, On the Second of December, 1697.

Being the Day Appointed for A Public Thanksgiving FOR PEACE.

By SIM. PAGET, Rector of Truro.

LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall for Edward Evets at the Green Dragon in S.
Paul's Churchyard. School.

TO The Worshipful the Mayor, The Right Honorable the Recorder, The Capital
Burgesses, And other, the Inhabitants of the Ancient Borough of TRURO.
Gentlemen,
AMongst the many Decent and Suitable Demonstrations of your Joy on the late
Thanksgiving-day for Peace, I cannot but with great Pleasure and Satisfaction
call to mind, what a full Congregation we had at Church, and how devoutly every
one performed the Public Service for the Occasion.

You were then pleased to approve of this Sermon, as a Discourse suitable to
the Occasion, and apt to stir Men up to a thankful Reception of so great a
Blessing. Trusting it will he thought so still, and have the same effect now it
is Printed; I do in particular dedicate it to you, as a thankful
Acknowledgment of the kind Welcome you have me at my first coming to you, and
of the many great Civilities and Favors I have received from you ever since.

I should have presented you with it sooner, but that my great Indisposition
would not suffer me to transcribe it for the Press.

I pray God requite you for all your Favors, and bless you both in your
Spiritual and Temporal Interests, which is, and ever shall be the hearty Prayer
of,

Dear Sirs, Your most obliged, and Faithful Servant, Sim. Pagel.

A Thanksgiving-Sermon, etc.
Luke II. 14. Glory to God in the Highest, and on Earth Peace, Good will
toward Men.


THE Words are a joyful and congratulatory Acclamation of the Blessed Angels,
ushering into this lower world, the Son of God, the Prince of Peace. Him they
attend with Branches of Palms, instead of flaming Swords; with good Tidings of
great Joy to all People, instead of cursing Meros, burning Sodom, or destroying
the Assyrian Camp.

Him they attend, not as the Reverse of a Gracious God, as an Evil Deity
naturally eclipsing and opposing the Emanations of Divine Goodness; nor as a
Man of War, causing fear and dread to fall upon Mankind; dealing in Fury and
executing Vengeance, though a good Deity: But as the Prince of Peace, displaying
the Banners of Divine Love over Mankind, and reconciling the rebellious World
to the Favor and Beneficence of his Heavenly Father. As the Prince of Peace!
procuring and establishing Peace between Man and Man, as well as between Man
and God; Isa. 2.4.
commanding them to beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears into
Pruning hooks; Nation not to lift up Sword against Nation, nor to learn War any
more.

Well might a winged Embassy descend from the Court of Heaven, and call upon
Mankind to attend the Arrival of such a Prince, with the utmost Demonstrations
of Honor and Joy. Well might the whole World resound with Anthems of Glory to
God in the Highest, when Peace is proclaimed on Earth, as the blessed effect of
God's good will toward Men. When the Divine Goodness breaks forth into so
glorious a Display of it self upon poor Mortals, as to join Heaven and Earth
together in the mutual Beams of Love and Peace; the greatest Blessing Heaven
can bestow, the greatest Earth can receive.

And may not the occasion of this solemn Day raise in Our Minds the like
cheerful Joy, and devote Us to the most grateful Returns of Glory and Praise
to the same gracious God? Now, when the Divine Will has issued forth such an
overflowing Tide of Goodness upon the Face of the Earth, and the Son of
Righteousness is risen upon us with such Healing in his Wings. Now, when after
a long Night of Darkness, we are got into the Morning of so promising a Day;
and can behold our reviving Hemisphere to fill every day more and more, with
the beautiful Rays of an advanced Peace. Now, when the Weapons of War are
perished, 2 Samuel 1.27. Ps. 68.30.
and the People that delight in war are scattered, and the Meek begin to
inherit the Earth, Ps. 37.11.
and to delight themselves in the abundance of Peace. Isa. 11.6.
When the Wolf begins to dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard to lie down with
the Kid, and the sucking Child to play on the hole of the Asp; and every man to
sit under his Vine, Mic. 4.4.
and under his Fig Tree, and none to make him afraid. Shake thy self from the
Dust, O Zion. Isa. 52.2, 9.
Break forth into joy ye wast places of Jerusalem. Sing O ye Heavens, for the
Lord has done it: Shout ye lower parts of the Earth: Break forth into singing
ye Mountains, Isa. 44.23.
O Forest, and every Tree therein, for the Lord has Redeemed Jacob, and
glorified himself in Israel.

And that we may conceive a just Esteem of the Blessings we now commemorate,
and in some measure glorify God as we ought to do, for bestowing them upon us,
I shall from this Angelical Doxology do these four things.

I. I shall make some Reflection upon the Excellency and Desireableness of
Peace. This the words do plainly imply. II. I shall show what an argument of
God's Love and Favor the Blessing of Peace is to a People. God's good will
toward Men, breaks forth in Peace upon Earth. III. I shall observe concerning
Peace, how highly conducive it is to the Advancement of God's Glory: On Earth
Peace is Glory to God in the Highest. IV. I shall conclude with some Inferences
from the whole, and with showing you after what manner we of this Nation shall
best glorify God for bestowing this inestimable Blessing of Peace upon us.
I. I shall make some Reflection upon the Excellency and Desireableness of
Peace. Peace! methinks the word sounds pleasant in our Ears; the very naming
of it strikes a kind refreshment to the Heart, and diffuses a trembling
Ravishment through all the Veins. On Earth Peace! 'Twas one of the highest
Strains the Melodious Angels did ever sing to Men. They knew not how more
irresistibly to charm Mankind, than by sounding forth the glad Tidings of a
blessed Peace to them. And indeed considering, first, how unnatural a State of
War is to sociable Creatures; and secondly, what dreadful Calamities do
usually attend the drawn Sword; we cannot but conclude Peace to be of all
temporal Blessings, the most excellent and desirable.

1. How unnatural a State of War is to sociable Creatures. That Man by original
Creation was made for Society; bound by the use of Speech and Reason, and a
tacit inclination of Mind, as well as the Necessities of humane Nature, to be a
Companion and Friend, to esteem, and love, and assist the rest of his
Fellow Creatures, is a truth, I think not to be denied, howsoever disputed by
some of late Years, who would fain reduce a State of Nature into a State of
War. For we find even in this corrupted State of Nature, wherein the unruly
Lusts and Passions of Men have advanced the Principle of self-Preservation to
the offensive part, and improved the Cruelties of War to such vast Destructions
of Mankind; even here we find the Voice of Nature to cry against the alarms of
War, though it cannot cry them down; and to proclaim an universal Peace, as
most agreeable to our Natures, though it cannot establish one. Which plainly
shows, that Men must in some measure put off their Natures, before they can
engage in War; and become Wolves and Tigers before they can herd into Armies to
prey upon one another. And this shows the great Excellency and Desireableness
of Peace, to the more civilized part of Mankind especially, who always esteem
that to be most excellent and desirable, which is most agreeable to the
innocent Principles of uncorrupted Nature.

It Is true indeed, since we have lost our Innocence, we have made War
necessary; and God allows of it, we find, as a necessary Determination of Right
between one Nation and another. But this is no argument for its agreeableness
to our Natures, no more than it argues that Physic shall not make the Patient
sick, because he takes it out of necessity for the recovery of his Health.

It Is true again, that not only particular Persons, as Nero, Domitian, and
others; but likewise whole Nations of People have been naturally addicted to a
State of Immanity and War; as the Achaeans and Heniochs about the Pontian Sea,
who were wont to slaughter one another for Food, as we do beasts; and to serve
up their Children as Dainties to be eaten at their Banquets. But to this it may
be answered, that the universal Nature of Man ought not to be concluded from a
few instances. Shall we say that it is natural for all Mankind not to see,
because some few persons are born blind? And besides such a Nature as this is
not so much original as acquired; it is an improvement made by Education and
Custom upon the Stock of corrupted Nature. And sometimes, without doubt, it is
owing to the just Vengeance of God, who, for their great Abominations, does
give over a people to a rebrobate Mind, and to do those things which are not
convenient.

2. What dreadful Calamities do usually attend the drawn Sword. Thucidides
discoursing of War, calls it the Idea of all Evil; as if the whole Posse of
Evils was then rendevouzed, and followed the Camp in a body. And certainly of
all temporal Calamities, there are none greater, none of more general Influence
upon the quiet and prosperity of Mankind, than those are which proceed from
War. And therefore the Scriptures do represent War to us under the Similitude
of such things, as are most dreadful to humane Nature, and most destructive of
the whole Composition of this world's Happiness. Thus Jer. 13.24. it is compared
to a Wind of the Wilderness, scattering and destroying all before it. Jer.
12.12. it is said to be Sword devouring from one end of the land to the other.
Joel 2.3. it is set off by a dreadful Fire running through a land as rich as
Eden, and leaving nothing behind it but a desolate Wilderness. And Jer. 4.19.
they that live in the times of War, and behold and feel the dreadful Calamites
of it, are represented there, as lying under the greatest Consternations and
Perplexities imaginable. My Bowels! my Bowels! I am pained at my very heart, my
heart makes a noise in me, I cannot hold my Peace, because thou have heard, O
my Soul, the sound of the Trumpet, the alarm of War.

And if from these faint Resemblances of Scripture, we proceed to the Thing it
self; and consider the various miseries of War in the lamentable Experience of
all Men, whether in a private, public, or religious Capacity; we shall want a
Mind to conceive, and a Tongue to express even the half of their Dreadfulness.

First, In a private Capacity. Wherein as God threatens by his Prophet Zephany,
Zeph. 113.
Men's Goods do become a Booty, and their Houses as Desolation; they build
Houses and not inhabit them, they plant Vineyards and drink not the Wine
thereof. Wherein the tender Infant is snatched from its Mother's Breast, Nahum
3.10.
and dashed in Pieces at the top of all the Streets. Wives do become Widows to
be made a Prey off, and Children are left Fatherless, to be robbed and beg
their Bread.

2. In a public Capacity. And here we may behold the honorable Men of a
Nation to be cast lots for, Nahum 3 10.
and the great ones to be bound in Chains, and led about in Triumph through the
Crowds of insulting Enemies. Here we may behold men of great Trust and
Employment in Public Matters, falling to the great Loss and Danger of the
Commonwealth; and even Kings themselves dying in Battle, and quenching the
light of Israel. For War, as it knows no Laws, so it reverences no Magistrate;
the Higher Power is he that carries the longest Sword; and the Best Man he,
that can do the greatest Mischief.

3. In a Religious Capacity. But alas! what a frightfull Scene must we open
here? What a world of wickedness and impiety must we bring upon the Stage, to
represent the Sufferings of Religion in the time of War? Here Malice and
Revenge, Cursing and Swearing, Riot and Debauchery do Reign and Triumph over
prostrate Virtue. There false Christ's, and false Prophets do arise,
endeavoring to undermine Christianity it self, and, if it were possible, to
deceive the very Elect. There again, we may behold either the Doors of the
Temple shut against us, or the Temples themselves rased to the ground, or which
is worse, made a Stable for Horses; the Treasures of the Temple made a Spoil
of, and the Ministers of God mourning, because the meat offering and
drink offering is cut off from the House of the Lord. I dare but just Name
these things to you, for fear I should strike a damp upon the cheerful
devotion of this Day, and instead of Raising your Joy, Depress you into
Heaviness.

But why must we represent War in such a Ghastly Visage, to set off the
Beauties of Peace? Why must we go into the Heat of the Battle, into the Throng
of Calamities that attend upon War, to look for the Excellencies of a peaceable
Habitation? Alas! Peace wants no such Foil; she is of a more Divine Complexion,
than to acquire any Addition to her Beauty from the Fire and Smoke of Hell. Let
War appear as Lovely as it is possible for her to do; either in her Morning
Dress of a Good Cause, or in the Evening Train of Success and Triumph; yet
compared to Peace, she is an horrible Monster; and all Luster, if she has any,
like that which the Moon borrows, is derived from the Glories of a designed and
succeeding Peace.

-- Minor est victoria Pace.
Atque aliquid pejus Pace triumphus habet.
II. I am to show what an Argument of God's Love and Favor, the Blessing of
Peace is to a People. I must confess we ought to be very careful, in ascribing
good events at every turn, to the Love and Favor of God. Because, as the wise
Man tells us, Eccles. 9 1.
No man knows either Love or Hatred, by all that is before them. The Love of
God is, with our doubt, grounded upon unerring Foundations, and constantly
exerts it self in acts of Kindness and Beneficence to Mankind. When once God
comes to have any Love for a people, all his Dispensations toward them are
good, and arguments of his Love. But then we must consider, that the same
dealings of Providence may proceed from different Affections in God; and the
good things which he affords to some out of Love, he may dispense to others out
of Wrath and Hatred. Hos. 13.11.
Thus he gives a King sometimes in his Anger, and chastises an Hypocritical
Nation under the Triumphs of a proud Assyrian, Isa. 10.
who is afterward to fall into the same Calamities himself.

But that we may ascribe the good events of Peace to the special Love and
Favor of God, will appear to us, if we do but consider, first, what legible
Characters of the divine Goodness do appear upon Peace: and secondly, how
constantly God did bestow it upon his ancient People the Jews, when at any
time, by turning from the evil of their ways, they restored themselves to his
Love and Favor.

1. What legible Characters of the Divine Goodness do appear upon Peace. Now
the Characters of Divine Goodness are more or less legible, according as the
acts of Divine Providence are more or less Signal. In things of a lower Nature,
and such as concern only private and particular persons; the Tokens of Divine
Goodness are not near so discernable, as they are in weighty matters, and such
as concern whole Bodies and Communities of Men; because it is highly becoming of
God to adopt his Providence in proportion to the worth and value of the thing
it is concerned about. And therefore Man being of more worth and value than many
Sparrows, he is consequently made by our Savior to have a more particular
providence attending him. Are not ye of more value than many Sparrows? Now
Peace being a thing of the highest worth and value that the Providence of God
can be concerned about, in that it frees whole Nations from the Calamities of
War, and restores to them their Lives and Fortunes, their Liberties and
Religion, and all other desirable Goods, which a State of War is wont to
subvert and destroy: therefore, it is but reasonable to conclude, that the
Providence of God is more especially concerned about Peace; and consequently
Men must be Blind, if they don't discover the manifest Tokens of the Divine
Goodness upon it, and acknowledge it to be one of the greatest Arguments of
God's Love and Favor to a People.

2. How constantly God did bestow this Blessing upon his ancient people the
Jews, when at any time, by turning from the evil of their ways, they restored
themselves to his Love and Favor. This is a truth so well known to every one,
that 'twill be needless to relate any particulars for the confirmation of it.
The whole History of that people being but one continued Series and Narrative
of the Divine Dispensations toward them; either in causing the Sword to devour
them for their Sins, or in giving them Peace within their Borders upon their
sincere Repentance.

And though God does not govern the World now by such immediate Providence as
he did then; neither can we behold such direct Strokes of his hand, in
rewarding and blessing a beloved people: yet considering that God still keeps
the Government of the world in his own hands, and governs by the same
unalterable methods of Wisdom, and Goodness, and Justice to the end of the
World. Considering, that as the Goodness of God extends it self to all
Creatures in general; so the special Love and Favor of God extends it self to
Men and Kingdoms in particular, according as they approach nearer to him in
Truth and Holiness; and that this special Love and Favor of God is always
exerting it self in the greatest acts of Kindness and Beneficence to Mankind;
amongst which, Peace is the greatest, nay the only Blessing he can bestow upon
Nations and Kingdoms; it being impossible for a Nation to subsist in any
tolerable degree of Happiness, without Peace: considering this, I say, it is but
reasonable to conclude, That as God did love his ancient people the Jews, when
they observed his Statutes and Judgments which he gave them; and did bless and
multiply them, and give them Peace, because he loved them: so does he continue
to do the same now to all the Nations and Kingdoms of the Earth. And that
although his Blessings do come about in a larger Circuit, and after a more
abstruse and intricate Manner now to what they did then; sometimes carrying the
visible marks of deep humane Counsels and Contrivances, so that we may be apt
to think them the works of Men's own hands, and sometimes proceeding from a long
Train and Series of unforeseen and unexpected Accidents; so that Men may be apt
to ascribe them to Fortune or Chance; yet if we believe any thing of a
super-intending Providence, we must run all these remarkable Occurrences up to
their Fountainhead, and derive them all in their various turnings and windings
from God their Author. They do all of them proceed from him, who governs the
World now by the same Rules of Wisdom, Goodness and Justice, as he ever did,
and ever will do; notwithstanding the Executions of his Government are not,
neither is it necessary they should be, so immediate and visible now, as they
were formerly.

III. I observe, concerning Peace, how highly conducive it is to the
advancement of God's Glory. The Glory of God is properly an Excellence of the
Divine Nature, whereby God (as we may express it for the help of our own
Apprehensions) does infinitely transcend all created Beings in the vastness of
his perfections. The Scriptures, in condescension to our Capacities, do set it
forth under the resemblance of a King, with all his Glory and Majesty about
him. The Lord is King, Ps. 93.1. Ps. 104.1
and has put on glorious Apparel. Thou art become exceeding glorious, thou art
clothed with Majesty and Honor. And because it is not for such Creatures as
we are, to appear before the Throne of God, and there to behold him in those
vast Effluviums of Glory, which proceed from the immense perfections of his
Nature; therefore does God condescend to become visible to us in the remoter
works of his hands, and to let us see the back-parts of his essential
Brightness and Luster, in some wonderful Works either of Wisdom, or Power, or
Goodness, or Justice, or Mercy. Now when we say, that Peace conduces to the
advancement of God's Glory; we are not to understand, as if Peace could make
any real addition to the infinite Glories of God: for certainly God would have
been infinitely Glorious in himself, whether ever he had made this World, or
Man, or any thing belonging to them. But that Peace conduces to the setting
forth of this Glory to the Observation, Esteem and Admiration of the World. It
causes Men to conceive reverend Thoughts of God; to admire and adore the
infinite perfections of his Nature; and by all holy ways to set them off in
their brightest Luster to others, that they may observe, admire and adore them
too. Peace is a work of that Divine Original, Composure and Establishment; it
shows so much of a Divine Wisdom, in contriving a fit way to appease Men's
outrageous Lusts and Passions, and to satisfy so many different Humors, and
Interests, and Religions, which are so furiously carried on in the times of
War: it shows so much of a Divine Power, in overruling the deep Counsels and
indefatigable Practices of so many different Parties; and causing them all to
submit to, and concenter in the all-wise Determinations of his Will: it shows
so much of a Divine Goodness, in closing up the wide Ruptures of the World, in
healing the sad Breaches of War, in delivering whole Nations and Kingdoms from
the brink of unavoidable Destruction, and restoring to them their Lives and
Liberties, and all other desirable things; that if men have not cast off all
sense of God and a Providence, they mud necessarily break forth into the
devoutest Admiration and Love of God, when at any time he is pleased to make
Wars to cease, and to bless the world with the return of Peace. They must needs
sing Praises to the Honor of his Name, and make his Praise glorious. Thus the
holy Psalmist, Give unto the Lord, O ye Mighty, give unto the Lord Glory and
Strength, give unto the Lord the Glory due unto his Name, worship the Lord in
the Beauty of Holiness. And for what reason? why, the Lord will give Strength
unto his People, the Lord will bless his People with Peace, Psalm 29.1, 2, 11.

IV. And lastly, I shall now conclude with some Inferences from the whole, and
with showing you, after what manner, we of this Nation shall best glorify God,
for bestowing this inestimable Blessing of Peace upon us.

1. From hence we may learn to be suitably affected with the Solemnity of this
Day, and to put a very high esteem and value upon the Peace we now commemorate,
as the greatest Blessing could possibly come to our Nation. This we lie under a
great obligation to do, upon the account of Gratitude to God, the Author of our
Peace; who is pleased kindly to accept of so splendid a Compensation for the
many wonderful Benefits we are daily receiving from him. But this I shall have
occasion to enforce upon you more methodically by and by. At present, I shall
only remind you of the sad Miseries of War, together with the blessed Benefits
and Effects of Peace, as a sufficient argument to make you prize this happy
charge of your condition, and to esteem it as a Blessing, both to your selves
and Children beyond comparison.

It Is true, indeed, we have not felt near the Miseries that other Nations have,
who were less concerned in the War than we were; and for this reason, it is to
be feared, we shall be less Sensible of the Peace. We have had no Streams of
Blood running down our Streets, nor Flames of Fire clasping about our Houses,
nor our Husbands, our Wives, our Children either famished or slain. God be
thanked, we have enjoyed a Peace in the midst of War, to what our
Neighbour-Nations have done. Our Sons have grown up as the young Plants, and
our Daughters have been as the polished Corners of the Temple; our Garners have
been full and plenteous with all manner of Store, and our Sheep have brought
forth Thousands and ten Thousands in our Streets. We have had the free exercise
both of our Religion and Laws, Piety and Virtue, Learning and good Manners,
Commerce and Trade; and all other things tending to the Good and Honor of a
Nation, have in some measure, God be thanked, flourished amongst us. But what?
Shall we despise the Blessing because it comes so Cheap? Shall we grow sick of
it, because it puts us to no more Pain? This is such an odd fort of an humor,
that one would think Men should never be guilty of it. So long as the Physic
cures, what matter is it how insensibly it works? And so long as we enjoy
Peace, let us be contented to have felt no more of the War. Peace is highly
valuable, whether we compare it with War or no; and it ought with all
reasonable people to be esteemed a Blessing at the end of a foreign and less
calamitous War, as well as if our own Nation had been the bloody Stage of its
Slaughters, and we our selves the greatest Sufferers imaginable under the
Calamities of it. Nay, I know not but the Blessing may be the greater; for now
I am sure, we have fewer Damages to repair, less Miseries to bewail, more
Comforts and Conveniences left us to enjoy, and consequently are the better
qualified to derive a larger share of happiness from the Influences of Peace.
And to this give me leave to add, that God knows how soon our condition might
have altered for the worse if the War had continued much longer. Our Enemies,
you know, were come to their last push, and that proves oftentimes very
dangerous. They might have given us one sparring Blow at their going off, which
might have been of ill consequence, and have proved very fatal to the quiet of
our Nation. And though we should have had but little reason to suspect this,
having so wise and brave a Prince to fight our Battles for us; yet considering
that humane Strength and Policy are not always infallible, and that the
greatest Conduct of Princes, is oftentimes providentially disappointed, because
their Subjects are unworthy of the benefits of it: We could have had no
assurance that it should not be so with us; but our condition, for ought any
thing we know, might have altered much for the worse, and our Nation in a very
short time, have been made the seat of the most barbarous Treatments since the
beginning of the War.

In God's Name therefore, let us act like reasonable Creatures, and prize the
Blessing which the whole World is glad to enjoy. Let us think and speak of it,
as if we had a concern for our Country's good; as if our Religion, our Laws,
our Liberties, our Properties were dear and tender to us; and we highly pleased
to see them delivered from the merciless Storms of War, and brought into the
calm and secure Port of an honorable, and as we trust, lasting Peace.

2. From hence we may be able to look back upon our former Days of Fasting and
Humiliation, and those repeated Prayers we put up to God, for Deliverance from
our Enemies; and now give some comfortable account of them, both to our selves
and others, of their being accepted and heard. Our Enemies now will have no
occasion to reproach us, saying, Where is their God? Psalm 79.10.
Neither shall we our selves any more conceive such hard thoughts of God, as to
expostulate with him. Isa. 58.3
Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see not? Wherefore have we afflicted our
Soul, and thou take no knowledge? For now we lie under a comfortable
Assurance, that he that is our God, is a God of Salvation. Psalm 68.20.
Now we perceive the blessed fruits and benefits of putting our Trust in the
Lord, amidst all our vast Preparations, our deep Counsels, our indefatigable
Endeavors in carrying on the War, and making our Enemies yield to our own
Terms and Conditions of Peace. Now we find what it is to have waited patiently
for the Lord, and to have tarried his time for the Accomplishment of his
Mercies toward us: For having waited, we are not ashamed; and having patiently
endured, we have obtained the Promise. Now we trust, that Mercy and Truth are
met together, and that Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other.

3. Having tasted and seen that the Lord is good; let us resolve from
henceforth to put our full trust and confidence in him; and believe, that with
this great Blessing of Peace, he will bestow upon us whatever may contribute to
a lasting and happy enjoyment of it. This is St. Paul's argument with respect
to God's great Love in redeeming Mankind by the death of his Son. He who did
not spare his own Son, but delivered him up for us all; how shall he not with
him also freely give us all things? i.e. give us all things necessary and
convenient for the Completion of so great a Blessing. And (to use the same
argument) since God has been pleased freely to bestow upon us so great a
Blessing as Peace, let us firmly depend upon him for the Accommodation of all
subservient Mercies, let us trust that he will bless the King with a long Life,
as the Guardian-Angel of the Peace he has given us; and cause him to be as
sweet a nursing Father in Peace, as he was our gallant Champion in War; that
now having given repose to Europe by checking the Progress of so powerful an
Enemy abroad; he will secure England's Peace, by turning his Arms against the
insulting Foe at home; I mean Vice and Profaneness, Heresies and Schisms,
which, so long as suffered amongst us, will continually keep up a War in our
Bowels, and make us the greater Sufferers by the Peace we have got. Let us
trust that he will direct our Counsels, and bless our Undertakings, and make us
all obedient to Government, and loving one to another; that so our Peace may be
a Blessing indeed, and the Effects of it, an universal Happiness both to Church
and State for many Generations.

4. From hence we may perceive, what strong Obligations we lie under, to praise
and glorify the great God of Heaven and Earth, who, in great Mercy has
delivered us from the Calamities of War, and given us the inestimable Blessing
of Peace within our Borders. There is so much of the Perfections of God shining
forth in the works of Peace, especially such transcendent Rays of his Goodness,
the very Flower and Beauty of all his Excellence; that we must not only be
guilty of the greatest Blindness, in not observing such manifest discoveries of
the divine Attributes in general; but likewise of the deepest Ingratitude, in
suffering such an Ooean of the Divine Goodness to run out upon our Score,
without meeting with a suitable return of Glory and Praise from us. Now it we
would make some grateful return to God, for the signal Deliverances we this
Day commemorate, and glorify his Perfections as we ought to do, for bestowing
this Peace upon us:

We must in the first place, under a due sense and esteem of all God's Favors
toward us; more especially of this last signal display of his Goodness in
blessing us with Peace; we must send up our sincere Acknowledgments to Heaven,
and humbly thank God, the Author of our Life and Happiness, for this, and all
other his Favors toward us, since the beginning of the War. This is
absolutely necessary, in order to the setting forth of Gods Glory upon all
occasions of his Goodness toward us; we must do it with a thankful Heart,
otherwise we shall never glorify him aright. And therefore, Rev. 7.12. we find
Thanksgiving and Honor to God joined together. And Romans 1.2^. St. Paul gives a
very good reason why the Gnostics did not glorify God as God; they were not
thankful. And accordingly we find it to have been the constant practice of
holy Men of old, especially of that unimitable Pattern of Gratitude, and most
devout Admirer and Publisher of the Divine Goodness, the Royal Prophet David;
to celebrate God's Honor and Glory for his loving Kindness toward them, with
the utmost Thankfulness their inflamed Hearts were capable of sending forth.
Thus Psalm 107.21, 22. O that Men would praise the Lord for his Goodness, and
for his wonderful Works to the Children of Men! and let them sacrifice the
Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and declare his Works with rejoicing. And Psalm.
60.30. I will praise the Name of God with a Song, and will magnify him with
Thanksgiving; and in the following Verse he gives a very good reason for it;
This also shall please the Lord better than an Ox or Bullock that has horns
and hoofs. This cheap return of Thankfulness to God for Peace, will please him
better than all our sumptuous and chargeable expressions of Joy. 'Twill reach
the Heavens sooner than our loudest Acclamations; and be more acceptable to God
than our richest Banquets. For will God eat the Flesh of Bulls, or drink the
Blood of Goats? No, offer unto God Thanksgiving, for whosoever offers Praise, he
it is that glorifieth him.

And then because God usually works by a train of dependent means, and brings a
people out of Misery by degrees, and by a constant Succession of many Favors
and Mercies, which, like a Chain, hold altogether, and at length terminate in a
general Happiness. Therefore in our thankful returns to God for this great
Blessing of Peace, a Blessing which we have all along prayed for, and do now
receive, as the very Crown and Perfection of all our worldly Happiness; we
should make very sensible Reflections upon, and be sincerely thankful for all
those Deliverances and Successes which we have met with since the beginning of
the War; as tending all of them in their own Nature, and by the kind Influences
of Heaven, to produce this grand Happiness of all, viz. Peace. O now we are got
into the Land of Canaan! let us not be so stupid as to forget our Redemption
out of Egypt. Let us still remember God's wonders of old, though we cannot
forbear being transported with his present Mercies. Let us still remember the
House of Bondage; the Hand whereby, and the Day whereon we were delivered out
of it.

Let us still remember the many kind Stages of Providence, whereby we safely
passed from Danger to Danger; from one hazardous Enterprise to another with
Success and Victory; till now at length we are arrived at our secure Port of
Peace and Happiness: and let us under a due sense of all this, as a gracious
method of Heaven in bringing to pass this glorious work of Peace; let us add
mightily to the Thanks of this Day, and accumulate our Praise offerings to God,
for such a constant Succession of Mercies toward us since the beginning of the
War.

And this let us do, not only for a day or two, but for a considerable time to
come; nay, for our whole lives, if it be possible, because such signal Mercies
do require a considerable space of time wherein gratefully to commemorate them;
and because we may reasonably believe, that we shall enjoy the benefits of this
Peace as long as we live. While we live, therefore let us Praise the Lord, and
while we have any being, let us sing Praises to our God.

Secondly, we must glorify God in declaring his Goodness to others; that so we
may stir them up to an admiration of the great God, and cause, if it were
possible, the whole world to join together in adoring the infinite Perfections
of his Nature. This is one great reason, why God does oftentimes so visibly
interpose his hand in humane affairs, viz. that men may see, and know, and
consider, and understand together, that the hand of the Lord has done this,
and the holy one of Israel has created it. By the exercise of his Wisdom, and
Power, and Goodness in the affairs of the World, God would bring men to an
acknowledgment of his Authority, to an obedience of his Laws, to a belief of
his Word, to a dependence on and resignation to him, in all the circumstances
of Life, and therefore it should be the great concern of all men, as they
tender the Glory of God in the sincere practice of Religion, to declare and
make known his signal Providence through the World, and to endeavor in all
sincerity and gentleness to bring men over to a sight and acknowledgment of
them, that so they may say, Verily there is a reward for the Righteous, verily
there is a God that judges the Earth.

Thirdly, we must glorify God in our duty to the King. It redounds to the
Glory of God, for Caesar to have the things which are Caesar's, as well as for
God to have the things which are God's. For there is nothing wherein God does
more plainly discover his infinite Perfections, than in the establishment of
Government upon Earth, and ordaining Kings to rule over us. Here his Wisdom,
his Justice, his Power, his Goodness do all of them appear in a most
conspicuous manner; and for men not to acknowledge their power, not to be
obedient to their Laws, not to pay them them their Tributes, not to speak
reverently of them, not to honor them as God's Vicegerents upon Earth, is, I
am sure, to cast dirt in God's face, and instead of honoring him, to affront
him in the highest degree imaginable.

And now more especially we have great reason to be very fruitful in all the
Branches of our duty to the King; for now after a great many Fatigues and
dangers which he voluntarily exposed himself to for our sakes; he is returned
home with the Olive Branch of Peace in his mouth, and will make us, if we are
not wanting to our selves, a flourishing and happy people. It Is to his Goodness
and Love, to his Wisdom and Care, to his Courage and Conduct under God, that we
owe our Preservation and Peace; and therefore to him, next to God, let us
ascribe all due Thanks and Honor, all just Admiration and Praise, all sincere
Love and Obedience, as the seasonable instrument of all our Happiness. Let him
now live in Peace, since he has made it himself, and not find it a harder thing
to get the Hearts of his Subjects, than the Necks of his Enemies.

Fourthly, We must glorify God in the amendment of our Lives. And here it is,
that we shall glorify God indeed; this is the greatest Glory we can possibly
give to God, and that which he expects from us as a most reasonable service at
all times; but more especially when he has been pleased to confer any signal
benefits upon us. He has showed thee Oman such things as he good: He has
delivered thee from great Evils, and established thee in a happy condition; and
what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love Mercy, and to
walk humbly with thy God. Let the light, therefore, so shine before men, that
they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.
Haling your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak
against you as evil doers, they may by your good works, which they shall
behold, glorify God in the day of Visitation.

Fifthly, more particularly let me recommend to you mutual Love and Affection
one toward another, and that to your Godliness in general, you would add
Brotherly Kindness in particular. This I am sure the Apostle looks upon as very
instrumental toward the promoting of God's Glory. Now the God of Patience and
Consolation grant you to be likeminded one toward another; and for what
reason? but that they might with one mind and one month glorify the Father of
our Lord Jesus Chrst. As it conduces to the Honor of a Master, to have his
Family in good order; and to the Honor of a King, to keep his Subjects in
Quietness and Peace; so it highly conduces to the Honor of the great God, when
his Creatures live in a mutual Love and Esteem of each other. They do thereby
signify their obedience to his Laws, and copy out that great original, who is
Love it self, and whose tender Mercies are over all his works. Let us then, in
the Name of God, lay aside all Disputes and Differences, all Rancour, and
Malice, and Revenge, and live in the sincere Love and Friendship of one
another. Now we have Peace, let us live in Peace; now we have Peace from our
Enemies, let us not be so foolish as to throw up the Ball among our selves;
never let it be said, that we have brought the War Home. And let me beseech you
to lay the Ax to the Root of the Tree, I mean of this pernicious Tree of
Animosities and Dissentions, which does oftentimes spread it self so impiously
large, as to lash, not only the King and Government, but Religion it self, and
God the Author of it. The Root is little private Whisperings, and Resentments,
and Grugdes, and Mis-understandings of one another, in things of small moment
and value; which in time do advance to that height, as contumeliously to
disgorge themselves upon a Man's King, and his God too. I am verily persuaded,
that most of our differences in Church and State, are in a great measure owing
to these little Mis-understandings and Resentments in our private Conversation:
and therefore, as we tender the Glory of God in the Unity of the Church, and
the good of Government in the Honor of the King; let us now lay them all
aside, and expel them our Neighborhood for ever. And if we must keep up
Contentions amongst us, let our only Contentions be, who shall forgive first,
and love best; let our only Contentions be, who shall most devoutly serve God,
who shall most entirely affect his King, who shall most vigorously promote the
Public Good: And then we may expect that God will bless us, and suffer us to
enjoy the Peace which he has given us, and which, he sees, we are so careful
to keep and preserve.

Sixthly and Lastly, We must glorify God in our Charity to the Poor. He that
gives Alms, sacrifices Praise. To do good, and to communicate forget not, for
with such Sacrifices God is well pleased.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, Three Persons, but
one God of Love and Peace, be ascribed all Glory, Honor, Might, Majesty, and
Dominion, both now and for ever. Amen.
FINIS.

