THE PERSECUTED DISSENTERS ANSWERED.

Being the Substance of a Discourse with one of them.

In a Letter to a Gentleman of Gray's Inn.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by E. Whitlock, near
Stationers' Hall. 1697.

THE Persecuted Dissenter ANSWERED.
SIR,
BEing very late last night before I returned to my Lodgings, as I past by the
Groom-Porters, the Chair-men asked me, if I would not have a Chair? I told
them, I could not afford it. A Gentleman that was passing by took occasion to
say, I might have a Chair for a small matter; I asked him how much? He said,
they never took less than a Shilling, tho it was but to the next door, and yet
I might be carried from thenee to White Hall for the same Money: But continuing
to say that I could not afford to pay for a Chair, he took the liberty to
express himself very much against the Times and the Government, saying, that
all true Christians were oppressed, and under a severe Persecution. I asked him
how this could be, since the Government did allow Liberty of Conscience to all
Religions and Persuasions? And tho I could not by this time but give a shrewd
guess what Judgment and Persuasion he was of, yet that I might be sure not to
be mistaken, nor to seem too sensible of his meaning, I seemed ignorant, and
instanced in the chief, and most known Dissenters, the Quakers, Anabaptists,
Independants, and Presbyterians; saying that Liberty of Conscience was allowed
to these and all others, and how then could any complain of Persecution? True,
says he, Liberty of Conscience is granted to these and all others who do own
the Authority of the present Government, but there is none allowed to those who
are persuaded in their Consciences that King James is the Lawful King, and that
this Government is no other than an Usurpation. Why, said I, would you have the
Government tolerate its own Enemies? and pray is not King William's Title to
this Government, as good as Caesar's was to that of the Jews, when our Savior
determined, upon the sight of his Coin, that Tribute should be paid to him? And
I further added, if we may pay Caesar Tribute, we may Obey him, and if Obey him
why not Pray for him? No, says he, our case and that of the Jews is very
different; by the Word Caesar can be understood no more than the King, and so,
if in our Common Prayer Books there had been no express mention of King
William, in exclusion of King James, we could have prayed for the King. I
answered, if by Caesar our Savior did understand the Person of that Caesar who
was then the Supreme Governor of the Jews, as appears from the Nature, and
Force of his argument, taken from the sight of his Image, and Superscription
upon his Coin, as also from his willingness to suffer under Pontius Pilate his
Deputy, and his owning his Power and Authority to come from God, then it is
manifest that the case is the same. And that he might not have the least
apprehension of Caesar's having a better Title to the Jewish, than his present
Majesty to this Government, I told him that notwithstanding that Determination
so much in Caesar's Favor, it was elsewhere evident that our Savior did work
a Miracle to pay Tribute to that Power, and Authority, which Caesar had put out
of possession; for did he not command Peter to cast a Hook into the Sea, and to
give that Money to the Tributarians of the Temple, which he should find in the
Fishes mouth? And in as much as this Tribute was not paid to Caesar, but to the
Temple, we may, with good reason conclude, that it had not Caesar's but the
Temples Image and Superscription upon it. Being able to make no Reply to this
Argument, I took occasion thus to explain my self concerning paying Tribute and
Obedience to King William, saying, by the same rule any one shall think it a
sin to do, or say any thing that is an Acknowledgment of his Authority, he
ought not to Receive, pay, or trade with any of his Coin, that shall have his
Image and Superscription upon it, and that whoever does do it ought to own his
Authority, and in effect does acknowledge it. I urged this consideration so
far, as to say, you ought not with his Money so much as to buy a piece of
Bread, if you deny his Authority. Why then, says he, we must starve; yes, said
I, you must, and ought to starve, rather than do any thing that is contrary to
what you are persuaded in your Minds to be the Truth, or is inconsistent with
that Persuasion. But then, I added, this cannot happen to any that are willing
to do as Christ and his Apostles did, who by their Virtues and Graces so
recommended themselves to the Charity and Good will of others, that they did
not want Food and Raiment convenient for them. Nor ought you to doubt but God,
if your Cause and Virtues be good and great, will Bless and reward you in this
or the next World, in propotion to the goodness of your Cause, and the
greatness of your Virtues, as he always does those who worship him in sincerity
and truth, and do lay down their Lives for the faith. To these things he
answered only in a General and confused manner, without any chain of reasoning,
saying the Times the Times were not now like those in the Apostles days, and
that as this Government had not, so nor could it maintain its Authority, by any
Doctrines of Reason and Justice, and so it ought not to be acknowledged, and
submitted to. By this time, after several haltings by the way, we were come as
far as the Horse Guards, and now perceiving in the Gentleman no more of that
evenness and calmness of temper, which had at first engaged me to hearken to
his complaints, I told him I must bid him Good Night, for my Lodgings lay the
other way in the Strand. When he perceived he had drawn me out of my way, he
civilly asked my pardon, and so we parted. Coming to my Inn, and reflecting upon
this Adventure, with all the calmness and sedateness that I could, I could not
but chide my self, that I had not brought him to my Inn, or enquired of him his
Habitation, that so I might at another opportunity, have given him further
satisfaction in these things. For tho, as I said, his temper at last seemed to
be disturbed and uneasy, and such as did even make me suspicious, lest he
should have some design to draw me into inconveniences, yet I could not but
remember, that about the middle of our Discourse (when I had pressed him with
some, as I thought very plain and easy Arguments for a peaceable submission to
the present Government) he seemed to be convinced, and told me in a very
modest, and humble manner (without as I thought all Art and Disguise) he should
be glad to wait upon me, if I would give him leave, at my Lodging, or where I
should appoint, for further satisfaction in a case that had hitherto so much
troubled his Mind. And truly, I think, I was not so sensible as I ought, or I
had complied with his Desire. Nor could it be any thing but Weakness and Fear,
that made me decline so affable a condescension, and acknowledgment. And
possibly so unexpected a disappointment from one of my profession, (who upon
all occasions ought to inform and strengthen the minds of the wavering and
doubtful) did so trouble and discompose his spirits, that he could not
afterward maintain that sedateness, and temper, which before had been so
inviting. Nor did these my weak and feeble jealousies fail to work the like
effects in my own Breast; so that our discourse about another Title to the
Sovereignty of a Nation, was concluded in a mutual abdication of that
Sovereignty of Reason and Virtue, which ought to banish all those servile
fears, and slavish suspicions, which so much dissipate all the Obligations of a
generous Love, and Charity, to Friends and Enemies, that we cannot do those
things which Virtue and Religion would else oblige us to. Thus, Sir, for want
of other employment, at this time, presuming upon the greatness and freedom of
our friendship, I have thought fit for your Diversion, to lay before you this
last Nights adventure. I know very well this way and method of Reasoning, with
this sort of Men is not approved of by many that are right well affected to the
present Government, for that they do conceive it is not built upon a good
Foundation; and when I have sometimes urged them with the Authority of St.
Matthew, concerning our Saviors working a Miracle to pay Tribute to the
Temple, as you may find it in the latter part of his 17th Chapter, and which I
have here alluded to, saying, that the Precepts and Practice of our Savior,
cannot but be built upon a good Foundation, they have denied the interpretation
I put upon that place: But knowing that I have the Authority of many Learned
Men, and that the Text does naturally admit of this explication, and no other,
I do not doubt but I shall be able to justify this method of Reasoning with our
prosecuted Dissenters; and as by former experience I have observed it to shake
the height of their Confidence and Assurance, so I doubt not but I shall do a
good piece of service for the interest of Truth, and the Peace and Tranquillity
of Men's Consciences, if I can, as I believe I can, make it evident, that as no
Government will be so witless as to tolerate their professed Enemies, and those
that disown their Authority; so all true Christians man and ought to live
quietly and peaceable under the present Government, and enter into such
obligations for the performance of their Duty, as the Government shall require.
I am,

SIR, Your Humble Servant, W. B. I.


