A Philosophical Account OF THIS HARD FROST.

From Whence Is Rationally concluded what Effects it may probably have upon
Humane Bodies, as to Health and Sickness.

Both in relation to the time of the Frosts Continuance, and to the time of
Thaw that shall succeed.

With Cautionary Directions for the prevention of such Distempers as are likely
to be the Natural Consequence of both those Seasons.

Which Directions are not only Calculated for this present Season, but are
designedly adopted to serve upon the like occasion for time to come.

PSALM. 147.17. He casts forth his Ice like Morsels; who can stand before his
Cold?

Written in Answer to a Letter of a Person of Quality, and at his Command made
public for the Common Good.

By JOHN PETER Physician.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Smith at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Church Yard,
1684.

A Philosophical Account OF THIS HARD FROST.
Honored Sir,
YOurs received, and upon weighing its Contents, I find my self involved in a
Dilemma: If I should stifle it by silence or answer it by excuse, I should give
you a just occasion to be jealous of my obedience to that Command (I have
always more than pretended) you justly have over me: On the other hand, by
readily answering your desire, I shall pitifully expose my insufficiency for
such a Task: I confess I cannot for my life be so ungrateful and disobliging,
as to become guilty of the former part, and therefore considering into whose
hands I shall fall, I shall the cheerfuller proceed in doing my endeavor to
answer your desire, viz. That I would present you with an Hypothesis of the
Natural Reason of Heat and Cold, Frost and Thaw (2.) That I would give you my
Opinion, What Effects this extreme Cold and Frosty Season may probably have on
Humane Bodies, as to Health and Sickness.

In undertaking to Salve the Phenomenon of Meteors, I shall not look back into
the Egyptian Darkness of the Peripatetick Philosophy (you seeming to intimate,
that the dissatisfaction you found in its Theory, gave you Incitement to put me
upon this Design) to ingulf my self and you in untelligible Notions, but shall
launch out into a more genuine and better grounded Hypothesis, wherein all
Appearances of Nature are easily Saluable. Therefore to cut my Suit according
to my Cloth, to fit my Answer to your Request to the size of a Letter, I shall
(1.) briefly offer you an Hypothesis of Meteors in general. (2.) Of Heat and
Cold, Frost and Thaw in particular. (3.) I shall endeavor from the same Theory
rationally to conclude what Effects this extreme Cold and Frosty Season may
probably have upon Humane Bodies, as to Health and Sickness.

That the several Appearances in Metereology (as all other Phaenomena's in
Nature are best resolvable by Spagiritick Principles (viz. Spirit, Sulphur,
Salt, Water, and Earth) daily Experience evinces, and that according to their
various Motions and different Proportions in mixed Bodies, are the said Bodies
built up and demolished; raised up, and taken in pieces again.

As in Meteors, so also in Minerals, the chief active Principles are Salt and
Sulphur, they are both for the most part conceived in the same Womb: As the
Production of the last is made by the said Fermentative Principles or
Elementary Particles grown compact, and made concrete in the teeming Womb of
the Earth: So whilst the said Fermentative Principles are fluid, and in
Solution, fluctuating here and there in the Earths bowels, they fume out
various Exhalations through the subteraneous passages, which mingling with the
Airy Corpuscles, supply the Region of the Atmo-sphere, with the usual variety
of Appearances observable by every vulgar Eye, as Clouds, Wind, Snow, Hail,
Rain, Dew, Hoary Rimes, the vicissitude of Heat and Cold, etc. as also with
others more unusual and strange, as Fiery Drakes, Dancing Torches, Burning
Globes, Iguis Fatuus, Ignis Lambens, Parelli, and Paraselenae (many Suns and
Moons) and many other wonderful Apparitions.

2. From this short Hypothesis of Meteors in general, I raise the following one
of Heat and Cold, Frost and Thaw in particular.

First, The Particles of Cold being conceived in the Frozen Womb of the Earth
(in that Climate, where the enlivening and thawing Beams of the Sun seldom or
never approach) passing through the Pores of the Earth into the Airy Region,
are brought to us through the Air (their proper Vehicle) by certain peculiar
Winds, which in their Motion, meeting with Liquid Watery Bodies, do co-agulate
them; by which means those Bodies we call Ice, Snow, etc. are constituted.

Secondly, As there be Corpuscles of Cold, so are there also Particles of Heat
begot in a different Womb of the Earth in those Regions, which are mostly or
always visited with the Parching Beams of the Sun, which are brought to us at
other Seasons through the same Vehicle of Air by different and contrary Winds,
which in their Motion meeting with those of Cold (either in the Air or here
below co-agulated in Watery Bodies) do by quite altering their Textures, wholly
resolve, mortify, and thaw them (as we daily see some Salts do others of a
different Texture) so that thereupon the said Particles of Heat prevailing, a
warm Temper of Air succeeds, and the Weather becomes quite altered, and that
sometimes very suddenly, even to Admiration.

And that the Phenomena of almost all Meteors, and their true Reasons, are
deduceable from the Exhalations of Sulphur and Salts, as Nitre, Vitriol, Alum,
and Sal Armoniack, is apparently conceivable by the following Instances of some
Artificial ways of representing Heat and Cold: As

If you put Oil of Vitriol to Water in a Phial, and mix them well together by
shaking, you will find, that those two Liquors (tho cold to touch) will
immediately contract a greater Heat than the hand that holds the Glass can well
suffer: and from the same cause you may make Ice it self to cause heat to
another cold Liquor, by proceeding as before, with Ice put into Oil of Vitriol.

If you please to mix Sal Armoniack with Saturn Ore in a Mortar, and put them
into a long Glass, and shake them well together: whilst the Solution is making,
you will find the Glass feel very Cold, and if at the same time you wash the
outside of the Glass with Water, you will find as you pour it on, long Flakes
of Ice will immediately be congealed: The same will Sal Armoniack of it self
do, being dissolved in Water.

Besides the trite and common Experiment of making it Freeze Artificially, viz.
by putting either common Salt, or Sea Salt, or Nitre, or Vitriol, or Sal
Armoniack, and Snow, together into a Pewter Flagon, set on a Joyn'd-stool by
the Fireside, upon which some Water is spilt, and churning them together with
a Rolling Pin (or some such Instrument) in a little time the Flagon will be so
hard frozen to the Stool, that without some difficulty it cannot be parted.

If you put Snow into a Pewter-platter, and set it upon a Chafing Dish of live
Coals, and in the midst of the Snow you place a Glass of Water, you will find,
that as the Snow melts, the Water in the Glass will be frozen.

The Reason of which Processes is this, viz. The Nitrous Particles of Snow
being driven from their hold by the Fire, and those Salts (for any of these
Salts being added to Snow or Ice, do presently dissolve their Texture) they in
their flight join themselves to the Neighboring Water, and so congeal and turn
it to Ice.

Thirdly, I am (according to my proposed Method) come to give you my Opinion,
what Effects this extreme Cold Frosty Season may probably have upon Humane
Bodies as to Health and Sickness; which I shall consider in Two Parts, (1.) In
Relation to the time of the Frosts continuance. (2.) In Relation to the time of
Thaw.

Whilst the Frost continues, and the Minute Keen Particles of Cold are in such
swarms brought to us by the Northern Winds, their peculiar Vehicle for this
Climate (as they are by the Southern Winds peculiar likewise to them, over whom
that Pole is Elevated) they close up the Pores of our Skins, so that the usual
Vent by Transpiration being stopped up, our inward Ferments thereby become
mightily invigorated; as is manifest in that Trite Observation, that our
Appetites to Food are stronger, and our Digestion better, in Frosty than Warm
Weather: And since our Spirits by those Particles of Cold are driven up and
confined to a narrower room than ordinary, the Sulphurous parts of the Blood
wanting their wonted space to dilate themselves in, are apter now than in warm
Weather, upon every little occasion to take Fire, and to be thrown into an
unnatural Ferment, thereby laying the Foundation of Feavors of all sorts, Small
Pox, Pleurisies, Peripneumonia, all sorts of Internal Inflammations, External
Cutaneous Affects, etc. as also ^^^tharrs, Asthma's, Long lasting Coughs, Chin
Coughs, etc. For which later Catalogue I take the peculiar reason to be,
because the Blood at such a time being overcharged with superfluous Serasities
(their wonted passages by evaporation being stopped) does pour upon the Lungs so
great a quantity thereof, that they are (as it were) drowned and damned up
therewith, upon which account great Obstructions must needs succeed, the
Parents of those and such like Distempers.

And should this Frosty Season continue one Month longer (the time wherein the
Blood of all Animals is inspired with a new Ferment, and begins to luxuriate)
the case would be much with our Bodies, as it is with Vessels which are filled
with Wine whilst it is fermenting, and immediately close bung'd up; where the
Vessels and the Liquor would be in great danger of being spoiled and lost.

And on the other hand, should the intensness of the Season presently abate,
and the Atoms of Cold be on a sudden now shattered to pieces by other
particles of a different composure; yet since for almost two Solar Months they
have had their Impressions upon us, we shall be made sensible of their
influence a longer time than generally we are aware of, they having undoubtedly
imprinted on our Bodies such Morbisick predispositions (like seeds of various
Diseases) as will be ready upon fit occasions (for many Months next succeeding)
to spring up and be brought into Act, to the endangering the whole frame of our
Constitutions.

Now that those persons whom this Frosty Season found in health, and are so
now, should be put in a way to continue in the same state, so long (however) as
it lasts, I shall (since it lights so pat in my way) caution them of two things.

1. That they take care, they do not too much exalt the Fermint of the Blood by
too violent Exercise, or by too copious a supply of Spirituous Liquors: which
last is too frequent a Custom with some, who finding themselves externally Cold
in such an extreme Frosty time as this, do (upon a mistaken Notion) allow
themselves a greater liberty (than at other times they were wont) in the use of
Distilled Spirits, Brandy, Wine, and other Strong Liquors, whereby under
pretense of procuring Heat and Vigor, they certainly endanger the stifling and
suffocaing the Natural Heat within them.

2. That on the other side they be not careless in opposing the sharp and keen
particles of Cold by warmth from moderate Exercise, or by a due and accustomed
use of Spirituous Liquors; for let the Blood and Liquid Jui^es of our Bodies be
invigorated by a due supply of Spirituous, Saline and Sulphurous Particles,
whereby they may be kept constantly in motion, etc. then there will be no fear
of our receiving any injury by Cold: but where through necessity or
carelessness, those needful supplies are wanting, it is no great wonder if such
do fall Victims to this almost-intollerable Season: For from what parts of our
Bodies soever, the Spirituous particles shall be forced to withdraw themselves
and make a Retreat, they will instantly be supplied with the nimble Particles
of Cold, which will congeal our fluid humors; and if suffered to prevail, must
certainly put the Spirits to a rout. For that the Particles of Cold at some
times and in some places are so intense, that they irrecoverably destroy the
Ferments of Men and other Animals, is evident by their killing of many Men and
Beasts in some Countries, as in Russia, Greenland, Norway, etc. where the
Frosts are sometimes so strong, that Men are often frozen to death; and I have
read and been personally informed, that in those Countries Men in Traveling
have been brought to their Inns frozen to death on Horseback, and been found
so stiff and rigid, that they have sat up strait like Statues.

2. Now I am come to consider what effects the Thawing Season (immediately
succeeding this Frost) may probably have on Humane Bodies, as to Health and
Sickness.

When the Southern Winds shall fill our Hemisphere with the Particles of Heat
and Moisture, and in carrying them through the common Vehicle of the Air, shall
with their great and numerous Swarms, meet there with those of Frost and Cold,
and being of a different Texture, shall suddenly resolve, thaw, and take them
all to pieces again, then will all Putrefactive Ferments grow vigorous; and
upon the unhinging and unriveting the Atoms of Cold great alterations must
needs be produced in the Bodies of all Animals.

Whatever Cold, Frosty, and Snowy Winters may conduce to the invigorating the
Earth, to make it the more Fertile in producing Vegetables (I shall not here
examine;) but if we look back into those Years in which have happened the most
Epidemical Malignant Diseases, and the greatest Mortalities, we shall find they
have succeeded the Coldest, most Frosty, and Sharpest-Winters.

When after a Vigorous Assault the Particles of Cold have kept possession of
the minute Portals of our Bodies, for (it may be) two or three Revolutions of
the Earth Attendant, they shall be so strenuously attaqued by the prevailing
Particles of a contrary Extreme, that they shall be forced to surrender and to
quit their Hold; what quarter then can we expect should be given to the various
Juices of our Bodies? Can any Extreme be Friendly to Nature? Can such sudden
Alteration of the Weather prove otherwise, than mightily prejudicial to our
Healths? Those Passages of our Bodies which were so long so closely locked up,
will now be laid open, and become laxe and penetrable, liable to receive such
Exotic putrefactive Ferments as the Air (being saturated with) shall present:
whence is that trite and true Observation, that in Cold, Raw, Thawing Weather
People generally take more Cold, and are more prone to Diseases than at other
times: And it is mostly of such Weather, that Aged and Infirm Folks do (by
their Almanacks, as it is said, in their Bones) so truly prognosticate, and
discern its approach beforehand. For in such cold, open Weather, the raw and
moist Particles in the Air, insensible insinuating themselves into our gaping
Pores, slide into the Mass of Blood, whereby it becoming overcharged with
Superfluous Serosities (as from another cause, before intimated, it was, whilst
the Frost lasted) it carries them in a full Current to the Lungs, where
depositing them, they there stagnate, and thereby become the cause of desperate
Coughs, Asthma's, Gouts, Rheumatisms, Drowsiness, with manifold other Symptoms,
vulgarly ascribed to the Scurvey.

Thus (Honored Sir) according to my present Sentiments of Things, I have
endeavored to comply with your desire; which tho it be far from being done
Dignum Rei, yet of such as it is (I will presume to say) I question not its
Candid Acceptance: your Commands gave it Life, had it not been for that, it had
never had Being: And the daring Atoms of Cold insinuate themselves into the Ink
in my Pen whilst I am Writing, and it is by the Magic of your Commands if my
Intellectuals have been kept Frost-free.

Feb. 2. 1683/4 L. M^s^olo Le^ish^i^^^ Honored Sir, Your most Humbly Devoted
Servant, J. P.


