A SERMON Preached in the CATHEDRAL OF St Peter's in York.

On the Fifth day of November. 1689.

By William Perse, M.A. Rector of West Heslerton, and Chaplain to the Right
Honorable Lewis Earl of Feversham.

Imprimatur, Charles Palmer, Rmo. in Christo Patri, ac Dno. Dno. Thomae
Archiep. Ebor. a Sacris Domesticis.

York, Printed by John Bulkley for Francis Hildyard at the Bible in Stonegate.
1689.

Psalm. 129.1.2. Verses, Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth may
Israel now say:

Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth; yet they have not prevailed
against me.


AMongst the many undeniable and irrefragable arguments that may be brought to
prove the Existence of God, the consideration of the great Care which He the
Supreme Governor and Moderator of all things has in all Ages taken to preserve
his small Flock, the Church, from the Paw of the Lion and the Bear;
(notwithstanding all the Arts and Stratagems, all the force and cunning of her
potent and vigilant Adversaries) seems to me not to be of the least moment to
convince an Atheist of his impiety, a Pagan of his Infidelity, an Heretic of
his Obstinacy, and a Schismatic of his dangerous and erroneous Opinions. For
surely were there not a God in heaven that put a stop not only to the raging of
the Sea, but the madness of the people: were there not a God who set Limits to
the Waves, and bounds to the fury of Tyrannical Oppressors; were there not a
God who put a Hook into the Jaws of the great Leviathans: the spiritual Church
had long since been like some of the material Churches in the low Countries,
quite under water: The Floods of Oppression had overflown her, and she had long
ere this become a prey to those many Enemies which even from her infancy have
Watched and Waited for her ruin and destruction. To see the Church like the
Salamander, not only living in the fire of Afflictions but as it were receiving
nourishment from the inoffensive Flames; to see the Holy Bush-burning without
any detriment to its own substance, is a sufficient Argument that there is an
Angel that Protects her, an invisible power that dwells within her, which
preserves her body from scorching, though not always her Garments, her external
Constitutions from the smell of the Fire: That such a small Vessel as the
Church should Ride out so many blustering storms on a troublesome and
tempestuous Sea, without bulging or leaking, without splitting on the Shelves,
or being swallowed up of the Sands, must needs proceed from the skill and care
of her indefatigable Pilot, and the strength of her invincible and irremovable
Anchor: for what the Disciples said to Jesus when a sudden gust of Wind arose
on the Lake, and filled the Ship with Water, Help Master or we perish, is most
true of the Church in general: Were it not for his aid and assistance, for his
continual presence, and express Commands, whom the Winds and Sea, and all
boystrous and otherwise unruly passions obey, we should not only be tossed to and
fro with every wind of uncertain Doctrine and so become unsettled in our
Judgments, and Resolutions, but also we should suffer on the one side from
Piratical Oppressors, and on the other from Heretical and Schismatical
Intruders.

It had been impossible for Christianity, like Rome now the great Opposer of
it, which from a few scattered Cottages came to be the sovereign Commandress of
the whole known World, to have stretched out her Empire so far, and wide as it
is at this day, and that from so low and small beginnings, had not the Divine
Spirit carried her on and protected her, assisted and upheld her in spite of
all opposition, and contradiction whatsoever: Turning some unto that Faith
which they but lately persecuted, discovering the wicked designs and
machinations of others, and confounding all their devices; so that diverse
conversed with Lyens without and danger, and played upon the hole of the Asp,
and the Den of the Cockatrice in great security, as was foretold by the Prophet
concerning the first days of the Gospel. God has built his Church upon a
Mountain that cannot be shaken, on a Rock that cannot be moved; for though the
rain descend, the Winds blow, and the Floods rise, though the Rain of adversity
may wet her, and the Floods of persecution may rage against her, and the
furious blasts of discord and dissension may ruffle and discompose her outward
Garments, yet the Church her self shall not fall, nor her Faith totally fail,
nor even the Gates of Hell prevail against her; for she is founded upon a Rock,
even the Rock Christ Jesus: he is her Savior and deliverer, her Fortress and
Castle of defense, under the shadow of whose Wings, under the coverture of
whose gracious providence she shall be safe and secure till all Tyranny and
Oppression, all rage and violence, all Envy and Malice be quite past and blown
over: For though they have afflicted her from her youth may Israel now say,
though many a time have they afflicted her from her youth, yet have they not
prevailed against her.

From which Declaration of the royal Psalmist we may observe.

1. The inveterate Malice, and the unwearied Industry of the men of this world
to ruin Sion, and to pull down the Walls of Jerusalem: Many a time have they
afflicted her from her youth, many a time will they afflict her in her old age.

2. The Frustration of their design, or the ill success that all those meet
with who strive to oppose the Truth by Violence, or to detain it in ungodliness
by Fraud. Yet have they not prevailed against me.

3. The Retribution or return that the Church is bound to make, Deo statori and
liberatori, to her Savior and Deliverer, for the preservation of her self and
the destruction of her Enemies. May Israel now say, ought Israel now to say.

The frequent Declarations of the Mercies and Deliverances we receive from the
hand of God; is a sign of the value and estimation we put upon them, and the
ready way to increase their number. The Remembrance of the Churches danger and
of her wonderful deliverance from it must be the burden of her Song of
Thanksgiving: For so the ingemmation of my Text, as in other places seems to
import.

In the first general Observation we are to consider 1. Who they are that are
so malicious as to envy the peace of Sion, and so sedulous and diligent in
contriving her Destruction.

2. How frequent they are in their Attempts.

3. By what ways and means they endeavor to bring their wicked and pernicious
designs to pass.

And this I shall show in the Phrase and Language of my Text.

1. The Enemies of Sion are many. Their multitude renders them formidable:
Illos defendit Numerus junctaeque Umbone Phalanges.

2. Many a time do they renew their Assaults; Like importunate Beggars one or
two denials will not shake them off; one or two, or twenty disappointments do
not dishearten or cause them to desist from their interprize: This but whets
their anger and inventions: Animos a vulnere sumunt: Like Antaeus they seem to
receive vigor from their very falls. This shows their Obstinacy and inveteracy.

3. They have many ways to execute their Fury and to bring their hidden
purposes to perfection. The Sword and the Mattock. open Force, and hidden
Treachery: I might put in the Pen likewise none of the least envenomed Weapons
they make use of to accomplish their wicked designs: Besides a thousand little
Arts they have to delude the Vulgar, and to hold silly ignorant people Captive
this shows their Cunning. They do as Balaam did, at the request of Balak; Number.
23.13
if they cannot curse Israel from one Hill, they will try another, and another
after that, to see if at length some one lucky hit may render their
Fascinations and Enchantments prosperous and successful.

1. The Enemies of the Church are many; Too many for me to speak to within the
compass allotted for this Exercise; too many for the poor Church by her own
strength to encounter, but not too many for her Almighty Patron and invincible
Champion to deliver her from: For though all the Legions of Darkness should
combine in one against her, and call in all their Auxiliaries to their
assistance, all those who for the Virulency of their Principles, and the
maliciousness of their practice, may be styled Devils incarnate, yet should
they be as chafe before the wind, and the Angel of the Lord scattering them,
as the fire burns the Wood, and the flame consumes the Mountains, so shall
God persecute them with his Tempest and make them afraid with his Storm. Though
they come about her like Bees yet shall they be extinct as the fire amongst
Thorns, so suddenly shall they vanish and be no more. Though the Red Dragon
open his mouth wide to devour her and her offspring, yet God will prepare a
place-in the Wilderness for them to retire unto: And though he follow her
thither, yet he shall give her the wings of an Eagle that she may fly away and
be at rest: and though the Serpent cast whole Floods of Water out of his mouth
to overwhelm her, yet the Earth shall preserve her, by receiving them into her
large and vast Treasury As the Air before, so the Earth now, yea even all
Elements shall by the direction and command of their Superior Agent, contribute
to her security, and preservation. The Enemies of Sion are many: She may well
say as David did in her person, All nations have compassed me about, they have
consulted together with one consent, and are confederate against me; the
Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites of Moab, and the Hagaerens, those
indeed who to our great trouble, (and the greater, because assisted by one who
calls himself the most Christian King,) have overspread a considerable part of
the once Christian Empire; Though the late prosperous successes of the Churches
Arms make us to hope, that notwithstanding those indirect and unchristian
practices, their late Half Moon is hastily declining to its utmost Waine. Gebal
also and Ammon, and Amalek, the Philistines with the inhabitants of Tire,
Assure, also is joined with them and have helped the Children of Lot. The
Enemies of Sion you see are many: The Vineyard which God has planted for
himself with his own right hand is infested, and troubled with many Adversaries
that envy her Felicity, and endeavor her utter extirpation. There are wild
Boares that break down her Hedges, and would lay her open, and make her common
to the Beasts of the Wide, and unmanured Wilderness: And there are little Foxes
that creep through them and crop her tender Budds: There are Sacrilegious
Caterpillars that devour her fairest Clusters, her best and richest
possessions: And there are Teredines little Creatures that worm themselves into
the body of the Vine, and corrupt it, and others that gnaw at the very Root
thinking to kill, and destroy it.

I shall pass by her Foreign Adversaries, Atheists, and Infidells who deny
the very Principles and first Grounds of our most excellent Religion, whose
Eyes the God of this World has so blinded that they cannot see the wonders of
Gods Law: and come to some of her domestic and homebred Foes, those that eat
of her Bread and drink of her Cup, that partake of the same Ordinances,
Communicate of the same Sacraments, that acknowledge the same faith, and yet
either out of Pride or Ignorance, Folly or Conrempt lift up their heel against
her.

1. Some of those many Enemies of Sion that molest and disturb her are those
who joining with her in her outward worship, in the observation of her
excellent Discipline, and the belief of her sound and Orthodox Doctrine, do
notwithstanding to their own shame, and the Churches prejudice depart from her
in their practice, and manner of outward conversation: whose lives are no ways
answerable to that most holy Religion which they profess. Qui aliud, aiunt,
aliud vivunt. That speak the words of Simon Peter, and live the life of Simon
Magnus. And truly these are none of the least Enemies that the Church of Christ
has; for there are no wounds like the wounds of a Friend, they strike deepest
and are most unkindly resented. Such as these give advantage to the Gainsayers
of the Truth, and make them speak evil of that most innocent Gospel that is
first pure, and then peaceable. Methinks I hear our blessed Savior saying to
the sinning Christian that lives indirect opposition to those divine Precepts
which he left to be the Rule and Guide of our Actions, something not unlike
what the chaste and dying Arria said to her beloved Paetus.

Vulnus Iudaeus quod fecit non dolet inquit;
Sed quod tu facies hoc, mihi creed dolet.
The Wounds that the malicious and bloodthirsty Jews made in my Hands my Feet
do not trouble me being they were given me for thy sake do procure an
Atonement for thee: but they are those which thou my Friend and Companion whom
I loved as my self, those which thou who art a part of me, a Member of my Body
give me with thy Blasphemies, with thy Oaths and Execrations, those are the
Wounds that stabb me to the heart, that crucify me afresh, that put me anew to
open shame. Pity it is that those who are right as to their understanding
should be perverse in their Wills, and irregular in their Affections: That
those who are so far enlightened in their minds should mix Heaven with Earth,
light with Darkness, for what Fellowship or Communion is there between them.
Oh! if there be any such here, let me beseech them by the Mercies of God, by
the Bowels of Christ Jesus, not to Eclipse the Light of their Profession, by
the dull interposition of their carnal and Earthly desires.

2. Another sort of the Enemies of the Church, which do her and themselves no
small prejudice, are those who by opposing her Doctrine, and separating from
her Communion upon slight and frivolous pretenses, do what in them lies to
loose those Bands and Ligaments of Order that preserve her within the Terms and
Limits of one entire Body and Society. What Opinion this sort of People, who
out of an over nice and Curious Tenderness run from one extreme sometimes to
another have, I know not; but this I think, that no rational unprejudiced
person can altogether excuse them from giving Offense, and Scandal to the
Catholic Church of Christ, whereof they either are or ought to be Members. If
Laceration, if Distortion, if Mutilation bring pain, deformity and imperfection
along with them, then sure I am that those who tear one Member from another,
who divide the continuity of Christ's Mystical Body, and cut off diverse from
the whole, must needs not only spoil the Beauty and Comeliness of her who is
the fairest of ten Thousand, but also bring torment and vexation, pains and
diseases to the great and universal Congregation of the Faithful. These
unnecessary, I may say scandalous Divisions, are as the Rickets which hinder
the growth of the Church, that impair her strength, and make her Limbs knotty
and disproportioned.

3. The third, last, and most dangerous sort of those who afflict Sion, and
seek her utter ruin and destruction that I shall mention, are those who either
out of Ignorance, or secular Carnal self Interest, or both, corrupt her
Doctrine, and either propose new, and unwarrantable Articles of Belief for the
Terms of their Communion, and as the necessary conditions of Salvation, or else
detain part of that which is necessary to be assented to, and practiced; from
the knowledge of those who are subject to their Authority, and Ministerial
Jurisdiction. These deliver the Inventions of Men instead of the Oracles of
God, and impose uncertain Traditions instead of Divine Truths upon the
overcredulous and easily seduced Multitude: God has commanded the Governors
and Stewards of his Church to prepare wholesome Pottage for the Sons of the
Prophets; but they who have long, (though upon false grounds) pretended to be
folely authorized, and commissionated for that Employment have gathered wild
Gourds, venomous Colloquintidu instead of favory favory Herbs, so that we are
forced to cry out that there is Death in the Pot, there is no safety in eating
and drinking with them after a Religious manner, no Communicating with them in
in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper without danger of infection, till some
Flour, which was Elisha's cure of the Deadly Pottage, be acknowleged to be in
their Host; which they (for Reasons best know to themselves) will not allow of.
They have so poisoned and Corrupted the pure Streams of Gods Word, which should
make glad the Church, which is the City of our God, that he that continues to
drink his fill of those putrified Waters without a special Antidote dies. Nay
the Jesuits some of the greatest Empoysoners, and Sorcerers have turned them,
as once the River Nilo was, into blood; that is by their false comments and
misinterpretations of the Sacred Writ they have extracted bloody and cruel
Principles out of it. And by virtue of that unlimited, and uncontrollable
Authority they would falsely fetch from thence, assume to themselves a power
(which they have but too often used) of Dethroming Kings and Princes: and by
dissolving the bands of Allegiance, expose them to the rage and fury of their
own Subjects; impudently denouncing the fatal Sentences of Deprivation and
Destruction against those Sovereign and Anomted Heads, whose Authority is in
those Sacred Volumus most plainly asserted; and their Persons most expressly
protected. To pass by that rabble of Heretics that arose in the Primitive
Times, (for the good Man had no sooner Sown his Wheat but the evil one
scattered his tares amongst it) the Church of Rome as infamous now for her
Apostasy, as she was once Famous for her Faith, has wilfully incurred the
severe penalty mentioned by St. John in the Revelations, adding to and
diminishing from the express word of God; nay some of her Communion have been
so impudent as not only to corrupt several places of the Holy Scriptures, but
even to Abase the value of that which they have left untainted and untoucht,
Preferring their Canon Law, before the law of God, preferring the arbitray
constitutions of St. Peter's pretended Successor to the undoubted and Divinely
inspired writings of St. Paul: one instance of which I shall mention out of
their own Decretalls: where it is said, Secundam accipere uxorem Secundum
Apostoli praeceptum licitum est, Secundum vero veritatis rationem vere
Fornicatio. That is as much as to say, that according to the word of God in St
Paul's Epistles Second Marriages are lawful, but according to the word of God,
as they would have it in their Canon Law written 1200 years after, it is plain
Fornication. St. Paul gives a command to Timothy to keep safe that committed to
his Charge, to preserve the Talent of Catholic Faith delivered to him unbroken
and uncorupt, neither perverted or crak't in it is order by Schismatics, nor
tainted in it is Doctrine by Haereticks: but it seems the Pope who so
frequently and so easily, (though it may be not so cheaply) dispensed with
others, has given himself a Dispensation from this Golden Rule: making such
an unequal Exchange with us, as Diomedes in Homer made with Glaucas for his
Armor, brass for Gold: giveing us brazen, impudent, counterfiet Traditions,
for the Golden Armor of Gods word which admitts of noe Dross, no Alloye.

2. As the Enemies of the Church are many, so are their Assaults frequent,
their industry unwearied, and their malice still ragoing, though continually
unsuccessfull. Like Courageous Gamsters, two or three unlucky Games cannot,
dishearten them, nay the more they loose, the eagerer they are thinking though
in vain, that some one fortunate hit may make them amends for their former
disappointments, and answer their so often deluded expectations. It was a great
comfort to Israel that though Sisera had nine hundred Chariots of Iron, and a
vast Army with which he harast and oppressed them for twenty years, that yet one
overthrow given him by Deborah secured them from all such hostile Invasions for
a long time after: But here it is as with the Hydra, out off one head and two
springs up in the place of it: Though diverse of the heads of the adversaries of
Sion have been fixed on Poles for their Treachery and Rebellion, to be a terror
and warning to others to avoid the same indirect Courses, least they meet with
the same fatal end, yet there have been always other Heads of the same Mould,
and Figure, and are still busily plotting, and contriveing the downfall, and
ruin of this poor Church of England, forsaken of those who should be her
Friends, and exposed to those adversaries whose Designs is to Swallow both.
And no wonder it is that these fiery Exhalations continue burning in their
Malice for so many Ages together, seeing they have a plentiful Supply of
unctuous, and Sulphurous matter from Hell it self which maintains the flames
of Dissension which like the Funeral pile of the two irreconcilable Brothers,
Eteoches, and Polmices whose Enmity lasted longer then their breath, divide
themselves, as also the more vehement fire of Persecution.

The Enemies of Sion are moved by a restless Spirit, even by him who is ever in
action going too and fro about the Earth: and his chief business and design is
to disturb the Peace of Sion and to hinder the welfare of Jerusalem; to pull
down the old Temple of the Lord and to erect a new Chapel for his own Worship.
From the infancy of Religion he began to persecute the holy Seed nor will he
leave off to malign their happiness, and to create them trouble till this world
be no more, and till they arrive at that unchangeable State of rest, and
Security, which he being bound with his confederates in everlasting chains of
darkness shall have no power though his perverse will shall still be the same,
to desturb or molest. he seduced Eve in Paradise from the duty She owed to her
Lord and Husband, and drew both of them from their Allegiance to their Supreme
Head and Master: and thereby made them isntrumental to their own and our
Misery: He instigated Cain to Sacrifice his innocent Brother, endeavoring
thereby to destroy the Church in the first Marter and Confessor of it. Endless
would it be, and indeed needless to run through the many oppositions that the
chosen People of God met with by his sly, and cunning insinuations before their
settlement in the promised Land: needless I say it would be to rehearse the
several hardships they underwent, in a Congregation of reformed Protestants to
whom the free use of the Sacred History of the Bible is allowed in their own
tongue, wherein the several particulars relateing thereunto are contained. Were
I indeed to Preach to an Assembly of Lay Papists, and had occasion to make use
of any part of the Sacred writ, to give a demonstration of Gods care of his
People under their most cruel and severe Taskmasters, then it would be
necessary to make a full, and perfect recital of all the circumstances
belonging to such a deliverance; and that because their cunning and merciless
Spiritual Guides as they call them, look up the Records of Eternal Truth from
them, and keep them in ignorance of those wonderful works of God which he has
done for his chosen Seed: it being in some of the Catholic Countries as they
are Styled, a crime within the compass of the Inquistion for any laick to have
a Bible in the Vulgar tongue in his custody: but to you it is given to know
those truths that concern your everlasting Salvation; and if it be not your own
or your Parents faults you may be able to understand the whole Series, and
method of Gods Mercies to his Church from the beginning of the world till the
Revelation of Jesus Christ; Happy are you if you know how to make a right use
of this great Privilege to your own advantage: I shall therefore be very
brief, and that rather to refresh your Memories, then to inform your
understandings. I shall not stand to reckon up the several Depravations,
Schisms, and persecutions that hapened to the Children of Israel under the
several Dispensations of the Old Law until the comeing of our Savior in the
flesh: and then at the Entrance of the Captain of our Salvation on the great,
and charitable work of our Redemption, Satan renews his Assaults, doubles his
files, and again seeks to strangle Christianity in the very Cradle. He incites
Herod to lay in wait for him, and what he could not accomplish by his Agents he
attempts to perform in his own Person, after this he exposes him to the malice
of the Scribes and Pharisees, and at last when he thought his design finished,
he was vanquished by the Cross, and the Death of Jesus proved the life of his
Church: who knows not what Enemies, how powerful, and how cruel the first
Propagators of the Christian Religion met with from his bloody Instruments in
the first Ages, and Centuries of the Church? how they were thrown to wild
Beasts, devoted to the flames, Broyl'd upon Gridireons, pounded in Mortars, and
put to all the Torments that Man's malicious wit could invent, or his power
execute: Afterward when the Gospel of Grace, and Peace, had by its own inocent
Arts and iresistable Charms, (the Divine Spirit working along with them)
spread it self over a great part of the world, but then by degrees (as the best
things here below are subject to coruption) became tainted with Errors, and
overcast with Ignorance, and superstition, when a few (as most great things
have small beginnings) to whom a light from above shined through the gross and
thick Mist, being sensible of their Errors, and willing to Forsake them, and to
bring others likewise out of them, Endeavored to reform those dangerous, and
damnable Corruptions which had (dureing that General state of darkness) crept
into the Church; what opposition? what contradction? what Persicution? did
those first Reformers, and Assertors of the true Ancient Catholic and
Apostolick-Faith meet with from those whom either incorrigible Obstinacy caused
to persevere in their ignorance; or whom carnal Interest obliged to act
contrary to those Principles of light, and Knowledge where with they were
informed. I might run this from the beginning of our own Reformation down to
these very days, and show you how the several Enemies of the Church have been
still hammering and beating out Plots, and making Fetters from time to time to
Shackle us again, and to reduce us to our former Slavery. No sooner had we
through Gods providence escaped from the land of Darkness but the Egyptians as
loath to loose so sweet and profitable a pray pursued us, useing all Arts, and
means both force, and cunning, both threatings, and temptations to bring us
back to our old house of Bondage: But this will more properly belong to the
third head: which was this.

3. As the Enemies of Sion are many, and their Assaults frequent, so they have
many ways to accomplish, and bring about their Pernicious designs. They know
that the same Stratagems in War are seldom twice used with good success: and
therefore they vary their Arts, and change their Habits according to the times
they live in, and the Persons with whom they have to deal. I might show you
here what little and yet destructive Arts some of the Enemies of our Church
breed amongst our selves (doubtless deriveing their small bye Streams from the
corrupt and infected Fountain of Rome) use to under mine her Foundations, and
by dissolveing her Order endeavoring to subvert her very Constitution. But
seeing the solemnity of this day, the happy day of our Deliverance from one of
the most horid Plots that ever was contrived against our Religion, and just
upon the Brinke of Execution, seems to Point to me to direct my Discourse to
that Party who were the cruel Instruments, and Abettors of that hellish
Conspiracy, I shall wave those lessor Disturbers of our peace, and come to that
open, and professed Enemy of our Religion as by Law Established amongst us:
Following the method that Gregory Nazianzone does in his first Invective
against Julian, who would not meddle, as he tells us in the beginning of his
Declamation, with Sehon King of the Amorites, nor with Og King of Basan, small
inconsiderable Princes; and who only endamag'd a little part of the Church
Israel: but that he would direct his Arrows against that great Proud Spirit,
that Dragon, that Apostate, that common Enemy, and disturber of Mankind. we
will at present pass by those who do not Practice what they profess, though
they are a great Dishonor to our Church; we will slip over in silence those
who though in most Points they acknowledge her Doctrine, do yet without any
real grounds dissent from her Discipline, though this be an unknown injury and
discredit to her, and as great an unhappiness to themselves, and come to this
great Monster this red Dragon, red with the blood of the Saints, to this
ungrateful Backslider of Rome who brings a disreputation on that once Famous
Place where the Apostles of the Gentiles, and the great Minister of the
Circumcision Preached up that pure and sincere word of Truth, which is their at
this time, and has been for some ages so abominable adulterated, and
corrupted: Christ gave St. Peter the Keys and commanded him to lay aside his
Sword, but his pretended Successor has beaten them into two Swords a
Temporal, and a Spiritual, with both which he Tyranizeth over the Kings and
Princes of the Earth, witness those Emperors he has Excommunicated with the
one, that so he might the sooner, and easier dispatch them with the other.

Should I recite the several Murders, and Massacres that the feirce
Propugnators of the Romish interest have committed, that deluge of the blood of
the Saints which they have spilt and the cruel and Barbarous torments they have
exposed them to, my Sermon must become a Martyrology, and these few Papers
swell into a Volume: all History that runs parallel with their Epoche abounds
with instances of their cruelty and violence: Neither are their own writers
shye in relateing the great Slaughters they, have made, and the many out rages
they have committed for the propagation of their Religion, and the rooteing
this pestilent Northeren Heresy of ours as they call it out of the world:
glorying in their Villainies when Growned with Victory and triumph, but
disowning them when Abortive and unsuccessfull. And if this barefaced, and open
way of proceeding will not serve their turns; if plain force will not prevail,
then in the next place they have recourse to hidden Arts, and secret Treachery:
what they cannot compass in the open field, they endeavor to effect by Ambush,
by drawing those lives they aim at into a snare under the pretense of a Treaty
for accommodation: witness John Husse, and Hierome of Prague both betrayed by
the Emperors Letters of safe conduct into their Enemies hands, and then
Sacrificed to their Zealous fury: so unsafe is it to put any confidence in them
whose Sacred Principle it is not to keep their promise with them whom they are
pleased to brand with the title of Haereticks. But more especially for ever be
remembered the barbarous, and inhumane Massacre at Paris whither the chief of
the Protestant party were decoyed under the pretense of an accord, and there
miserably Butchered. Sometimes they work under ground showing themselves
thereby the Children of darkness, they conceal their intentions the better to
bring them to perfection: We ought to bless God daily for the many Seasonable
Deliverances He has at all times afforded us from the many Treacherous
Designs which that restless party have contrived against the Persons of our
Princes, and the Body of our Religion: but more particularly we have, as we
ought, this Morning offered up the unbloudie Sacrifice of our Praise and
thanksgiveing in the name and the sense of our Church to our gracious and
merciful Preserver for the timely and happy discovery of that Powder Plot
which was hatched in Hell, wrought in darkness, and should have been this Day
executed in Clouds, and Pillars of Smoke: A Smoke like that which arose out of
the bottomless pit, like the smoke of a Furnace; a smoke which would have
Eclipsed our Sun and Moon; our King, and Prince: that would, have darkened the
Stars of the first Magnitude our Nobles; as likewise the lesser Constellations,
the lower house of Parliament: and which is more, and which, had been worse
(though all was bad enough) a Smoke which had quite put out the Glorious Light
of the Gospel, the very Eye, and Sight of this our most excellently Reformed
Religion: and a smoke at last which like that ascending from the infernal Pit,
would have brought whole swarms of Locusts, and Caterpillars, of Monks, and
Friars, of Priests and Jesuits, which would have devoured all that had been
green, and pleasant, all that had been pure, and wholesome in this our fruitful
Land, through this fire (for their is no smoke but has some fire) they
intended to have Sacrificed our Consciences to the Moloch of Rome; that cruel
Idol that kills soonest those whom it embraces closest.

I need not give you a Resation of that wicked and pernicious design; their
late Practices, and contrivances to overturn the Foundation of our Religion
has sufficiently revived the memory of their ancient detestable conspiracies,
and of this unparalleld one among the rest; so that now almost every Child is
made acquainted with it, and the Fathers shall teach their Children as the
Psalmist says upon the like occasion, Psalm 78, 4.5.6.7.
that their Posterity may know it, and the Children that are yet unborn, to the
intent that when they came up they might show their Childdren the some etc. and
therefore I shall pass on to something else. These ways they have to offend
their Enemies, other ways they have to gain Friends and to obtain Proselytes,
one way is by speaking them fair with large Promises of Indulgence and
Preferment: how many has the hope of Liberty to do what they please upon easy
terms of Absolution Seduced from the Truth, and caused them to make Shipwreck
of their Faith? And as they have this way to gain them so they have another to
retain them: false signs, lyeing wonders, and counterfiet Miracles: for
certainly as the delusions of the Egyptian Sorcerers were in some measure a
cause why Pharouh was more perverse, and his heart more hardened against the
Children of Israel, so the strong opinion that the vulgar have of the reality
of those signs and wonders that are pretended to be wrought amongst them is a
great reason of the continuation of their Spiritual Captivity. These ways and
several, others they have to promote their cause, and make their worse then
Egyptian Sorceryes to prevail but to no purpose, for there is one in Heaven
that laughs them to scorn; for as Balaam when Divinely inspired said: Number.
23.23.
Surely there is no Enchantment against Jacob; neither is their any Divination
against Israel: according to this time shall it be said of Jacob, and of
Israel, what has God wrought? which makes good the next General I am to speak
to which must be acceptable to all good men.

The Frustration of their design: or the ill success which they meet with,
that strive to oppose the Truth by violence, or detain it in ungodliness by
fraud: yet have they not prevailed against me.

Many are the inventions of the wicked, many their Plots and Stratagems, many
their devices, and subtle Machinations, but the Counsel of the Lord that shall
stand! As Satan and his Instruments are restless Persecutors of the Saints; so
is God a sure rescuer, and Preserver of them: Though the red Dragon call
together all his infernal Legions; Rev. 22.7.
all the Principalities, and Powers of darkness, all the numerous host of the
bottomless Pit; yet the victory shall remain with Michael: for indeed it is
Imper congressus, a very unequal Match? for although the Devil in Scripture be
styled the strong one, yet has he to deal with a stronger then himself, with
one who can when he pleases restrain his fury, and dispossess him of all the
advantageous Holds he has gotten) and disappoint him and his Agents of their
most forward and pregnant hopes even upon the Edge, and point of their
accomplishment. As the Enemies of Sion have many ways, and many means to
afflict her, so God has many ways, and many means to protect and defend her. I
cannot show all the ways, and Methods which our Almighty Preserver makes use of
to save and deliver his Chosen, because many of the Paths of his secret
Providence are unknown to us, and past finding out: neither can I insist long
upon those several ways, that are discovered to us in holy writ, which his
divine wisdom uses for their continual Preservation: I shall instance in the
two most comprehensive Methods I can think of and be as brief in them as I can.

1. The special Providence of God is wonderfully shown in the singular
Protection of his Servants from those dangers that arise from necessary causes,
from such as act from their natural inclinations, or at least ways without
much premeditation or design.

2. His infinite Love to his People is more Eminently discovered in the various
Methods he takes to secure them from the mischiefs that are designed them by
voluntary Agents. But before I treat of either of these I must premise this by
way of caution; That God does not allways make use of any peculiar providence
for the preservation of his dearest Children either from dangers ariseing from
necessary, or free Agents, and therefore we are not rashly to judge of all
those who come to any Misfortune either from the one, or the other Cause.
Sometimes he suffers his chiefest Favorites to be sawn asunder, to pass through
the flames, and those of whom the world was not worthy to be stoned, and slain
with the Sword, here in suffering the Malice of the wicked for some private end
of his own to take it is natural course, and to obtain it is designed Purpose;
sometimes likewise he suffers his own Children to come to sudden, and as we
call them untimely Ends; by some unforeseen, and therefore unavoideable
accident: but chiefly and generally speaking God as I shall show you is
pleased to give signal Evidences of his particular care of his own People, in
preserveing them from the many fatal dangers they are subject to from the one
and the many bloody contrivances that threaten them from the other Cause.

1 Gods care is remarkable in the preservation of his Servants from dangers
ariseing from natural Causes: He oftentimes for the Safeguard and Protection
of his People either restraines the violence and Malignity of them, or else
alters, or suspends their Property: Thus he restrained the consumeing nature of
the fire in the over heat Furnace into which the three-Children, (the bold
opposers of Jdolatry to the Kings face) were cast, So that they walked
unconcernedly in it, as though they had only been surrounded with a harmless
Lambent flame. Thus the viper that fastened on St. Paul's hand by the wonderful
Providence of God, (whose first motions all natural Agents must needs obey) had
lost its innate venom, which was turned into an innocent juice: and this is
one of the promises which our blessed Savior made, to his Disciples a little
before his Ascension mentioned by St Mark: They shall take up Serpents, Mark.
16.18.
and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them. we are told by Job
that the stones of the field shall be in League with the Righteous, Job. 5.27.
and that the beasts of the field should be at peace with him. Thus God shut
the Mouths of the Lions, and took away their ravenous appetite, to preserve his
Servant Daniell, whose only crime was his Devotion, his not dareing to offer
up any Petition but to his God only. and we know that the stones which the
people of Lystra (the same persons whom St Paul had lately before Restrained
with much ado from Idolatry.) A^^s 14.19.
threw at that great Apostle, were more favorable to him then the hard hearts
of the misguided rabble; Thus the fire shall not burn, nor the viper sting, nor
the Lions devour, nor the stones kill, nor the Oil Scald, (St John's
deliverance at Patmos) when God is pleased to appear for the security and
Preservation of those who stand up in opposition to Idolatry and Superstition
in defense of his own true worship.

2. The special Providence of God is most Eminently discovered in the several
methods he takes to secure them from the violence intended them by voluntary
Agents. And this God does sometimes by turning the hearts or those who wish
evil unto Sion into a friendly compliance with her. thus he protected his
servant Jacob twice in the same journey, when Laban pursued him, and his
incensed Brother Esau went forth to meet him. Sometimes by turning the fury and
violence of the enemies upon themselves: Thus the war between the Turks, and
the Persian was for a long time the Safeguard, and preservation of the
Christians in Hungary: and often times the jealousies and contests amongst the
several Sects of the Mahometans have diverted the arms of those Infidells, or
recalled them from the advantages they had gained by their vast multitudes:
sometimes God is pleased to send Panick fears, and general consternations
amongst the Enemies of Sion, thereby making them afraid of their own shadows,
and causeing them to fly when there is none to pursue. Kings 2 book 7.6.
Thus he made the Syrians to here the noise of Chariots and Horses, even as the
noise of a great host, and they arose and fled, and left all their Furniture
and provision behind them to the great comfort of the almost starved
Samaritans. At other times he preserves his Servants by discovering the
councills, and revealing the designs of those that seek their destruction:
thus God by the Prophet Elisha discovered the secret Cabinet Councills of the
King of Syria, by which means the King of Israel saved himself: otherwhile he
smites them with blindness, as he did he great host that came to entrap the
Prophet Elisha and takes them in the same snare they laid for others. Sometimes
he infatuates their Councills, making them thereby isntrumental to the
preservation of those whom they had marked out for destruction: Thus the
writeing of an ambiguous Letter to the Lord Mounteagle to diswade him from
coming to the House that day was a Secondary means of preventing that bloody,
and horid design which should on this day have been executed, and for the
happy discovery whereof we have this Morning paid our grateful acknowledgment
to our Merciful Savior and Deliverer.

And as God has many ways so he has many means to protect his Chosen, and to
suppress either the force or to defeat the cunning of their Adversaries: As his
Angels, his Ministering Spirits sent abroad continually for the good of his
Elect: witness Sonacheribs vast army destroyed in one night by them: his
Magistrates which are the Sheilds of the Earth, and his Ministers which are the
Chariots and horsemen of Israel. But in all these we must look up to God, the
first Mover of the wheel and return our Praise and thanksgiveing to him, to
whom it alone belongs, which brings me to the last head The duty of the Church;
the thankful retribution she is bound to make to her great Champion, and
Defender of all her deliverances: may Israel now say. The remembrance of her
past dangers ought to be the Burden of her Song of thanksgiving: as the
Reduplication in the Text, and in other places of the Psalms seem to import
Not unto us, not unto us O Lord but unto thy Name be glory; they compassed me
about, they compassed me I say about, but in the Name of the Lord I will
destroy them. All the redoublings almost that we meet with are but so many
repetitions of Gods favor, and Mercies, whereby we are the more effectually
and strongly stird up to a cheerful thankfullness to him who is the Giver of
all victory and the only Preserver of all those that fear him, and put their
trust in his mercy.

A grateful acknowledgment of Benefits received is one of the first Principles
and common notions we bring into the world along with us: neither have we only
the indelible and indispensible Law of Nature to commend this duty of gratitude
to us, but the positive command of God himself to enforce the commemoration of
either particular or national deliverances, under no less apenalty then the
absolute forfeiture of them: God will by no means admit that his mercies should
be writ in Sand to be washed away by the next coming in of the Tide; but that
they should be recorded in such lasting Characters that may transmit them to
succeeding generations. He commanded a Pot of Manna to be preserved in his
Tabernacle to testify to after ages that miraculous Providence where by he
sustained the Children of Israel for forty years in the dry and barren
Wilderness: And when the waters of Jordan were dryd up to afford an easy
passage to that vast army into the promised Land, we find that Joshua erected
12 stones in the place where the waters were cut off, to be a perpetual
Memorial of that wondrous separation: Nay we are told that in the same place
where they past over the Red Sea, the Print, and Footsteps of that Stupendous
March. May be seen to this day, as a lasting Monument of that Miraculous
Preservation: I shall not stand to justify the truth of that bold and
seemingly improbable relation; but sure I am that the signal steps, and prints
of this days wonderful deliverance remain fresh in this Nation to this present
time, for though many noble, and Eminent neighboring Structures have since
(not without suspicion of indirect contrivances from the same cruel hands)
felt the fury of the merciless Flames: yet those ancient, and glorious Piles of
building at Westminster, where the Plot was laid, where the seen was
contrived, and which were designed, for one common heap of rubish, stand
hitherto as a monument of our Churches triumph, and their shame, and at once
bid defiance to the jaws of Time, and their inveterate Malice.

Let not therefore the complicated Blessings which by the happy discovery of
this days horrid Treasons descended upon this Nation be blotted out of our
remembrance so long as we wish well to the English Monarchy or to the
Protestant Religion; for to this days Triumph we owe the Preservation of both.

Nay least the remembrance of those Miraculous Deliverances that God has
bestowed upon this Kingdom by snatching it out of the bloody Jaws of Popery
should ever be forgotten by us; he has been graciously pleased, as it were to
refresh our Memoryes, and to reprint the Characters of his goodness to be
continued to our Posterity, to signalize once more the same day of the same
Month, and the same date of the year with fresh instances of his gracious
Providence over us, and his singular protection of us, and our most excellent
Religion. Mikeing 88 in this wonderful Century, and the now twice happy fifth
of November, (the glorious day of his present Sacred Majesty's Arrival in
England, for the Preservation of our Liberties and Religion) the joyful
Seasons once more of our deliverance from that fearful inundation of Popery
that was ready to break in upon us.

Let us therefore offer unto God our Protector, and Preserver a double Tribute
of thankfullness for the joint Deliverances vouch saf'd to us, and our fore
Fathers on this Solemn Festival, which deserves to be marked with a new Star,
and colored with a fresh, and richer grain in our English Calender.

Deliverances by which we are rescued from being carried back to our old
abandond Egypt of Idolatry, and Superstition. Mercies to which we owe the
continuance of many noble Families which otherwise had been blown up without
any Luxury or Prodigality of their own: and lastly Mercies to which we must
ascribe the free Exercise of our Religion, and our meeting together in this
venerable, and Agust Place appointed for Gods holy Worship; (a place to which
that Party were lately too near Neighbors, and which they looked upon with too
greedy an Eye) whereby we have this oppertunity of Magnifieing that gracious
Providence which countermind all their hellish Plots in both the Miraculous
Revolutions.

And set us show our Gratitude to Almighty God on this great occasion chiefly
by wishing well unto Sion, and doing the things that may conduce to her Peace.

Let us not be accessory to our own Misfortunes in calling down judgments from
Heaven, in removeing those Golden Candlesticks which are yet, God be praised,
(and long may they continue so) fixed in our Sanctuaries either by the
wickedness of our lives, or the vitiousness of our Principles. Let there be no
Divisions among us, the fomenting of which is the ready way to blast, and sully
those extraordinary blessings which we at present enjoy; and which an unanimous
conformity to the most pure and excellent rules and Discipline of our Church,
is the most likely, and prudentiall way to confirm to our further Benefit, and
advantage. Let those who upon slight, and trivial Grounds separate from our
Communion consider seriously with themselves, who they were, that have ever
since the Reformation been the stout opposers of Popery, and who they now are
which appear as the resolute Champions of the Protestant Religion against all
it is Enemies whatsoever. And then let them be ashamed to stand out any longer
against them, who have always stood in the Gap to Defend them, and the Faith
which they Profess.

Let them all run into the Arms of our common Mother the Church of England, and
rest assured that they cannot but be safe unde her Shelter whom God has so
miraculously restored, and preserved: And let all acquiesce in the wise, and
the sober determinations of those Reverend, and pious Compilers of the most
excellent form of her Dicipline which as well as her Doctrine, some of them
sealed, and confirmed with their best blood. For we may assure our selves of
this Truth, that as a Church over burdened with a multitude of Ceremonies is
like a Bird with great Wings, many gay Feathers, and a small light, empty
useless Body; So that Church (if we may call it one) that despises all outward
Decency, and Order, is like the unplum'd Jay in the Fable, a trouble to her
self, and laughing stock to her Neighbors.

Lastly let us endeavor to be Sober in our Judgments, prudent in our
Conversation; putting on a calm, meek, obedient, teachable Temper; not
affecting singularity, but agreeing as in one Faith, one Hope, one Baptism, in
the acknowledgement of one Lord, and Savior of us all: So likewise in one
outward form of worship, even that Incomperable one which is so happily (and
long may it be so) Established by Law among us.

And let Us, bless and Praise God for all his Mercies; and then God shall bless
us, and continue this most excellent Religion which we profess, and enjoy, in
spite of all it is Adversaries, and Opposers whatsoever, to us, and our
Posterity for many and many Generations; till all Churches shall be gathered
into one, and united to their Supreme head Christ Jesus our blessed Savior,
and Deliverer, to whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, three Persons,
and one God be ascribed oll Power, Praise, Honor, and Glory for ever and ever,
Amen.

FINIS.

