Persecution APPEARING With its own OPEN FACE, IN WILIAM ARMORER:

As will be sufficiently manifest to all that may impartially read this
following Relation of the Cruel Proceedings of the said William Armorer, with
some others, against the Innocent People of God called QUAKERS, in the Town of
Reading, in the County of Berks: Of his taking of them up, and Imprisoning
great Numbers of them: And of the eontinuance of their Sufferings to this day,
being almost Three years and a half. And of his unwearied and Cruel Practices
against that Innocent People from time to time.

Discovered and laid open, to the end that Lies and false Reports may be
stopped, and that the King and all People may be rightly informed, and truly
acquainted with the Case, as it is clearly and truly in it self.

Matt. 5. 11, 12. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you,
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake; rejoice and be
exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven; for so persecuted they the
Prophets which were before you. Rev. 2. 10. Fear none of those things which
thou shall suffer; behold, the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, etc.
Psalm. 119. 126. It is time for thee, Lord, to work, for they have made void thy
Law. LONDON, Printed in the year 1667.

To the READER.
Friend,
THou may be sensible, That great and many have been the Trials and
Sufferings of the People of God in Ages and Generations past, who did bear
witness against wi^kdeness, Idolatry and Oppression, and all the unrighteous
Laws and Decrees of men; bearing a righteous Testimony for God, his Way and
Truth, upon earth; for which cause they have always been persecuted by wicked
and ungodly men, whom the Devil, the Enemy of mankind, has always made his
Instruments, to withstand the work of the Lord God in every dispensation of
time, wherein the Lord has been pleased to appear and manifest himself unto
men; and as Truth and Righteousness has flourished and born rule in the heart,
and the true worshipped of God been exalted and set up; so much the more has
Deceit, Cruelty and Oppression, appeared against it, through wicked and
cruel-minded men; whereby the Lord was displeased and provoked to anger, and
his indignation and wrath was many times kindled against the Kings and Rulers
of the Earth, because of the Afflictions and Oppressions of his People, which
he did see and take great notice of; as the heavy Plagues, and dreadful
Judgments which were known and felt in the earth, were signal Testimonies of;
whereby (for the Cause beforementioned) they were brought to perpetual shame
and confusion, and an example to all that should come after, and tread in their
footsteps. As in the case of Cain, who was wrath, and slew his brother Abel
about Sacrifice, because Abel's was accepted, and his was not, being wicked;
and Abel off^red unto God a more acceptable Sacrifice then Cain; by which he
obtained witness that he was righteous, Genesis 4. Heb. 11. Also in the case of
Lot, it may be seen how wickedness and oppression did abound in the men of
Sodom against him; and how they compassed his house, because of the men, the
Angels of the Lord, which were with him; and pressed to break the door, to
search for the strangers: These were the Sodomites w^o were made Examples of
Gods Eternal vengeance, to all persecutors and ungodly men, Genesis 19.

Also in the case of the children of Israel, when the Lord manifested himself
unto them by Moses in Egypt, who commanded them to worship contrary to the
worship and wills of the Egyptians, and walked contrary to their ways and
customs, and were oppressed and held in bondage, till God was provoked to
destroy them, seeing his heavy Plagues and Judgm^nts did not reform them, Exodus
3. 14.

And also the Judges and Kings of Israel, who were wicked, and did that which
was evil in the sight of the Lord, and regarded not him, nor his way and
people, how the Lord, the Most High God, dealt with them according to their
doings, and how he often cut their days short in the earth, and made their
Names a reproach for ever.

Also in the case of Haman, whom the King Ahasuerus had exalted and given Power
and Authority unto, how he insulted over the Kings peaceable Subjects, and poor
Jews misrepresenting, and falsely accusing them to the King, because Mordecai
the Jew, could not give that honor to him, which belonged to the Lord; telling
the King, That their Laws were diverse from all people, and that they kept not
the Kings Laws; and therefore said, it was not for the Kings profit to suffer
them: And the King giving too much credit unto this envious, bloody-minded man,
consented to him against the Jews, and bid him do as he would to them, and left
them wholly to the mercy of a merciless man to destroy them; and in the Kings
Name he began to proceed against the Jews; so that his Villainy must be done in
the Kings Name, which was his Cloak, and to execute the Kings Laws, (or that
destructive, unrighteous Decree which he through wicked Enmity had obtained) as
if the King had sworn him to do all mischief in his Name; which would have been
great dishonor to the King, if he should have brought his wicked intentions to
pass; and would undoubtedly have provoked the Lord God of Israel to anger
against the King, to destroy him: But the Lord appearing for his innocent
people, the Kings heart was turned, and he persuaded from his Resolution which
he had made through misinformation, and then see what followed this proud
Haman, who was exalted as it were from the Dunghill to the Throne, Esth. 3. 7.

And again, how the Princes and Presidents of King Darius who fearing that
Truth and Righteousness should be exalted by Daniel; and De^eit and Wickedness
thrown down, they finding no occasion against him, except it were concerning
the L^w and Worship of his God, for they could not deny but he was an honest
peaceable man, and his conversation among men was blameless and harmless; and
what was the matter then? why did they persecute him and throw him into the
Lions Den? Why these envious men that purposed to destroy him coming into his
Chamber, and finding him seeking the Lord or making petitions to his God, as he
use to do at other times, (notwithstanding there was a Law made against it)
with his window open, they went to stir up and incense the King against him,
saying, Have thou not signed a Decree, That every man that shall ask a Petition
of any God or Man, within thirty days, save of thee, O King, (or as thou have
prescribed) shall be cast into the Lions Den; and here is one Daniel, who
regards not thee, O King, nor the Decree that thou have signed; but makes his
petitions three times a day, etc. Dan. 6. And this was his crime, for
worshipping God, or asking petitions of him, according to his usual manner; but
see the end of his Accusers and Persecutors, Jer. 24. And the King repealed
that Law, in which he pleased God.

And again, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and others, were persecuted by their own Nation
the Jews, for bearing witness against their evil practices, by word and
conversation, and because they could not conform to their unrighteous Laws; yet
the Jews pretended to worship the true God, and did profess love and service to
him in words; which some perhaps may think were more justifiable then those
Persecutors beforementioned, who worshipped nothing else but Creatures, and
the works of men's hands: But that cannot be; for persecution for Religion, and
tender Conscience sake, in whomsoever it appeared, was never of God, nor
practiced by good men: And it is worse, and more wicked in them who profess the
true God, then in those who neither know, nor own him in words; and a bare
profession of God, his Law and Ordinances, cannot justify any man or people in
the sight of God, while that nature and spirit rules in them, which leads to
persecution.

And the chief Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, had a large Profession of God
and Scriptures, and had the Law of God read among them every Sabbath Day, and
did many things which God commanded to be done, and yet persecuted Christ that
was the Substance; and said they had a Law, and by their Law he ought to dye,
Joh. 19. And his Apostles were also persecuted by them as Blasphemers, and such
as changed their Laudable Customs and Laws, and turners of the world upside
down; because the Lord was with them, in whose Authority they preached the
Gospel, and struck at the very root of Iniquity, Wickedness and Oppression, and
their vain Customs, which the people then could not endure to hear beat down;
but the then Rulers commanded them to preach no more in the Name of Jesus; and
they gathered great multitudes together, sometime by the Seaside, on
Mountains, Fields, and in upper Chambers, separate from the Jews and Heathens
Synagogues and Temples; and many did suffer great afflictions by reason
thereof. And thus in brief (Reader) thou may see and remember how righteous
men that truly feared God, and wrought righteousness in the earth, have been
persecuted, and cruelly entreated both by professors and profane.

And as it was then, He that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was
born after, and walked in the Spirit, even so it is now in this our day,
wherein the God of Heaven has appeared unto us, and visited us in his
everlasting Love and Mercy, by the Light and Spirit of his Son Christ Jesus,
which we have received, and by which we are led into all Truth and
Righteousness, and from the filthy conversation and ways of the world, to bear
witness for God, his Way and Worship, as it is made manifest to us; because of
which we also have been persecuted, and cruelly entreated, since the Lord
gathered us to be a people; and many have dealt hardly with us, and rose up
against us for these twelve or fourteen years; and all sorts of people, from
the high professor, to the profane, that have been in power in the world, have
pushed at us. But now more abundantly, and particularly, one William Armorer, a
Justice so called, and his Abettors, as may be seen by this following Relation,
who has appeared against us in this Town of Reading, more like a Monster in
nature, then a man, and much less like a Christian, though he would be so
accounted, as also the rest of our Persecutors would: But their works do make
him and them manifest; and according to their proceedings (which thou will here
find gathered into as short a compass as we could well, to keep the substance
of things) thou may judge of him and them; for we desire not to lay open the
cruel dealing of our adversaries farther then to relate their own actions;
neither have we put a worse face upon it, then it is really in it self. But if
it does appear ugly, cruel and monstrous, it is their own; we have not wronged
them in one particular, that we know of; neither have we filled paper, to
amplify, with many words to make a large volume, to set out the cruelty of his
and their proceedings, and how contrary it is to the known Laws of the Kingdom,
but to leave that to thy ingenious understanding, as thou shall read the
Relation, to make up that which for brevities sake we have omitted; and the
reason why it has lain so long, and not been published, as many have both
expected and desired, was, because we did not desire to lay open his cruelty,
or to make a noise of our sufferings (for in that we have the infallible
testimony and evidence of Gods Eternal Spirit in our Consciences, that we
suffer for well doing, and for righteousness sake; we are fully satisfied in
our selves, if it had been buried in Obiivions Grave) but would rather have him
amend and repented; but seeing he still continues to deal hardly and cruelly
with us, and not only so, but misrepresents us, and falsely accuses us to many
who do not know his proceedings against us, we cannot but bring these things to
public view, for the clearing of that blessed Truth and Testimony for which we
suffer, and our innocence, which is deeply concerned herein, and to satisfy
all people who have heard the rumor thereof; as also, that he may see and
remember what he has done against us, and leave off his bad intents and work
of Cruelty, and repent of them.

And Reader, thou will find by this following Relation, That the chief Cause of
this our Suffering, is, Because we cannot svvear at all, it being forbidden by
Christ Jesus, whom we must hear in all things, and by his Apostles; and being
inwardly persuaded in our Consciences by his Spirit, That we (as Christians)
ought not to swear in any case, (as the true Christians have been heretofore)
we dare not do it. And also, because we meet together to seek God, to wait upon
him, and to ask Petitions of him, as we use to do, with our doors open: Because
of this, we are accused as Plotters, breakers of the Kings Laws, etc. and
thronged up in Prisons, and sentenced to Banishment from the Land of our
Nativity; and all the Crime they can find us guilty of, is, Because we confess
we meet to seek the Lord, or wait upon him; and this our Adversaries accounts
sufficient ground to proceed against us; whereby it is fully manifest, That it
is against the appearance of Good, of Sobriety, of Truth and Righteousness,
that this old Spirit of Cain, of the Sodomites, of Haman, and of the cruel
Jews, is risen in William Armorer, and some others, who take occasion against
us, because of the Law and Worship of our God; else he could have nothing
against us, nor justly accuse us; but because he himself comes to our Meetings
again and again, as thou will see, and finds us seeking the Lord, or asking
Petitions of our God, and nothing else he can prove against us; for we can
appeal to him, and all people in this place, Who we have wronged or hurt in any
thing? And have we not lived peaceably, harmlesly, and honestly amongst our
Neighbors? And if nothing else can be found against us, but for the cause
before mentioned, is it not great pity that any of the Rulers of England should
be so much like those wicked Persecutors before mentioned, as to have a hand in
such a work? And does it not tend very much to the dishonor of the King, that
such things should be acted in his Name? And do not such men do the King much
more hurt, then ever they can do him good, by ^isobliging the hearts of all his
best and most truest Subjects, by these wilful and rude Proceedings in his
Name, and only satisfy the Rabble of rude deboist people, in whom his safety
does not at all consist. To say no more, we shall leave it to the serious
consideration of the wise Reader, and remain friends unto him and all men, and
do pray for the Conversion of our Enemies, who hate us, though we are continued
under great Oppression.

From the Prisoners called Quakers, in Reading-Gaol, the 13th day of the 6th
Month, 1667.
PERSECVTION appearing in its own Open Face, etc.
BEfore we come to speak particularly of the Proceedings of William Armorer, we
thought fit (as in its right place) to give a short Relation of the Proceedings
of George Thorn, in the time of his Mayoralty, in the year 1662, and how he
acted his part against the People called Quakers, being his known Neighbors in
the Town of Reading. But he being since dead, we shall say the less of him,
only for the sake of such as are yet living, that they may not tread in the
footsteps of unwise and cruel-minded-men, and that those that have had a hand
in these things, may take warning, and repent, before the time comes, when the
wicked cease to act, and receives his reward according to his works, which
follows him.

The 8th day of the second Month, called April, 1662, the Sessions being holden
at Newberry for the County of Be^ks, where Rich: Palmer of Oakingham, sat
Judge; where Thomas Curtis, George Lamboll, and eight more, appeared, being
warned thither for not going to their Worship, an Indictment being read against
them upon that account; They pleaded not guilty, and the Court required of them
to put in Bail for their appearance the next Sessions; one of them answered,
They were known to them, and if they would take their words to appear, they
would promise to appear; but that not being accepted, they were sent to the Gaol

The 15th of the 4th Month, called June, 1662, George Thorn, Mayor, sent two
Constables, Thomas White, and John Kenton, (both which also are since dead) to
the Meeting at Tho: Curtis his house, and took the Names of Friends at the
Meeting; and said they must come before the Mayor the next morning: One of them
answered, That they would not go out of the way on purpose, but might go if the
Mayor did send for them. The next day the Constables and Officers with a
Warrant from Geo: Thorn, took William Lamboll, William Tompson, Anthony
Sadler, Thomas Tudway, Walter Emerton, Joan Dee, Anne Hatt, Hanah Webb, and
Sarah Lamboll, some in the street, some at their own houses, and some going to
their work; some of whom desiring to go before the Mayor, being brought before
him, he demanded bond of them to appear next Sessions; they answered, They
could promise to appear: But that not being taken, he sent them to Gaol; and
being brought to the Gaol-door, one of the Officers said to the Under-keeper,
Here I have brought you two honest men. But S. Lamboll, and H. Webb, were
bailed by John M^les, unknown to them.

The 22 d of the same Month, George Thorn Mayor, and Thomas White Constable,
came to the Meeting, and took Nineteen Friends, viz. Leo: Coal* Joseph Coal,
Jonathan Lamboll, Thomas Chelton, Jo: Walker, Jo: Fellows, Joseph Phips, Tho:
Bartlet, Jo: Boult, James Whiteheart, Edw: Smith, Jo: Ranolds, Rich: Hutchins,
Anne Sharp, Margery Richardson, Eliz: Dee, Widow, Bridget Smith, Sarah Lamboll,
and Hannah Webb, and sent them to the Gaol for being at the Meeting; Sarah
Lamboll, and Hannah Webb being committed in the Town-Sessions.

The 8th of the 5th Month, called July, the Sessions for the County was holden
at Abingdon, to which place the Prisoners before mentioned were brought, and
the Assizes being the next day, the Sessions was adjourned for two weeks: the
Prisoners not Called.

And the 18th. of the same Month, the Sessions was holden for the Borough of
Reading, where Sarah Lambol and Henry Webb appeared: Instead of proceeding
against them according to their Commitment, for being at a meeting; they asked
them if they would take the Oath of Allegiance, which they for Conscience sake
refusing, were sent to Goal again.

And then the 22 d of the same Month, the Prisoners before mentioned, were had
again to Abingdon to the Sessions, being the time to which they before
Adjourned, where 34 Prisoners appeared, some being left sick at Goal; And Tho.
Curtis and Geo. Lambol, and 7 of the other 8 that were Indicted at Newberry,
for not going to their Worship (one of them being an ancient man, and not well,
was left behind at Reading) were tried by the Jury, and freed. Yet
notwithstanding, Tho: Holt the Judge, caused the Oath of Allegiance to be
tendered to Tho: Curtis, and Geo: Lamboll, whereby to ensnare those two only in
that snare; for refusing of which, they were committed again to Gaol; and of
the other seven they demanded Sure^ies for their good behavior, which they not
giving, were sent likewise again to Gaol; and the other twenty five Prisoners
(being quit by the Jury) were discharged.

The 27th of the same Month came Geo: Thorn Mayor, and Tho: Seikes Justice (so
called) with Hugh Smith the Clerk, and many Soldiers with them, to the Meeting,
having the Statute-book with them also: One of the Friends desired they would
read the Preamble to the Oath; but they refusing, took Forty seven Friends,
viz. Tho: Noris, Tho: Tudway, Jo: Kemboll, Leo: Key, Joseph Phips, William
Lamboll, Jo: Ranolds, Christopher Cheesman, Walter Emerton, Humphrey Emerton,
Tho: Bartlet, Jo: Walker, William Tompson, Jo: Boult, James Whitheart, Jo:
Jegger, William Ye^t, Tho: Chelton, Jasper May, Jo: Fellows, Antho: Sadler,
Edw: Smith, Tho: Speed, William Whistler, Jonathan Lamboll, Ann Hatt, Francis
Kent, Eliz: Tudway, Joan Wilessby, Rachel Cope, Sarah Pain, Anne Weedon, Sarah
Lamboll, Eliz: Dee Jane Hussy, Joan Wheeler, Ann South, Hannah Wrenn, Hanah
Emerton, Judith Smith, Bridget Smith, Hannah Mills, Anne Webb, Dorothy Clarke,
Catherine Edsol, Francis Dawson, and Joan Terrey, and made a Mittimus, and sent
them to the Gaol, many of whom were freed but a few days before, at Abingdon;
as the Reader may observe.

The 7th of the 8th Month, called October, 1662, the Sessions was holden at
Newberry; but all the Women were left at home by the Mayor's Order; there being
so many, it may be the burden was too heavy for him to bear; so they were
dropped, and taken no notice of: And Tho: Curtis, and George Lamboll were not
had thither, but the seven men before mentioned, committed for not giving
Sureties, were called and discharged; and the rest of the men last taken, being
there called, were indicted for being at an unlawful Meeting; and having
pleaded Not guilty, the Court demanded Sureties; for not finding of which, they
were sent back again to Gaol.

The 13th day of the 11th Month, -- 62, the Sessions for the County was held at
Reading, but none of our Friends (the Prisoners) were called, but were kept
till the next Quarter Sessions holden at Newberry the 28th of the second Month
called April, -- 63; and being had thither, twenty one in number being called
into the Court, the Judge said to them, You are discha^ged, and pray God bless
you; but though we do discharge you, yet we cannot give away the Cle^ks fees:
The Prisoners told them, they would speak with the Clerk; which having done,
told him they could give him no money; but however, he discharged them.

And Geo: Tho^ne Mayor, having thus g^ven the onset upon his peaceable and
harmless Ne^ghbours, for their tender Conscience sake, and having haled them to
prison, and thronged them together, and hurried them backward and forward from
one Sessions to another, till his own works had even tired him, his fury being
pretty much spent, another Instrument appeared to carry on that w^rk, to wit,
William Armorer, who came on with open mouth, as it were, as if he would have
devoured at once, the sheep of the Lords Pasture; and as if he had bid defiance
to the Lord God of Israel, and were resolved to destroy his chosen people,
being furnished with great strength and authority, and having his will for his
Law, and prisons ready to receive all that come to his hand; or rather, what
his own heart and hand found out, searching the Houses, Chambers and Shops of
innocent people for that end, as if it were Crime enough to be called a
(Christian) Quaker, and his punishment must far exceed the quality of the
Crime, being almost three year and a half's Imprisonment: And thus he has
continued to this time, as the Reader may observe.

Upon the 27th day of the first Month, in the Year 1664, William Armorer came
to the house of Thomas Curtis (where the people of God were peaceably met
together, to wait upon, and worship the Lord in Spirit and in Truth, according
to their usual manner) and pulled out of the Meeting the young children, then
took thirty four men, whose Names are as follows, viz. William Lamboll,
Richard Hutchins, William Tompson, Jasper May, Edward Lambourn, John Fellow,
James Marlow, Anthony Sadler, Thomas Tudway, James Whiteheart, Walter Emerton,
Joseph Phipes, Tho: Speed, Tho: Chelton, Tho: Cenicke, Tho: Heifeild, Tho:
Hind, Daniel Green, Henry Pizeing, James Lavell, Hen: Bristow, Rob: Pider,
Tho: Curtis, Geo^ge Lamboll, Leonard Key, John Kembell, Jonathan Lamboll, Leo:
Coal, Io: Pain, John Beck, Tho: Norris, Edward Fellow, William Whistler, and
Christopher Page; and caused the Clerk to make a Mittimus, the substance
whereof was, for being at an unlawful meeting, contrary to an Act of Parl^ament
made about a year or two before, etc. and delivered them to Richard Johnson,
and John Creed, Constables, who had them to the County-Gaol in Reading.

The 3 d. day of the 2 d Month called April, 1664, came William Armorer again
to the meeting, and took two men, viz. Robert Pain, and John Bolt, being all
the men that were at the meeting; And said to them, what a Devil, are you met
again? I will send you all to Prison; what a Devil, are you all Dumb? has the
Devil cast his Club over you, and bewitched you? I. Boult said, We have learned
of a better Spirit, even the Spirit of Christ Jesus, which teaches us to deny
the Devil and all his Instruments. William Armorer, Who a Devil will believe
you? hang you, you are deluded by the spirit of the Devil; I will send you all
to Prison: I. Boult, Many good people will believe us, and we wholly deny the
spirit of the Devil, having chosen a better spirit, the spirit of Christ Jesus,
which is a spir^t of love and meekness, of patience and humility. W. A. You say
true, it is so. I. B. And the spirit of the Divil is an angry, furious, hasty,
persecuting spirit* W. A. sa^d he is so: I. B. Come, let us try who is of this
spirit, thee, or us. W. Armorer, A Devil on you, I could find in my heart to
lay you over the pate with my Cane. I. Boult, I hou ought to keep the peace,
and I hope thou will not go to break it; did'^t thee ever read that Christ, or
any of his Apostles did Persecute any? W. Armo^er, Did none? then Ch^ists flock
is but a little flock, and there is but a few of you, but I will make you
fewer, I will hunt you out, and send you to Prison. I. Boult, that is the
weakest thing that thou can do; if thou can convince me of any thing that
is evil, I will hear thee and let the Pri^ons alone: after some other discourse
he caused a M^ttimus to be made, and sent them to Goal: And the 19th day of
the same Month the General Quarter Sessions for the County was held at
Newbe^^y, but the Prisoners before mentioned were no^ had thither, nor Called;
neither at the Sessions for the Borough of Reading, held about the same time,
though most of them were Inhabitants of the same Corporation.

The First of the 3 d Month called May, 1664, came William Armorer again to the
Meeting, and took one man and six women, viz. Tho. Bartlet, Anne Hat, Anne
Sharp, Hanah Webb, Sarah Pa^ne, Dorothy Clarke, and Elizabeth Crage, and made a
Mittimus much after the manner of the former, and sent them to Goal by Rich.
Johnson Constable.

The 8th of the same Month, came W. Armorer to the Meeting again, there being
no man there, he took seven women, Bridget Smith, Anne Curtis, Sarah Lambol,
Iudeth Smith, Katharine Woodard Martha Cheeseman and Elizabeth Hampon; and made
a Mittimus as before, and sent them to Goal, by Tho. Coats Constable.

Upon the 2^ d of the same Month, W^lliam Armorer came again, to the Meeting in
great fury, as formerly, but finding only a few Children and young Maidens, he
pulled them out himself, (and his men) having a great Club, or Staff in his
hand, struck one of the Maidens a sore Stroke, that she felt it for some time
after; and told them he would send them to Prison; and other throatning
speeches what he would do to them, if they came there again: And on the seventh
of the fourth month, the Jailer called for all the Women and Maids
beforementioned, except six, viz. Ann Hatt, Ann Curtis, Sa^ah Lamboll, A.
Sharp, Sarah Pa^ne, and Eliz. Crage, and gave them leave to go out of prison,
and to come again when he sent for them, having (as is supposed) some private
Instruction from William Armorer so to do; and about the 18th day of the same
month, Tho: Coats Constable, came to the Gaol, and fetched out one of those six
(Anne Sharp) also, the Jailer demanding fees of her Husband, he refused to pay
it; notwithstanding his refusal, she was set at liberty, for the Constable had
some work for her Husband to do.

And now we come to the Proceedings at the General Quarter-Sessi^ns held at
Abingdon the 12th of the 5th month, 1664, against the Prisoners before
mentioned, who were taken up, and committed for being at meetings, etc. But
being brought to the place aforesaid, they were informed that the Justices
would have put them off to the Sessions for the Borough of Reading, but
William Armorer would not consent to it; and one Hersie told Champion the
Deputy-Clerk, That here was about threescore Quakers, and asked what he should
do with them: Champion replied, That he would show them a trick; which he
endeavored to do indeed, because some of the moderat'st men who were warned to
be of the Jury, were excepted against, and put out; because some of our friends
about a year before, being there upon the same account of meeting, were cleared
by the Jury, there being no sufficient evidence against them. Well, in the
Afternoon they were called to the Bar, expecting a Trial according to their
Mittimus: One Friend, James Whiteheart, being the first that was called to the
Bar, putting not off his Hat to them, they were very angry with him, and many
words passed, and he was taken from the Bar, but they never so much as asked
him whether he would take the Oath of Allegiance, or not. The next that was
called, was one Henry Pizeing, (who was committed among them; but was no
Quaker, s^ called) who coming to the Bar with his Hat in his hand, and bowing
his body to them, Tho: Holt (who was Judge) said, Here Is a man has some
manners; and asked him if he would take the Oath of Allegiance? He answered, he
had taken it twice already: The Judge said, But y^u were no Quaker then; The
said Henry replied, Neither am I now; but have been many weeks among them, and
I nev^r saw no hurt by them, but are an hon^st, civil people: Upon which
William Armore^ stood up, and said to him, Why did you not tell me so before.
Henry said, Your Worship was so wrathful, that you would not hear me. Then the
Judge said he must take it again; so the Oath was read to him, and he said after
them; and having taken the Oath, the Judge stood up, and made a motion to the
rest of the Justices, That because this Henry Pizeing had taken the Oath, he
did desire that they would consent that he should go free without paying any
fees; to which the Justices consenting, bid the Jailer take no fees of him, and
would have had him to have past out at a back door, and come no more among the
Quakers. But he told them, He hoped now he was freed, he might go out at which
door he would.

Then the Judge bid the Jailer bring up ten of the Prisoners at a time; and Tho:
Norris, and several others, were called; and they asked them whether they would
take the Oath of Allegiance; they answered, they were not committed upon the
account of the Oath, but were taken at a meeting, and expected a Trial upon
that account: Others of them answered, Christ had commanded them not to swear
at all, and therefore they could not take an Oa^h; and that they were not sent
to Gaol for that, but were taken at a meeting, etc. Judge. We discharge you as
to your meeting, but you must take the Oath of Allegiance. Many being called,
answered to the same purpose as the former. Tho: Curtis was called; the Judge
asked him if he would take the Oath of Allegiance? Who answered, He had
something to say, and desired he might be heard; and said he did not refuse the
Oath upon the account as not to bear his Allegiance to the King, but because
Christ had commanded him not to swear at all; for he was persuaded, That he had
manifested himself to be as good a Subject to the King, as most in the County,
since He came in; and that if he could take any Oath either to save his Estate
or Life, he did profess he would begin with that Oath; and therefore desired
that the Court would be pleased to let some of their Ministers show him by the
Scr^ptures how he might take it, and not break the Command of Christ, and he
would do it. The Judge called to a Minister that was near them, to spend half a
quarter of an hours time with him, to satisfy him in this particular, and they
would sit still and hear. But the Priest (one Worell, as we remember his Name
was) said, putting off his Hat, and bowing to the Court, he desired to be
excused, for he had, had to do with some of them already, and they were an
obstinate people, and would not be satisfied, or to that purpose.

Tho: Curtis: This is commonly the answer we have from these men, when they are
desired to answer us a question according to the Scripture, that we might be
satisfied; they answer, We are obstinate, or such like.

So the Jailer was commanded to take them all away, by William Armorer, who
said, I know they will not take it; though many of them never denied it.

The next morning, being the 13th of the month asoresaid, after William Armorer
was gone out of Town, two Friends, viz. Richard Billingsly, and William
Sargood, were called to the Bar (being warned to appear there for not going to
their Church, though there was no Priest in the Parish) and expected they
should have been proceeded against for that; instead of which, they asked them
if they would take the Oath of Allegiance; and because they could not swear,
were sent to Gaol with the Prisoners before mentioned.

The 19th of the same month, John Cre^d Constable, came with a warrant from
William Armorer, to the Jailer, and demanded the body of Tho: Curtis; which
being delivered by the Jailer, was had to the Bear Inn, where William Armorer
was, who said to Tho: Cu^tis, You are going eo Bristol Fair, but I will stop
your journey, (the Sherif having given him leave to go to Bristol about his
occasions) and commanded the Constable to carry him to the Town-Prison, the
Counter; he refusing to go, (being a Prisoner in the County-Gaol, the Constable
called ^n Officer, and compelled him; and they had him to the Counter without
M^ttimus.

And the 22 d of the same month, being Sessions time for the Borough of
Reading, Rich: Johnson Constable, came and fetched out Tho: Curtis from the
Counter, before Tho: Seikes Mayor, and William Armorer, Edward Dolby, Justices,
and many others in the Council Chamger: The Mayor asked him, Whether he sent
those Papers? T. C. said, I received them from a little Maid that came from the
Gaol, and I sent them: They said, But did you write them? He answered, Nay* Did
you indite them, said the Mayor? I will not answer to such questions, (said T.
C.) read the Paper, and then I will say more to it. So they gave him the Paper,
and he read it; and being reading that part which says, Because of swearing,
the Land mourns; Alderman Johnson said, that was vory true: And having read it,
T. C. said it was every word true, and should stand for ever; and he did own
it: Then said William Armorer, I will send it to the Council. T. C. said, I
would they had every one, one of them: A Copy of which here follows.

THE Eternal God, from whom no secrets can be hid, sees your doings, and the
eye of the Lord beholds the way that now you walk in, and the works you are
about, who are persecuting his Lambs, and impr^soning his people, who for the
fulfilling of his commands, and walking in his ways, have chosen the sufferings
of this present world, rather then all the glory and pleasure that this world
can afford them; and we have counted up our cost, and do find upon serious
deliberation, That it is better for us to dye by the hands of the hard-hearted
and cruel men of this world, in and under the favor, love and friendship of
the Lord, then to lose our peace with him, by making shipwreck of our faith and
peace of conscience which the Lord has given us; and we have truly debated,
pondered and considered this our present state of hard and cruel suffering in
our own bosoms; and weighed our hearts in the balance of Gods truth; and
there is nothing in all this world that could make us to leave our Wives and
Families, our Callings, Estates and Employments, but this very thing, namely,
The Truth of our God, and the Worship of Christ Jesus; the profession and
practice of which, at this day is the ground of this our sufferings. And
whereas you press us so hard to take the Oath of Allegiance, and come to your
Church; We do declare in the sincerity of our hearts, That the ground and cause
why we cannot take an Oath in any case, although it be to the loss of our
Estates and Life, is, Because Jesus Christ and his Apostles has commanded us
not to swear at all, and it is not lawful for us in any case to break Christ's
command: And if any of your Ministers, Doctors, Priests or Bishops, can make it
appear by Gods Word, or the Scriptures, that it is lawful for us to swear, and
may swear, and not fall into damna^ion, we will take it. And therefore cease
calling for us to swear, and break Christ's commands, till your Doctors,
Bishops, ^^^rates, or Ministers, or some of them, has convinced us that it may
be done, and Christ's command not broken. There is too much swearing already,
and because of swearing, the Land mourns. And as concerning coming to your
Church, we have with much gravity considered the true state of the Church of
which you are members, to see if possible, we might come to you, and join with
you, and not lose our peace with God; and this we find, That you have called
your selves by the Name of the Church of Christ, but the nature of Christians,
and of the Church of Christ, is denied by you: For the Pride we daily see, and
the Oaths we daily hear from the Members of your Church, is sufficient to make
a Heathen or a Turk (much more a Christian) quite out of love with it: And
further* the cruelty that is practiced by your members, as haling men and women
out of their peaceable Meetings, and casting them into Prison, contrary to the
Lord Jesus Christ's Practice and Doctrine, is ground enough for us to believe
that you are neither members of Christ's Church, nor children of God, nor heirs
of his blessed Kingdom; for if you were members of Christ's Church, you would
not act such high blasphemies against the living God, as to swear by the Blood
and Wounds of God, and God damn me, and God confound me; and when you have so
done, enter in^o your Church, and cry aloud, We beseech thee to hear us goo^
Lo^d; and this is top, common among the members of your Church* Now in the
coolness of your hearts, con^ider what it is you ar^ so earnestly pe^swading us
unto: How ca^ we come among ^^u, and joy^ in prayer with such as act this great
^ wickedness? If we should come and join with you, the Lord might ^^mn us all
together, for it is the same tongue, the same lips, and ^he same spirit that
swears before you enter, that when you are entr^d, ca^^s to ^od to hear you; so
that the words of the Apostle are ^ul^^lled, Out of the same mouth p^oceedeth
blessings and cursings. Oh ye unw^se ^n (...)! ye know not God, neither of what
spirit you are; an^ ther^^ore be advised before it is too late; for in love to
^ou^ sou^s do we declare unto you, That if you will have us joy^ to you your
way must be to join to the Lord, repent of the wickedness that you have done,
and return to the Lord God, and p^^ away the evil of your doings, and cast out
from among you the P^oud* and the Drunkard, the Swearers, the Murderers, the
Adulterers and Whoremongers, and all other filthiness of flesh and spirit that
is among you; and then clothe your selves with meekness and pa^^ence, ^s the
Church of Christ was in the days of the Apostles; an^ the^ if we will not join
with you, and come to your Church, let ^ur b^ame be upon our heads; for till
then, although you call your selves Christians, you are but Antichrists
servants, that opposes Christ in this the day of his appearance. And though you
may comp^l b^ force and cruelty, many to join with you in words, you do* but
make them ten-fold more the children of the Devil, and a t^ousand-fold more in
a capacity to do you mischief; and truly such Christians; you have enough
already; and this was the way that your forefathers walked in whom God
overthrew, and razed their Name ^ut of the Land of the living.

Therefore boast not your selves over us, as if the Lord had forsaken us,
because we have none in the Earth to take our part, or p^ead our cause; or a^
if your day should never have an end, or as ^f ^he Lord had ^o regard to his
suffering-people, nor took no no^^e of your cruelty toward them, for
certainly, when we have fil^ed up the measure of the sufferings of Christ that
is yet to be filled up, and you have filled up the measure of your cruelty and
hard-heartedness, the Lord will divide between cattle and cattle, and you shall
not escape his fierce Vengeance and fiery Indignation; therefore in love to
your souls do we send this, that you might be warned before it is too late; for
the wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all that forget God, as the Scripture
plainly declares, and we cannot but be plain with you. And therefore fear the
Lord ye Rulers, and give glory to his Name, for the Lords day is at hand that
shall burn as an oven, and the wicked shall be as thorns cast into it, we wish
you well and could rejoice to see you in that path that leads you to Gods
kingdom, that your souls might find rest, that the light of the Lord might be
your leader, and you might be guided up to God, is the desire of them who in
scorn are called Quakers.

From the Gaol, the 22d of the fifth Month, 1664.
And the 31 of the 5th Month, called July, William Armorer came again to the
Meeting, and took seven Women and Maids, viz. Bridget Smith, Eliz: Bradbridg,
Anne Watson, Anne Sharp, Eliz: Wright, Eliz: Dee the younger, and Sarah
^ustell, and caused his Clerk to make a Mittimus there present in the
Meeting-room, mean while William Armorer his man, John Venture, knowing that
Tho: Curtis, his Wife and Manservant, were all Prisoners, went and opened a
door, and went into the house, (there being only a Maidservant, and one man of
the Family, not very well in his chamber, having taken something that morning)
and went up stairs, meeting with the Maid, bid her not be afraid, and asked her
if there were any in the House more then the Family? who answered, No; of which
he informed his Master; being gone out of doors again, the Maid locked the door;
in a little time after, his Master, William Armorer, went and knocked at the
door; the Maid being in a fear, her Master, and Mistress, and Manservant being
all in the Gaol, did not open the door. But William Armorer pulled some kind of
Instrument out of his Pocket, and picked the Lock, entered the house, and
searched from room to room, and under the bed, until he came where the man
belonging to the House was, and asked his Name; he told him his Name was Joseph
Coal; and being asked where he dwelt, answered, That he dwelt there, and that
he had lived there for seven years at times, and that it was the place of his
abode: So William A^morer began to turn about, as if he would have gone away;
but his Man Venture turned to him, saying, Sir, this is he we were informed of:
His Master said, Is this he indeed? Sir, said ^enter, this is the man, this is
Coal. Then William A morer took him by the arm, and bid him come with him: J.
C. said, Whither must I go? Go! (said he) ^o Gaol. To Gaol! (said J. C.) for
what? what have I done? W. Armorer said, I will tell you for what; and being
pulling of him down stairs, said, Will you take the Oath of Allegiance? Jos.
said, Why do thou ask me such a question? I am known in the Town, having
served an apprentiship in it, and am a freeman of it, and have not been used
to swearing; but if thou can convince me by sound reasons and arguments,
according to the Scriptures, that I may safely, and not break Christ's command,
I may do it. But W. A. said, I Will send you to Gaol, and the^e you shall convince
your self; and so put two lines more in the Women's Mittimus, for refusing the
Oath of Allegiance to His Majesty, etc. and sent him to the House of Correction
with the seven women before mentioned, by John Creed Constable, who in a short
time after dyed; and the next day W. Armorer sent for J. C. and asked him the
same questions, and after some discourse about the lawfulness and unlawfulness
of Swearing, sent him back again to the house of Correction.

Upon the second day of the sixth Month, called August, William Armorer came
again to the Meeting in a violent manner, and took one man, and seven women,
viz William Yeet, Anne Ball, Mary Slade, Mary Emerton, Elizabeth Lavell,
Katharine Edsol, Ellin Binfeild, and Margery Richardson, and sent them to the
House of Correction.

And the 14th of the same Month, William Armorer came again; and though there
were but two men and one woman, viz. Benjamin Coal, John Trayard, Hannah Webb,
as he judged, above the age of sixteen years; yet those three, (contrary to the
Act, which allows of four to meet) he sent with a Mittimus, the substance
whereof was, For being at an unlawful Meeting, etc. by Thomas Coats,
Constable, to the House of Correction; and while the Clerk was making the
Mittimus, he went to the house of Thomas Curtis again, and finding the door
locked (the maid being gone to carry some provision to her Master and Mistress in
prison) he picked the lock, opened the doors, and went into the Court, the door
of the house being locked also, he pulled out his penknife or some such like
instrument, to cut the keyhole, that he might come at the lock, to open it,
till a neighbor that was desired to look to the house in the maids ahsence,
came to him, and told him there was no body in the house, and asked him what he
did mean to break folks house up, and pick the locks, and much more to that
purpose? for he had been in the warehouse, where was much cloth, and one that
saw him go, bid him take heed, for if any thing were lost, it might be laid to
his charge; then he (the said William Armore^) said to the Woman in great
wrath* What have you to do with it? where is that whore? (meaning that maid
servant) and said he would have her to morrow; the woman answered, she was gone
to carry her Master and Mistress some victuals for ought she knew; and having
spoken very much to him for picking of the Locks, and what he had done; he was
very angry, and asked her what she had to do with it; who answered, she had to
do with it, for she was to see that no body did steal any thing out of the
House.

The 25th of the 6th Month called August; William Armorer sent for the four men
from the House of Correction, to wit, Jo: Coal, Benjamin Coal, William Yeet,
John ^ray, and Tho: Seik^s the Mayor, being with them; they asked them if they
would take the Oath? they desired to know for what they had lain so long in the
House of Correction: But they taking no notice of that, a^^^r some discourse,
and many railing accusations breathed out by William Armorer, they committed
them to the Gaol; and the same da^ ^he women being sent for, they put Fines on
them; for non-payment* they sent them back again to the House of Correction,
there ^o remain till three months were expired.

Upon the 28th of the same month, William Arm^rer came to the Meeting again,
and took four women, and caused a Mittimus to be made for them, viz. Anne
H^rrison, Hannah Emerton, Katharine Woodard, and Jud^th Smith, and sent them to
the House of Correction* though there were but four, which according to that
Law, by which he pretended he proceeded, was a lawful Meeting, etc. and at the
same time he struck a young Lad, who was under age, with a great Cane, and
another time pulled him by the Nose, so that his Nose was much swelled: And
farther, he said he would have the man and maid of Thomas Curtis to morrow, or
else the Devil should take him; which though he performed not, yet in some
short time it came in part to pass; for he having sent T. C. and his Wife and
manservant to prison, and being kept close prisoners, T. C. sent into the
Country for another man that was formerly his Apprentice, to look to his shop;
and though he came not to the Meeting, yet his enmity and mal^ce was so great
against T. C. and that Family, that the 31 of the same Month, he sent two
Officers with a Warrant, by force to take the man servant out of the shop, and
bring him before him; for he had provided a snare for him, and had gotten
Thomas Seikes the Mayor, (who has heen very active also, in this work of
cruelty) and being brought before them, they asked him if he would take the
Oath of Allegiance: To which the said man, Rob: Peacock, answered, I am a
peaceable man, and have wronged no man, and cannot break Christ's commands, but
can promise to be true to the King, and will be content to suffer the same
punishment, if I break my promise, as they do who swear and break it: But
notwithstanding, the Mayor, and William Armorer, caused a Mittimus to be made,
and sent him to Gaol a so; and the same Officers asked a Neighbor where the
Maid was, that he might have ensnared her also: for William Armorer had said
(if not sworn) but a little before, That he would send the Maid to Gaol, (or he
would be hanged) and nayl up the doors, that there should be no more meetings.

And the same day was three women brought before W. Armorer, from the House of
Correction, who told them they were fined for being at a Meeting; and although
the Act said five pounds a piece, yet he had fined them but five sh^llings a
piece, and asked them if they would pay it? One of them, Anne Harrison, said to
him, Thou have got our house already, that we built, and have taken away our
means, and would thou have me pay more money when I have broke no Law? We
were but four above the age of sixteen years, and the Act says it must be above
four. William Armorer said his man told him they were six, and two of them run
away, one was Frances Kent, the other Pidgons maid. It is false (said Anne
Harrison) there was Frances Kent, but she was fetched out of Town (being a
Midwife) and as for the other, she was not there; there was but four. W.
Armorer said, I shall have Mrs. Kent, and then let the best Lady in the Land
want her, she shall not go, except the King or Court send for her; but said he
could make as good a Midwife himself, as she: So he sent them back again to the
House of Correction, being comm^tted for three months, but released them in two
weeks after.

^he 18th of the 7th month, called September, -- 64, William Armorer came to
the meeting, and took one man and five women, viz. Christopher Cheeseman, Anne
Sharp, Hannah Webb, Bridget Smith, Hannah Emerton, Judith Smith, and being
brought to his own house, before himself and Tho: Seikes, they fined them
twelve pence a piece; for non-payment of which, he told them he would send them
to the Gaol, and make them pay their Fees, which would be more; so he sent them
to the Gaol, but they were released the next day.

The 4th of the 8th month, called October, -- 64, the Sessions for the County
was held at Newberry, to which place about fifty Persons, and some of their
Wives (who being all Prisoners upon the account of the Oath of Allegiance) were
brought, and being called to the Bar, an Indictment was read against them, for
obstinately refusing to take the Oath of Allegiance; and the Clerk (one
Champion) had sworn that it was tendered to them at Abingdon, though many of
them had never denied to take it, and one was not so much as asked whether he
would take it or not: The Prisoners being informed that William Armorer, and
Tho: Seikes Mayor of Reading, supposing that the late Act, which says, If any
man shall refuse to take an Oath in any Court of Judicature, being lawfully
tendered (except Court-Leets) shall be transported etc. supposing they would
refuse to take the Oath, might have made short work with them, and to have run
them all on this hazard, to be rid of them all at once; and the Judge of the
Sessions, a bad man, one Procter of Windsor, gave in his Charge, That it was
Treason to refuse the Oath of Allegiance. But the Indictment being read, they
pleaded not guilty; some of their Adversaries supposing (as some of the
Prisoners were informed) they would not have pleaded, and so they might have
taken them as Mutes; but having pleaded, and desired a Copy of their
Indictment, some of the Justices said, God forbid but they should have it: yet
Procter the Judge would not consent to it, till he had been at London, and asked
the Lord Chief Justice Hide, (as he said) and if he said they should have it,
and the Law would afford it, they should have it: Then one of the Justices
asked him, Whether they were not admitted Council in such a case? He said, Yes.
Then said the Justice, How can they advise with Council, if they have not a
Copy of their Indictment? So the Prisoners sent one (being a Councellor) after
them for a copy of their Indictment, and Champion the Clerk demanded 21 l. 13
s. 4 d. before he could grant it; but with some importunity it was gained for 1
l. 4 s. for one man and his Wife. And after the first were called, the other
six that were committed since upon the same account, were called; being asked
if they would swear, they desired to speak something concerning their
commitment, and how illegally William Armorer had proceeded against them, one
being taken out of his Masters Shop, another out of his Chamber not being well;
another poor man out of his Shop from his labor; the others for being at a
meeting where three were together, etc. but they would not admit them to speak,
but soon put them by, and they were all sent back again to the Gaol.

Again the 6th of the 8th month, called October, -- 64, W. Armorer came to the
meeting and took five women, viz. Anne Sharp, Fra: Kent, Eliz: Streater, Anne
South, and Sarah Binfield, and sent them to Gaol with a Mittimus for one night:
But while he was in the meeting-room, a neighbors Wife perceiving the doors of
the house of Tho: Curtis to be unlockt, went and locked a door, and carried
away the key; which when W. Armorer came to understand that one had locked the
door, fell a swearing like a mad man; and a little time after they were gone
out, they shut the street-door, the Woman's daughter bringing the key of the
inner door, W. Armorer his man Venture, by violence took it from her; but the
street-door being shut, he could not get in: Then in great rage W. Armorer
called for something to break open the door; and some Hammer or Sledg, or such
like thing, being brought, they went about to do it; but others persuaded W.
Armorer (to pacify him) that there was another way into the House.

The 23 d of the same month came W. Armorer again to the meeting according to
his usual manner, and took three men and six women, viz. Christo: Cheeseman,
Ranold Ave^y, Tho: Hine, Mary Wrenn, Eliz: Dee Widow, Jane Hussy, Judeth Smith,
Katharine Edsoll, and Eliz: Lavell younger; and committed C. Cheeseman on the
third account, though it was but his second, and accused them of carrying of
Letters about the Country, and then came together on that day to plot, etc.
But when they came to have their trial, then that is not mentioned; but the
main business is to prove they were, there to worship God, or to seek God, or
to seek Christ* etc. and this is the crime for which they proceed against them
to Banishment, (as will more fully appear by the following Relation) and not a
word of plotting then when they come to the proof: And the rest were sent to
the House of Correction for forty eight hours, Tho: Curtis his maidservant
being one of them: So that the whole Family were now prisoners, the maid being
taken out of her masters house.

The 6th of the 9th month, called November, -- 64, William Armorer came again
to the meeting, and swore there was a goodly company; and caused the children
to be pulled out, and with a staff that had a goad, or some sharp peick at the
end of it, pricked some of them, that they were very sore and black where he
pricked them; and took one man and six women, viz. T^o. Hine, Anne Harrison,
Rachel Cape, Hannah Emerton, Mary Sanders* Al^ce Milerd, Mary Winter, and sent
them to the House of Correction for three days.

And the first of the tenth month, called D^c^mber, -- 64* William Armorer came
again to the meeting, and caused the children to be pulled out, telling them he
had a stick at home that he had forgot, would make them feel him, which was
supposed to be the same with which he pricked them before; being under age; he
could not have his will in imprisoning of them: Others of the children he
threatened to have forely whipped; and having turned them going, took two ancient
Women, Bridget Smith, and Margery Richa^dson, and sent them to the Gaol on the
third account; and sent four; viz. Anne Hatt, Margery Symonds, Grace Hutchins,
Jane Hussy, to the House of Correction for twenty four hours: And being not
satisfied when he had got them in prison, but would have had the Jailer put
them in one room together, and no body to come at them; and what provisions was
brought them, should be put in at the Grates; and has cau^^d their papers to
be taken from them, pretending they had sent a Paper to the King and Council,
which was very false.

And now we come to the proceedings of the said William Armorer, and the rest
of the Justices at the general Quarter Sessions held in Reading for the County
of Berks, the tenth, eleventh and twelfth day of the Eleventh Month, called
January, 1664.
The Justices being come into the Town, the morning before they sat, a Paper
was sent (by one of the Prisoners) to them to read; but being refused by W.
Armorer, who would have had it burnt, it was sent to the Court, and delivered
to the Crier; which W. Armorer perceiving it, cried out, Burn it, for it should
not be read; and therefore it is thought meet here to be published: A true Copy
of which here follows.

Friends,
IT will be a good and precious thing, To have the fear of God before your
eyes, and therein to act in all things toward all people; and then you will
act in righteousness, and do the thing that is just, if in the fear of the Lord
you stand, and are exercised therein in your proceedings; for it is that which
makes men honourabl^, and in Ages to come to be had in renown by the generation
of the r^ghteous, and the memory of such who in the fear of the Lord do act in
their day in Justice, and Righteousness, shall live for ever, when the Name of
the wicked shall ^ot, and be blotted out from under Heaven, who have had no
regard to the fear of God, neither has Equi^y and Justice have had place in
their hearts, and such shall eat the fruit of their own doings, and receive a
just reward from the hands of the Lord, according to their work, in the day
when God shall judge the secrets of all men's hearts, and search out the hidden
things of darkness, and then shall every man be rewarded according to their
deeds done in the body, whether they be good, or whether they be evil.

Wherefore Friends, the Lord has put it into my heart to write unto you, and
that I may be clear in his fight, and that the neglect of such a thing may not
lie upon my Conscience as disobedience, I say unto you, Be considerate and
sober in your minds, and calmly and seriously weigh what you are going about,
and let not rashness and envy oversway you, because that the God of Heaven
takes notice of your proceedings, and your actions are registered in a Book of
Remembrance: But let Justice be your Rule, and let the Law of Equity be your
Guide; let the Light of Jesus in your hearts and Cousciences, be your
Counselor; because if you start aside from that, and act not according
thereunto, you cannot please God, nor do the thing that is justifiable in his
sight; but you will bring guilt upon your Consciences, which no man upon the
earth shall ever acquit you of; and the sentence of condemnation you will
certainly feel, by the Spirit of the living God, which judges righteously,
without respect of persons: And to lie under that guilt and sentence from the
Lord in your own hearts and consciences, will be sad and heavy indeed; for a
wounded conscience, who can bear? If the Lord wound men inwardly in their
consciences, because of transgression against his righteous Law of Equity, who
can bind them up, or heal them? Will the saying, We have a Law, and by our Law
he (the just) ought to dye, or suffer? Will this ease them? Oh no! that will
not remove that weight and burden from off their consciences, which they do
bring upon them by acting and walking contrary to the Light or Law of God in
their own hearts; and because of this, the Lord often brings shame and
confusion upon men, and dishonor and a curse in all ages has attended and
followed those that have been found in that way of afflicting, troubling,
disquieting and persecuting innocent and harmless people, because of the
exercise of their Conscience toward God, and for their obedience unto his
requirings. And do ye think to gain honor, if ye proceed against us in
afflicting of us because we cannot transgress the Royal Law written in our
hearts? I tell you no, for we are a people that desire to spend our days here
in this world, in the fear of God, and to follow him in all things which he
does require of us, to keep his Commandments and his Statutes, and to worship
him according to his mind, in spirit and in truth: And this is all we desire,
(which is our right and privilege, as we are freeborn people in this our
Native Country) That we may have liberty so to do; but if for so doing; and
nothing else, we must suffer, (as ancient Christians have done) we are content,
knowing that the Lord will plead our cause, and will care for us; and we cannot
deny him to please men, but must still to ourlives end, serve and obey him, and
wait upon him, and worship him in spirit and truth, having engaged our hearts
so to do, in that he has made known himself to us, and by his Eternal Power
redeemed us out of the world, and the sinful ways thereof, and shed abroad his
love in our hearts; and we are persuaded, and do know of a truth, That the Lord
has been, and is with us in this his way which we now walk in; and can you in
reason and equity expect that we should deny that way in which we have found
the lord to satisfy and refresh our souls, and to make our hearts glad? Or is
it doing as you would be done by? Would you think it right to be persecuted and
afflicted for walking in that way which you are persuaded in your selves you
ought to walk in? If not, do you fulfill the Royal Law, which is, To do to
others as you would be done unto? Wherefore, consider betimes, and have not a
hand in afflicting of innocent people because of their consciences: But break
off your sins by righteousness, and your iniquities by showing mercy to the
poor in spirit, and afflicted people of God, who suffer at this day for no
other thing, but for keeping the commands of the Lord Jesus Christ, and for his
Worship: For what is the matter? Who have we hurt or wronged in any thing, that
here is such furious and unchristian-like proceedings against us? And if our
Adversaries have nothing against us, but because of our obedience to the Law
and Worship of our God, is this such a crime at this day, that honest people
for so doing should be so eagerly and violently proceeded against, and that
snares and traps should be laid to catch and ensnare them? Well, the Lord takes
notice of these things, and he will arise for his own Name and Seeds sake,
before whom the Mountains must bow and tremble, and the high places of the
earth which stands in his way, shall be removed, and the Lord God will cut his
own way through them, before whom all Nations are but as the drop of a bucket,
and as the small dust of the balance, and they that strive against him, cannot
be blessed. And therefore be wise and considerate ye Rulers of the Earth, lest
ye be found opposing of, and striving against that Eternal God that gives us
all life and breath, and a being here in the world, who will be too strong for
you, if you shall think in your hearts to stop and limit his appearance in the
hearts of his people, and bind the Conscience (in which it is his Right and
Prerogative to rule, and no Man's upon the Earth) from following the Lord in
what his Light leads and draws it unto, which will be Usurpation and great sin
charged upon you in the day of the Lord, when you shall come before the Throne
of his Justice and give an account unto him; Wherefore, kiss the Son, stoop and
bown unto the Light of God's Son which appears in your hearts, and convinces
you of sin, least the anger and indignation of the Lord be kindled, and flame
and break out like devouring fire, and burn in your own hearts so as it can
never be quenched.

Here are many of us Prisoners in this Gaol, and have been long, (which is not
unknown to you) both men and women, and almost some whole Families, and several
Aged People, many, because we cannot break the Command of our Lord and Master
Jesus Christ; who has said unto his Followers, Swear not at all, because he
leads them (and keeps them) out of the strife, and out of sin and wickedness,
into Love, Peace and Truth, from which mankind was degenerated, when the
swearing came in; which was to bind the conscience, because they were gone, and
erred from the love and truth of God, in the heart, which Christ our Savior
restores into again, and says unto such, swear not; for truth binds them, and
their yea is yea, and their nay is nay; and because we cannot break this
Command of Christ, we are ensnared, and do suffer at this day, and many may be
exposed to utter ruin in this world, because thereof, and the guilt of the ruin
of innocent people and families, may come upon you, if in a rash and
unchristian-like spirit ye run on against them, (which may be in your power to
prevent) the sufferings and cries of whom will, enter into the ears of the Lord
God of Sabbath, who will hear and have regard thereunto, if men do not regard,
and will recompense those that trouble his, into their own bosoms.

And others here are that suffer for worshipping God in spirit and truth,
according to the Scriptures, who cannot forsake the ancient Doctrine and
practice of the Apostles, who exhorted true Christians not to forsake the
assembling themselves together; and we cannot but perform that Christian and
innocent duty, for which occasion is sought against us, by such as have given
way to that spirit of enmity which always appeared against the way and worship
of the true God, which such that are joined unto, will feel their reward and
portion with; and their inhumane and illegal proceedings may in time be more
fully and manifestly declared and laid open to the world.

Now are these things worthy of such strait bonds, and close imprisonment, even
to the endangering the lives of your peaceable Neighbors, who have not done
any man wrong; but because of the tenderness of their Consciences toward God,
they must be thus used, so that hereby at least their health in the outward man
comes to be impaired, by reason of keeping in, and being kept from their honest
Callings and Employments in the Creation; so that these things tend to the
destruction of men, women and children, and civil commerce among men, and only
because of their faithful obedience to the Lord, in what they are persuaded in
their hearts unto by his Eternal Spirit, and constancy in his way, which they
can never deny, whatever they suffer in this world; neither can any of these
things (I am persuaded) separate us (who have truly and experimentally tasted
thereof) from the love of God which we feel in Christ Jesus, in whom we have
the assurance thereof unto our souls.

Wherefore I say, Oh ye men in Power and Authority in the world, Be cool in
your minds, and let the cause of the Oppressed and Afflicted people of God, be
pondered by you, and take heed of turning your hand against them; for if you do
make that your work, To root out and destroy them, it will be too hard for you,
and your eyes shall never see the accomplishment thereof; but if some or many
of us do seal our testimony with our dearest lives and blood, yet will the Lord
raise up more in the same power and spirit, to bear witness unto his Name in
the same way in which we serve him, and you will be found fighting against God,
till he be provoked to anger against you, if Justice and Mercy be not showed to
them; and ye shall not obtain mercy and favor at the hand of the Lord; which
that you may, is my desire, who desires the good and salvation of your immortal
souls, and not your destruction, and am a true Friend to Justice and
Righteousness, and those who are exercised therein, and suffers with the
despised people of God, for the Testimony of a good Conscience.

Jo: Coal.
From the Gaol in Reading, the 16th of the 11th mon: 1664.
In the morning, the 11th day of the month aforesaid, about fifty Prisoners
were called to the Bar, of which were about eight of the Baptized people; an
Indictment was read against them for wilfully refusing the Oath at Abingdon,
the 12th of July, etc. To which at Newberry they had pleaded not g^^lty: The
Jury being sworn, they were going to swear Champion the Clerk; but Tho: Curtis
desired to speak a few words before he took his Oath, being granted, said,
Whereas there was an Indictment read against us for refusing the Oath of
Allegiance, when the Oath was never tendered us; for the Statute says it
should be tendered upon the Evangelists, and it is the opinion of the Judges,
That it must be read to the party, otherwise it cannot be a lawful tender; as
for instance, about thr^e years since, Capt. Pecke, with diverse others, being
called at an Assizes before Baron Turner in this place, the Judge asked him
whether he would take the Oath of Allegiance; Capt. Peck told him he was not
committ^d for refusing that, but was taken at a Meeting. The Judge replied, I do
not read it to you, I do but ask you the question; for if I should read it to
you, you would be in danger of a Praemunire, etc. And this is our case, We were
not committed at first for refusing the Oath of Allegiance, but were taken at a
Meeting; and when we expected to have our Trial according to our Mittimus, they
asked us whether we would take the Oath, but it was not read to us; for the
first of us that was called, they were very angry with about his Hat, and never
so much as asked him whether he would take it. The next that was called, was no
Quaker so called; and he coming before them bowing, with his hat in his hand,
they ask^d him to take it, and he did take it; but then was not I, nor forty
more of us called to the Bar, as we can prove by many witnesses: Another thing
is, the Indictment ought to comprehend the whole Oath; but this is false in
many places. Then one Proctor a Counselor, and a Justice so called, being on
the Bench, stood up, saying, As to your being taken at a Meeting, the Court
takes no notice of that; you are here indicted for refusing the Oath of
Allegiance, and the Clerk has sworn to the Indictment: And wherereas you say,
the Oath was not read to you, you say false; for I my self was at Newberry
Sessions, and the Oath was read to you there: Then several of the Prisoners
cried it was false, it was never yet read to them: Proctor asked whether the
Indictment was read? T. C. Yes. Then said Proctor. The Oath was in the
Indictment. T. C. That matters not, that was the Indictment, and no Legal
tender of the Oath to us; for we declare in the presence of God, That the Oath
was never read to us; and you do us much wrong; you ought not to deal so hardly
by us, you ought to help the Pri^oners at the Bar; instead of which you are
set against us.

Procter said, It is for my King and Country.

Jo: Kemboll, one of the Prisoners, replied, He did not believe the King did
desire to enrich himself with the undoing so many poor men and their Families.

The Judge of the Sessions, Edward Dolby, stood up, and asked William Armorer
again, Whether it was not read to us? Who answered, Yes.

Then Tho: Chelton, one of the Prisoners, c^^^ed to him to come off the Bench,
being a Witness against us. Which h^ did, and swore that the Oath was read to
them all, and that they were called one by one; and so returned on the Bench
again, and sat as one of their Judges.

And Champion the Clerk swore also to the same purpose.

But the Prisoners still denied that it was tendered to them; but were
interrupted.

Then Procter stood up, and said, You Gentlemen of the Jury, I desire you to
take notice, Here is Sir William Armorer, a Person of Honor, and Mr. Champion,
the Clerk of the Peace, have sworn, That the Oath was read to them all. Now you
must either bring in these men guilty, or else you will make these two,
(William Armorer and the Clerk) perjured persons.

One of the Prisoners, Richard Billingsly, said, I am here indicted, and
another with me, for refusing the Oath of Allegiance the same 12th day of July,
at Abingdon, and I was not called till the 13th day, after W. Armorer was gone
out of Town; and yet he and the Clerk have taken their Oaths, That it was there
tendered to us all, (they being put in the same Indictment) but I was not so
much as called that day, (as the Reader may see by the foregoing Relation.) But
they would have waved that.

T. C. desired the Court would take notice of this thing, That these two men
were indicted in this Indictment for refusing the Oath the 12th of July, when
as they were not called that day at all; and though W. A. and the Clerk have
sworn that we were called to the Bar particularly, yet they were not called
that day; and W. A. went out of Town early the next morning before the Court
sat, and they were not called in two hours after he was gone, and therefore
the Indictment was false.

Then the Judge said to Champion the Clerk, Did you call these men particularly?
and did you read the Oath to them?

Cle^k. I did call them particularly to the Bar by their Names; and the Oath
was read to them, upon which many of the Prisoners cried out it was false, it
was false.

But said a Justice on the Bench, Were they called before the Oath was read? or
was the Oath read first, and they called after?

The Prisoners cried, That is the Question.

Then said the Clerk, I must speak the truth, I cannot well tell; but the
Jailer gave me a Note of their Names, and I called them particularly: But
whether it was read to them before or after they were called, I cannot tell;
but if I had thought they had been so critical, I would have been more careful.

A Prisoner said, Take notice of that, Jury.

So the Jury went forth, and staid not long, but brought them in not guilty.

So the Crier demanded money of the Prisoners for the Jury, and the Court broke
up, being adjourned till the afternoon, and our Friends departed, being cleared
by the Jury; only the Jailer told several of them they must appear again in the
afternoon.

The Court being sat again, several of our Friends appeared; but being
informed by some, that they intended to ensnare them again, and being cleared
by the Jury, they went out of the Court, as judging they had no reason to stay
to be ensnared by such as had enmity against them, most of the moderatest
Justices being gone.

But Tho: Curtis and his Wife, Geo: Lamboll and his Wife, and three Friends
more, being called, they appeared, the rest being absent, the Justices
threatened to fine the Jailer for those that were wanting, saying, Did we not
give you Order to stay them? Who answered, As soon as I heard your Order, I run
down the stairs upon my faith, but they were gone.

T. C. said, I suppose they would not have gone away, had they known your
Order. But being cleared by the Jury, they thought it was sufficient; and I my
self was gone, not intending to come again; but when they told me I was called
for, I came again; for I am not ashamed to show my face, nor afraid of any
thing that I have done; and I know W. Armorer his man Venture, is warrant enough
to take me at any time.

Judge. Though the Jury did clear you of that Indictment, yet they could not
clear you of you^ Ob^dience.

Then the Clerk reading over their Names, they called for Thomas Heifield.

T. C. said, That is a man that has served the King faithfully, and has many
cuts in his head, and wounds about his body, that he received in the Kings
Army, yet he is regarded no more then others, though he fought and ventured his
life for the King; and being come now to make conscience of an Oath, must be
ensnared with the Oath of Allegiance.

Then A. Curtis was called.

T. C. answered, Here is another whose Father laid down his life, and suffered
death for the service of the King; yet she also must be ensnared with the Oath.

Then they called for the Statute-Book.

T. C. said, We see your snare well enough; it is not the part of men of Honor
^o seek to ensnare those whom the Jury has cleared; but these things will
appear as a blot in your Scutcheon: We do believe you aim to ensnare us, and it
is our Estates you seek after, and it is well if some of you have not begged
them already.

Then Procter the Councellor stood up in great rage, and bid the Clerk read the
Oath to them.

T. C. said, Be not so hasty, for thou did but a little time since, charge
these two men (pointing to William Armorer and the Clerk) with being perjured;
for thou toldst the Ju^y, That either they must bring us in guilty, or else
these men were perjured; and the Jury brought us in not guilty. And thou
need'st not be so fierce now, for the time was, when thou wast as fierce in O.
Cromwell's days.

Then the Judge bid the Clerk read the Oath; being done, asked T. C. if he heard
^t; who answered yes. So they held the Bible to him.

He told them he could read them a better Lesson in that Book, ^f they would
hear, having the Book in his hand. ^hey bid him say after the Clerk, who read
the Oath; which he did till he came to that clause, And I do swear, etc. Then
he said, But I do not, for I cannot swear; but what I have said, I do helieve,
and question not but I shall prove as good a Subject to the King, as some of
you. So they bid the Jailer take him away.

Then Geo: Lamboll was called: They asked him whether he would take the Oath of
Allegiance?

Who answered, As to the Oath of Obedience he could promise very much, and he
should keep his promise, though some did repute us as liars.

Then Sarah his Wife was called to the Bar: They asked her if she would take
the Oath?

She answered, At present she was not satisfied that she might safely do it, or
to that purpose.

And the other three Friends, Tho: Tudway, John Pain, and James Marlow being
called, they asked them the same question.

T. Tudway asked, Whether it was better to obey Christ, then them?

They said, That was not the Question.

He told them he could not swear. The others answering to the same purpose,
they were taken away.

Then A. Curtis was called to the Bar: One of the Justices said, Come Nan, I
know you will take it.

A. C. Yes, if thee or any one could convince me that I might lawfully do it,
and not break Christ's command, who has said, Swear not at all. And being asked
the same question often, answered to the same purpose as before.

One of the Justices said, But the Apostle said, That an Oath for confirmation
ends strife.

She answered, That Christ the everlasting Oath of God, who puts an end to
strise, him I know says, Swear not at all.

William Armorer being on the Bench, said, This is the old tone.

A. C. It was before thee wast, and will he when thou have no being.

They still continuing to ask her if she would take it; answered, Yes, if any
one could make it appear that I might lawfully do it, and not break my peace
with God in my Conscience.

But they asked her again, and bid her answer if she would take it or not. Who
replied, I shall give no other answer. So the Jailer took her away.

The same day at night, Tho: Tudway one of the Prisoners, living in the same
Town, having been to see his Wife and Children, as he was going to Gaol again,
overtook William Armorer, and having passed him, he called, and sent his man,
and stayed him, and asked him why he did run away from the Sessions.

T. T. said, I did not, but am going to Gaol, for I am a Prisoner, and thou
have nothing to do with us, for we are the Gaolers Prisoners, and we were all
at the Sessions, and that was sufficient; and said it was hard measure that he
might not go see his Wife and Children.

Justice Brown being present, said it was; but you must be obedient to the Laws.

And W. A. said, You must take the Oath; an Oath for confirmation ends strife.

T. T. said, But I am not in strife; for I can say, notwithstanding thou have
kept me this forty weeks unjustly in Prison, the Lord forgive thee; and thou
wast best have a care what thou do to us, for thou must give an account for
thy bad deeds.

W. A. said, You shall see at the day of Judgment, whose arse will be blackest,
yours, or mine.

Prisoner said, Those words does not become a Justices mouth. So he sent him to
the Gaol.

The next day, being the 12th day of the month, the other six Friends, viz.
Joseph Coal, Rob: Pecock, Benj: Coal, William Yeet, Rich: Green, and Jo:
Tray, were called to the Bar, and Tho: Bartlet also, who was freed by the Jury
the day before. The Clerk having read the Oath of Allegiance, the Judge said,
Joseph Coal, What say you, will you take the Oath of Allegiance?

J. Coal said, I have something to say to the Court, and desire I may be heard
-- was interrupted by Procter, who said, Will you take the Oath, and you shall
be heard?

J* C. I have something first to speak concerning my taking up, and commitment;
for I was in my Friend, Tho: Curtis his house, being not well, and W. Armorer
picked a lock to come to me, and pulled me out of my Chamber -- was interrupted
by W. A. who called him Rogue, etc. Upon which one on the Bench pulled him to
be quiet.

One of the Prisoners said, Those words did not become a Justice on the Bench.

Judge. Well, what say you, will you take the Oath, or not? we will not hea^ you
of such things now.

J. Coal said, Why, are you ashamed to hear of picking the Lock, and such
illegal proceedings? You ought to hear and do Justice, as you are Magistrates,
and not to hide and cover such things -- was interrupted.

Judge Give him the Book, will you swear or no?

J. C. I would have spoken of my taking up, and known for what I have been kept
in Prison all this time; but seeing I cannot be heard, I shall speak as to the
Oath. Indeed I have not been used to swearing; but if you can satisfy my
Conscience that I may lawfully swear, and not break the command of Christ my
Savior, I may take this Oath: The Book being given him, he was turning to the
fifth of James; and W. A. cried, Oh, he is going to the fifth of Matthew; and
called the Jailer to take him away.

Then R. Pocock was called.

Judge. What say you, will you take the Oath of Allegiance?

R. Pocock. I desire to speak something concerning the manner of my commitment
-- but was interrupted by the Clerk, who said, he should answer first whether
he would take the Oath.

R. P. Thou art not Judge of the Sessions, therefore hold thy peace.

Justices. Will you take the Oath of Allegiance?

R. P. I desire to know whether it be in love to the King, or to ensnare me,
that it is tendered to me? For when I was committed to Prison by W. Armorer,
and Tho: Seikes Mayor, W. A. said he did believe I was a peaceable man.

W. A. said, I do believe so still.

R. P. If my word may be taken instead of swearing, I can promise to be true to
the King; and if I break my promise, let the same punishment be inflicted upon
me, as on them who break their Oaths.

So the Jailer took him away, and Benjamin Coal was called.

Judge. What say you, Benjamin Coal, will you take this Oath that was read to
you?

B. Coal said, Was it read to me? I did not understand it, for I am but a
young Lad, and unacquainted with these things?

Judge. Shall we read it again to you?

B. C. I suppose that I am a Prisoner; and was I brought here to have Just^ce?
or to be ensnared? I desire the Court would hear me a few words concerning my
commitment at first, which was not upon this account; but I was first committed
upon the account of the new Act, and I have been informed, That those that are
taken upon that account, ought not to be ensnared by any other.

Judge. Well, that is nothing; will you take the Oath, or no?

B. C. I desire to know for what I have be^^ this long time a Prisoner?

Judge. We take no notice of your being a P^iso^^r; you are here; will you take
the Oath? give him the Book:

B. C. Do you own this Book? (having it in his hand) at which they were
offended, and cried, Take him away, he deserves to be whipped.

But he desired the Court to take notice, That he did not refuse the Oath; but
if they could prove by the Script^res, that it was lawful to swear, he would
swear.

Then the Jailer took him away; and William ^eet was called.

Judge. William Yeet, what say you? will you swear?

W. T. The day of the Lord is come; therefore I rather choose to obey God, then
man.

Judge. said, It is enough. And Richard Green was called.

Clerk said, Will you take the Oath?

R. Green. I desire to know for what I have lain half a year in prison? (He
being taken out of his Shop, being a poor man, and having a Wife and Family to
maintain by his labor.)

W. Armorer answered, For refusing to take the Oath of Allegiante.

R G. I fear you do not know what an Oath is.

Some of them said they would make him know what it is, asking him again if he
would take it.

R. G. said, If you can convince me that I may do it, and not break the command
of God, I will take it.

W. Arm. It is written in the Scripture, That an Oath is the confirmation of
the truth.

R. G. said, Christ is the Oath of God; and to witness Christ in me, is the
confirmation of the truth; and he commands me not to swear at all.

Judge. Will you take this Oath, or no?

R. G. I cannot swear, but do not deny Allegiance to the King.

So the Jailer took him away, and John Tray was called; and they aked him the
same question as the former; who answered, That he could not swear, etc.

Then Tho: Bartlet was called; they asked him if he would swear.

He answered, He had learned better then to swear.

The Clerk bid the Crier give him the Book; and he would have read in the Book.

But they said, He must swear.

He answered as before, he had learned better.

Now when this Tho: Bartlet was taken at the Meeting, W. Armorer accused him of
Plotting and Rebelling against the King; but when he had got him in another
snare, that was no more mentioned; and said he made breach upon breach upon the
Kings Laws, because he did not put off his hat when he was brought before him,
and that he workt on holy days; stamping his stick on the ground, said, By his
troth he should go to New England for it.

Now we come to the proceedings at the same Sessions, the same 12th day of the
11th Month, against four others of our Friends, viz. Christopher Cheeseman,
Anne Sharp, Bridget Smith, and Margery Richardson, who were taken at a Meeting,
and committed upon the third supposed offense.

Being brought to the Town Hall, expecting to hear their Accusers, they were
not called, nor suffered to come in the hearing of the Court, but kept at the
lower end of the Hall several hours, the Justices having little to do, but the
trial of these four persons, it being the third day of their sitting, and most
of the Justices being gone; and having kept the Prisoners several hours, they
sent them to prison again, and the Court adjourned till the second hour in the
afternoon, the Grand Jury being gone out, waiting for the Witnesses some hours,
which were John Venture, W. Armorer his man, and Rich: Grover his Clerk, Hugh
Smith, Daniel Seamer and his Son; which Witnesses being sworn, were very much
different in their Ev^dence, some saying they saw them at the Meeting, but
heard them say nothing, nor do nothing, but only that they were there.

The Court being sat, the Crier called for the Grand Inquest, who appeared,
and brought in their Verdict Ignoramus.

Upon which W A^mo^e^ rose up from his seat in great ^age, saying, I will come
off the Bench, and swea^ against them, and w^ll (...) my Oath, That I have
found Christ: Cheeseman twenty times at ^^e mee^ing; and when I came, he would
tell me there was not my numb^^: So I was fa^n to wipe my nose, (wiping his
finger then on his Nose) and return back like a Coxc^mb as I went; and thus I
have been p^ag^^^ with him: and I will take my Oath* That when I have ask^d
them s^v^ral times wh^t they did at the meeting, they have told me to wait upon
the Lord, and to seek God, etc.

T^en Pr^ct^r sa^d, If that can be proved that they have confessed they were
there to seek or want upon ^od, it is enough; and would have encouraged the
Jury of fi^d the Bills upon it.

Oh abominable, unheard of w^ckedness and cruelty, that to wait upon, or seek
God, should be accounted such a crime, as to deserve no less punishment then
seven years banishment or death it self!

Well, but W. A^mo^er his man Vent^^ being called* and beginning to speak, his
Master, W. A. sa^d to him, J^ck, you ^^membe^ the 23d day of the Month?

H^s man answered, It Is no matter for the day of the ^o^th, I know the time
well enough.

Upon which a sta^der by sa^d, A Rogue, do^s not know ^he day of the ^^nth. He
deserves to be kicked out of the C^u^t: And the people fell out into great
laughter.

And so the Jury went forth the second time: the Jury still scrupling the
business, could not agree to find the Bills.

And W. Armo^e^ r^s^ off the be^ch in great rage, and took h^s Cath, and then
went into the Council Chamber to info^m the Ju^y: So that there wa^ only ^he
Judge, E^ward D^^b^, and o^e Justi^e (P^^ct^r) left on the bench* W. Armorer
being sword as a W^^tness; and whether they two could ma^e a Sessions, neither
of them being of the Qu^^um; no doubt but they can tell.

Well; notw^thstanding the Jury returned the second time, and brought in
Ignora^us.

Upon which Procter began to be very angry, saying to the Jury, Would you do
so, having such Evidence, and Sir William Armorer an honorable Gentleman,
having taken his Oath also?

The Jury answered, 'Twas true, Sir W. A. was an honorable Gentleman, but was
a man subject to passion.

Procter replied, saying, If he were, it did not become them to tell him so.

Then W. Armorer pressed the Judge to have them fined ten pounds a man.

The Judge answered, No, if that were their judgment, between God and their own
Conscienees be it.

But W. A. pressed to have them bound to their good behavior, because they had
some scruples concerning his swearing, being as they said, tender in conscience
touching so dubious a matter, and did question whether they might take his oath
or not; for it may be observed, that Procter himself but the day before did
tell the Jury, that if they did not bring in the Prisoners guilty, they would
make W. A. and the Clerk perjured persons; and the Jury did not bring in the
Prisoners guilty, etc.

So the Prisoners being cleared by the Jury, the two Justice on the Bench, and
W. Armorer not being pleased with it, committed them to the Gaol again as
factious persons, till they should pay their fees. So the Sessions ended.

And the next day, being the 13th day of the Month, W. A sent for the f^ur
Prisoners before mentioned, to his house, where three of them were brought by
the Jailer; but one of them being an ancient weakly woman, having taken cold
the day before, by reason of their being kept so long at the Sessions, it being
very cold weather, and not being well, was left behind: Which when W. A.
understood, he began to be very angry, and bid the Jailer fetch her, though on
Horseback.

So the Jailer fetched her also, and having kept them about two hours, being
very cold weather, nothing was said to them, but were returned back again to
prison.

The 16th day of the same month, they were had before him again to his House,
where was also Tho: Kenton Mayor W. A. commanded Grover his Clerk to read the
Oath of Allegiance to them; which being done, told them if they would take it,
they should have their liberty.

They answered; that they were Prisoners by an Order of Sossions, till they
would pay their Fees, and therefore would not answer to any such questions
until they were at liberty.

And after some discourse, they were committed again for refusing the Oath, etc.

And the 28th of the 12th month called February, -- 64, they were sent for
again before W. Armorer, who told them they were as they were before, if they
would pay their fees, they should have their liberty.

So when they came out of his house, the Jailer bid them go to their own homes.

And whether these proceedings be according to ^aw, or men's wills, the Reader
may judge; but we are sure the innocent suffers.

The 22 d of the 11th Month called January, -- 64, W. Armorer came to the
Meeting, and took Joan Willesby* Mary Winter, and Mary Richardson, and sent
them to the house of Correction for three days, upon the second offense, as he
calls it. And there being six men more, viz. William Lamboll, William Tompson,
Leo: Key* Anthony Sadler, Tho: Speed, and John Boult, he pulled one of them
down by violence from his seat, and sent for the Jailer, whose servant came,
whom W. A. commanded to take them to prison, which was done by his man Venture,
and the Gaolers man, who haled them to the Gaol without Warrant or Mittimus.

The next day he sent for the six men to his house, where he, with Tho: Kenton
the Mayor, asked them if they would ta^^ ^he Oath of Allegiance; and called to
Grover his Clerk to read it.

One of the Friends, W. Lamboll, asked, to what end do you require me to swear?

W. A. said, To be true to the King.

W. L. ^s swearing Allegiance sufficient, though I do it not?

W. A. said, No you must do it.

W. L. said, It seems doing Allegiance is the thing that is required?

He answered, Yes.

W. L. I own Allegiance to the King, and am willing to do all his just and
lawful requirings, as a Subject, in things pertaining to this world, and will
promise thereunto.

W. Armo^er^, You must swear to bind you, for if you break your Oath you a^e
damn^d.

W. I. Will not the breaking of my promise be matter of condemna^i^n to me?

W A. a^swered, No, or to that effect.

W. L. said, The Scripture says, that no Liar shall enter into the Ki^gdom of
God; and the Devil shall receive damnation for lying.

But still he asked me to swear?

I told him that Christ and the Apostles forbid swearing; and the succeeding
Chri^tians denied ^o swear, as Polycarpus and others: And swearing upon a Book
was set up by the Antichr^stian Power; and J^stinian the Emperor was the first
Institutor of it, as I read of; and ^t will ^dd nothing to the King, for me to
kiss th^s Book; neither will it do him any good: And therefore why should it be
put so much upon me, seeing I will do Allegiance?

W. A sa^d he co^ld not help it; and bid the Jailer take him away if he would
not swear; and said he might go and conv^nce the ^arliament that ma^e the Law;
and he was sworn to execute the Kings ^aws.

W. Lamboll asked ^im why he would put such Laws in execution, which he could
not defend by the Scriptures nor right reason?

Then he bid the ^aoler take him away.

W. L. said, The Lord God everlasting, (in whose presence I am justified in
th^s thing, and before whose Judgment Seat we must all appear) knows my
heart, that I do not deny to swear out of stubbornness, nor out of obstiracy,
or denying Alleg^ance to the King; but only and alone for Conscience s^ke
toward God, and because Christ Jesus (whom we are to hear in all things)
says, Swear not at all, etc.

The Oath being read to William Tompson, and the Book held to him, said, Alas,
^s th^s all that ye can do, so often to tender us this Oa^h to ensnare us? And
that he did own what was read, and could promise the things contained in the
Oath.

^^e Cler^ havi^g g^ven him the Book he said, Out of th^s Book can I pr^ve that
it is not lawful to swear at all.

W. A. sa^d, That is in you^ communication.

W. T. Nay it is not at all, which are Christ's words to them that were
followers of him, I say unto you^ Swear not at all, which comprehends all
swearing; but let your yea be yea, and your nay nay; for whatsoever is more,
comes of evil.

W. A. began to be angry with him, because he did not answer whether he would,
or would not swear.

W. T. I can promise the things contained in the Oath, and is not that
sufficient?

Mayor said, That does not answer the Law.

W. T. If I do that which the Law requires, or the substance of the Oath, it
will not be accepted.

W. A. being peevish and angry, thrust him going, he crying for Justice, W. A.
told him he should have it done.

W. T. appealing to the Mayor for Justice, he said, William, I am in place to
do the Kings business, and to execute his Laws, and I must do it.

W. T. said, But thou must have an eye to the Law of God in it.

The Book being held to Tho: Speed, he said, I choose rather to obey that Christ
which you profess, who said, Swear not all, then you who say swear.

W. A. Will you? that is enough, take him away.

T. S. Is this thy Justice, to command me to be taken away to prison for
saying, I choose rather to obey Christ then thee?

Then they asked John Boult if he would take the Oath of Allegiance?

Who answered, As for my part I am a man that makes conscience of my ways, and
I have great cause to respect the Lord, and to eye his way and truth; and as he
has made it known in me, I shall in that truth follow him in his holy way; and
that which he has made known to me to be evil, that I dare not do, lest I
should break my peace with my God, which I cannot do for all the world.

W. A. You cannot take it, can you?

J. B. I cannot go against my Conscience, nor do that which the Lord has made
known to me to be evil.

W. A. said, Where did you learn that, out of your nail? (the Friend being a
Shoemaker by Trade.)

J. B. reproving of him for his jeer, said, Nay, the Lord has made it known
unto me.

Some other discourse passed between them* which for brevities sake we have
omitted; and the other two also had some discourse to the same purpose.

On the 12th of the first Month called March, 1665, William Armorer came again
to the Meeting and sent for the Jailer, who being come, he sent Leonard Coal,
James Lavell and Walter Emerton to the Gaol without either Warrant or
Mittimus. And at the same Meeting took Christopher Page, Henry Adams, Anne
Sharp, Margaret VVhiteheart, Anne Godard, Ann VVeeden, Eli^. Lavell the
younger, and Mary Matthew, and sent them to the Counter, and then went into the
house of Tho: Curtis, and pulled out his Manservant Henry G^oss, and put him
into the Meeting-Room, and said he run away out of the Meetin^ (though the man
was never at our Meeting all his lifetime, as we heard of) and so sent him to
Gaol, and at night he sent for them all to his house, where was Justice Dolby
also; and tendered the Oath of Allegance to L. Coal, J. Lavell and VV.
Emerton, and committed them to the Gaol, and told Henry Gross Tho: Curtis his
man, that he was mistaken in him, and let him go again, the rest he sent to the
Gaol for three days, except A. Sharp, who was committed upon the third Account.

The second of the second Month called Ap^il, 1665, came VV. Armorer, and Edw:
D^lby to the Meeting, and took Christo: Cheeseman, Hannah Webb, Anne Harrison,
Eliz: Tudway, Eliz: Dee the younger, Do^othy Clarke, Hannah Kent; and Hannah
Lomboll; and being brought to his house by the Constable, Samuel House, he
examined H. Lamboll and H. Kent, about their age, and being little, let them
go; and sent the other five to the Gaol for three days, and Christo: Cheeseman
upon the third offense.

The fourth of the second Month called April, the Sessions for the County of
Berks was held at Newberry, to which place the Prisoners, to whom the Oath of
Allegiance had been tendered, were brought, viz. Tho: Curtis, and Anne his
Wife, George Lamboll, and Sarah his Wife, Tho: Tudway, John Pain, James
Marlow, Joseph Coal, Rob: Pocock, Benjamin Coal, William Yeet, John Tray,
Richard Green, Thomas Ba^tlet, William Lamboll, William Tompson, Leo: Key,
Anthony Sadler, John Boult, Tho: Speed, Leo: Coal, James Lavel, and Walter
Eme^ton; and being brought into the Court, were called to the Bar, and the
Oath was read to them, and the Court asked whether they would take the Oath of
Allegiance?

To which they generally answered, That for Conscience Sake, because Christ had
commanded not to swear at all, they could not do it: but did offer to give
under their hands, and promise that they would be true to the King, etc.

And one Friend, Geo: Lamboll, being permitted to speak a few words, said to
the Court, That the Law by which they proceeded against us, was never made
against a people that feared an Oath, and could not swear at all in any case;
but it was made against the Papists, who denied Allegiance to the King, and
chose rather to bear the penalty; for they owned Allegiance to another Power,
which we deny, and have often declared it; and do offer and promise Allegiance
to the King, and to no other Power on earth, whilst we live under Him; and
would be willing to undergo the punishment of perjured men, if we break our
Promise.

So they were put by, and committed to the Assizes, the Justices saying it was
a thing too weighty for them: So they would leave them to the Judges.

And Anne Curtis and Sarah Lamboll were called.

They asked A. Curtis if she would take the Oath.

A. C. said, I look on it as a very hard thing that I should be required to
take this Oath, being under covert, and my Husband being here a present
Sufferer for the very same thing; for there is no woman in England that I have
heard of, under covert, that is required to take that Oath, and kept in prison
on that account, excepting my self and Sarah Lamboll.

So after more discourse, they put her out of the Court, and bid her take Sarah
Lamboll with her.

And upon A. C. her speaking a few words to the Justices, W. Armorer said, Hold
your tongue, Nan, and turn your back.

And others of the Justices said, Go your ways, Mrs. Curtis, out of the Court,
and take Mrs. Lamboll with you; by which they, and many of the Spectators, did
judge they should have had their Liberty.

But after they were gone, W. Armorer (as some of the people said) began to
incense the Justices against A. Curtis, telling them what a dangerous person
she was to be set at liberty, etc.

So they ordered, that A. Curtis and S. Lamboll, should be committed to the
Gaol as dangerous and suspicious persons, there to remain until the next Assize.

The next day, being the fifth of the Month, two more of our Friends, viz.
Christopher Cheeseman, and Anne Sharp were called, and two Witnesses called,
viz. a Daniel Seamer, and W. Armorer his Coachman; a This D. Seamer was so
drunk the day before, that he abused several of the Prisoners, saying, he hated
them a^ he hated the Devil.
who being ignorant which hand to lay on the Book, his Master called to him,
saying, Lay on the other hand, Dick: and being sworn, were sent out to the
Grand Jury, who having heard their Evidence; returned into the Court, and their
Verdict was, They could not find any sufficient proof to find the Prisoners
guilty according to the late Act made against Unlawful and Seditious Meetings.

At which Verdict W. Armorer (according to his usual manner, if the Jury did
not do as he would have them) fell into a great rage, and began to threaten
some of the Jury that they should be fined; and caused them to return again,
farther to advise in the case.

But being retutned again, their Verdict was as before, with diverse sound
reasons and arguments wherefore they could not find the Bill.

Notwithstanding* the Justices put them to the pole, asking them one by one, Do
you find the Bill? etc. However the Jury (like men For when one would be as a
Witness that the Prisoners said they were at the Meeting to wait upon God, one
of the Jury answered, Wait upon God? who should they wait upon else? should
they wait upon the Devil?
.) stood to their judgment, crying, No, no, all except five of Nineteen; which
five also did confess it was against their Consciences to find it. Yet the
Justices (William Armo^er being still on the Bench) cried out, Tend^r them the
Oath of Allegiance. To which the Jury as one man, cried out, they would take
it. But when the Justices saw them so ready to take it, they past it by.

W. A. not being pleased with these proceedings, began to accuse the Quake^s in
venting most audacious and damnable lies, saying in the face of the Country, No
body should ever catch them speaking or praying, for they set boys at the
corners of the streets, to watch, so that if an^ come to take them, they might
have notice thereof*

Which being so notoriously false, no doubt the Country would give as little
heed to it, as there was truth in it; and so we leave it. For we dare appeal to
all people both in this Town, (where our Meetings are known, being public this
eleven or twelve years) and in Country, whether our harmless and innocent
practices, especially in the Service and Worship of the true and living God,
has not been of more Christian courage, then to set boys to watch if any body
came to see us: No, no, we are far from that; for our Testimony in preaching
and publishing God enduring truth, and our praying of so good effect and
acceptance with the Lord, that we are neither ashamed nor afraid of any that
shall come among us; and our daily practice, and his continual frequenting our
peaceable Meeting again and again, (as the Reader may observe) does
sufficiently manifest the contrary.

Well, but to return: the Jury being very much threatened, and much stir because
the Bill was not found against the Prisoners, there was some hurry in the
Court; but the Prisoners had their liberty, and the Sessions ended.

Again, the 23 d of the same Month, W. Armorer came to the Meetting, there
being not five of the age of sixteen years, though several under age, with his
Son and Servant, haled them out, and Christopher Cheeseman being there, be bid
one of them cudgel Cheeseman out of the room; and as he was going forth, W. A.
himself thrust at him with his Cane or Staff, and run it between his lips and
teeth, there being not his number as aforesaid.

Moreover, W. A. meeting Christopher Cheesman another time in the street, laid
violent hands on him, and plucked him by the Nose, and threatened if he caught
him at the Meeting again, he would cut off his Nose.

The 30th of the same Month, W. A. came again to the Meeting, and sent for Tho:
Kenton Mayor, who being come, they took Christopher Cheeseman, Anne Sharp,
Sarah Binfield, Mary Coal, Grace Hutchins, Hannah Lamboll, John Kent, Tho:
Conicke, and Hannah Wrenn. and being had to the House of Giles Pocock, and
having consulted together, they sent Christopher Cheeseman, A. Sharp, and Sarah
Binfield, to the Gaol on the third account.

W. Armorer still breathing out fa^se accusations against them, that they
carried Letters about the Country, and then met on that day to plot and
contrive insurrections.

One of the Friends denying it, told him, if he could prove any such thing,
they would be contented to suffer whatsoever the Law had provided in that case.

W. A. replied, We will make you prove the contrary: and told them of black
strings and ribbons to tie about their arms, and such stories which are
incredible to any man of gravity and understanding; and yet telling of it with
such confidence, as if the man had been an eyewitness of that which was never
to be seen: And one of the Prisoners counselling him to take heed what he did,
for there would come a day wherein he must give an account for what he did: W.
A. replied, We shall know at the day of Judgment, whose arse is blackest, yours
or ours.

The Prisoner told him it was an uncivil thing for one called a Justice, to
speak such words.

He replied again, Why Sirrah, what incivility is it? is not your nose your
nose, and your arse your nose?

So they committed Grace Hutchins for six months to the Gaol, and the rest for
three months; the Mayor being the chief Instrument at that time, of their being
committed for so long time, saying, We will not be troubled with them so
often; it being in the Summet time, when many were thronged up together. After
which, one of the Prisoners sent him a Letter, a true Copy whereof, here
follows.

To THOMAS KENTON, Mayor of Reading, These.
Tho: Kenton:
FRiend, Thou art now in a place of Authority in this Town; and as chief
Magistrate therein, thou have power put into thy hand to punish evildoers, and
to favor, encourage and protect people in well-doing; which is the End of
outward Rule and Authority in this world, which was never ordained of God to
limi^, stop or bind the Consciences of people to, or from any way of Worship,
or practices of Religion; but it was ordained of God to punish the evildoers,
and to keep and preserve men in peace and quietness one with another, that they
hurt not, nor wrong not one another, nor abuse themselves nor one another; but
that they might be kept in good order one with another in all things outwardly,
and not to rule over the conscience; but he, even God alone, is to rule in the
conscience, and to persuade it by his Light therein, to, and in his own way and
wo^sh^p, and therein man is not to meddle, but to leave it free: And he that
rules thus, he rules for God, and bears not the Sword in vain, which is to
stop, limit and bind wickedness, and he abuses not the Power, nor will not turn
his Sword (nor Power) against such as do well, and follows peace and holiness,
and fears and serves the Lord, but will encourage, and be a praise unto such
who do live peaceably and honestly among men; and though such may be falsely
accused and reproached, (as the peaceable people of God have been in almost
every age, and evil-minded men may surmise evil against them; yet such a one
who rules for God, (and not to please men's humors) will not afflict and
trouble innocent and peaceable people, upon the suppositions of envious and
evil-minded men, because he sees there is no (nor can be any) evil-doing proved
against them, that they are guilty of.

And Friend, if such a heart and mind were found in thee, thou would be happy
and honorable indeed; I say, if it were in thy heart thus to act even in that
very way and manner beforementioned, to look after, and punish evildoers, and
to stop and limit profaneness and wickedness, to encourage and be a praise to
those that do well, that are peaceable and harmless among men, that serve and
worship the Lord in his own way, (and not after the inventions and
prescriptions of men) even in that way which his own spirit leads and persuades
them unto, then it would go well with thee, and thou might then know the
worth and exceeding preciousness of having the peace of Conscience, if thou
did act in this way which is according to that of God therein, which would
lead thee and all men to this, did they but give ear unto it, and follow its
counsel; and then would wickedness be stopped, and godliness, sobriety and
honesty, would be esteemed and promoted: But alas! how does the contrary abound
in this place? and how has wickedness its swing? and how are evildoers
increasing, drunkenness, swearing, and vain sports and plays, allowed and
tolerated? And these are not accounted unlawful Meetings: But for peaceable
people, young children and youth, that have inclination after godliness and
sobriety, to meet together for no other end but to worship God, this is
accounted an unlawful Assembly, (for there was never, nor can never any thing
else be proved against us, what ever such as have enmity in their hearts
against us, may imagine) and must now be broken. And in this work thou have
appeared, in causing thy Neighbors to be haled out of their Christian
Assemblies, and sent to Gaol from their honest Callings and Employments,
separating men from their Wives and Children, and Wives from their Husbands,
and Children from their Parents, whereby they may be destroyed; and all this,
only because of the exercise of their Consciences toward God, and for their
obedience to him. And oh how heavy a burden will this be upon thee one day,
that thou should have a hand in this, and join with that spirit of
Persecution against thy peaceable Neighbors, and young children, whom thou
can not but be persuaded in thy conscience, that they are peaceable, and
intends no such thing as to plot against the King; neither is it a likely thing
to any judicious man, that a few Lads and young Girls, and a few women, should
meet together to plot or contrive insurrections, and no such thing can be, or
ever will be proved against the people in scorn called Quakers, who are led by
that spirit of truth which leads into love and peace, and good will toward all
men, though evil reports and false accusations may be given out against us, and
many foolish stories may go about among such as are given up to believe lies,
which are incredible to a man of gravity and understanding; yet our innocence,
uprightness and honesty, will appear, when all these things will dye, and the
refuge of lies is swept away; and that truth, and way of life, peace, and
eternal happiness, which God has made known unto us, will more and more be
made manifest to be that way in which alone true love, peace, unity and concord
among men is enjoyed; and without the knowledge of which; men can never be
established in peace and unity, where no plotters nor contrivers of mischief
against any man, can come; and which all that are out of, are not to be
trusted, whatever they may in words and shows pretend; for such as do
transgress against the Light of Gods Spirit in their own Consciences, and are
unfaithful and treacherous to that, will also in time be so unto men, though
they may fawn and flatter for their own ends, all which we do utterly deny, and
in our souls abhor, and which the Truth which we have received, has led and
redeemed us out of.

Wherefore Friend, it was upon my heart to caution thee to take heed what thou
do, as to proceed in this work of persecution of innocent people for the
exercise of their consciences in the service and worship of God, and causing
thy peaceable Neighbors to be haled to prisons for their obedience to the Lord
God; for this will kindle the wrath of the Lord against thee, and be the cause
of h^s heavy judgments to come and fall upon thee in the end, and sorrow and
trouble will take hold of thee, when the Witness of God in thy own conscience
shall bring these unchristian-like proceedings against those that did thee, nor
no man wrong, into thy remembrance, and give the sentence of condemnation upon
thee for condemning, and joining with the persecuting spirit, against the
innocent, and such as fears and reverences his Name.

And though now some may overawe thee, telling thee there is a Law, and thou
may think to cover thy self, by saying the Law is against us; yet I say, that
will not excuse thee in the dreadful day of account; for there was a Law which
the Jews had against our Lord Jesus Christ, yet that would not excuse those
that condemned him: But yet this Law does not at all reach us, being rightly
considered, because we meet really in truth to worship the Lord, and to perform
holy duty to him, and not in any color or pretense, to plot or contrive
insurrections; for they that do so, are the persons that the Law takes hold of;
and though some may suspect otherwise of us, yet that is not sufficient ground
so violently to proceed against thy peaceable Neighbors upon a bare
supposition, because it has not, nor can ever be proved, that we have done, or
intend any such thing at our Meetings; and therefore we are grievously wronged
and abused, and the Law turned to a wrong end, even against them that are
peaceable, and against whom it was not made, according to the Preamble of it.

And therefore it will be well for thee to be cool and considerate in thy mind,
and not rashly to run (or be led) on without any respect to the Lord, or fear
to offend and grieve his good spirit in thy self, which will not always strive;
or without any pity or compassion (as a man) to thy Neighbors, to send them to
prison, from their Wives, Children, Husbands and Parents, and Families, as if
they were such intolerable offenders, that were not worthy of the common air
in the Creation; when all that can be proved against them, is, That they were
in such a house, and they said to wait upon, or worship God: And is this now
become such a crime? Oh that ever men that profess Christianity, should be so
blind and sottish, as to lose their very reason (as men) to act in this manner,
which generations to come will even abhor. And who would have thought that the
Magistrates and people of Reading should be found in this work beyond most in
the Nation? What, is there not drunkards and swearers to be looked after? And
do not these transgress the Law? Is there not a Law against drunkards and
swearers? and art thou so forward and diligent to execute that, as thou (with
others) art that which you say is against our Meetings? Are not such at
liberty? And are not these things which are sins against the Lord God of Heaven
and Earth, winked at, and lightly passed over? And must those whom you do only
suspect (or some of you) to be transgressors of man's Law be so violently
proceeded against, when nothing of fact can be proved against them, nor no man
can justly charge them of doing any evil against him?

Consider of these things, and lay them to heart, and beware what thou do,
lest thou be found striving against that which God has purposed to exalt; and
remember what one once said, If this way be of God, it will stand, let men do
what they can; and if it be not, it will fall of its self, they need not
trouble themselves about it. And if you that profess your selves Christians,
had so much reason and moderation as he that was a Heathen, you would not
trouble your selves so much as you do, which will be in vain to strive against
the Lord, who will exalt his own Name and Truth over your heads, though you may
be permitted to try many, in which the Lord is trying of you in this your day,
which it would be well if you could see, which you can never do till you return
your minds to that Principle of God in you, which will let you see your selves,
and how you stand, and convinces of sin, and leads out of it all such as do
sincerely love and follow it; and all such as do slight and disregard it, it
will be a worm gnawing in their Consciences, and a fire that will never be
quenched; which will make the proud to bow, and consume and lay low the glory
and haughtiness of all flesh, and bring eternal sorrow and anguish upon all
that have lived wantonly upon earth, and spent their time in pleasure and
vanity, in ease and fullness: The day of the Lord is at hand, which will
overtake the wicked as a thief in the night; and blessed will they be that have
and prepare to meet him, by putting off their sins, and turning from their
iniquities, and forsaking the evil way; which that thou may do, is my
desire; however I have cleared my conscience unto thee, and rest a true lover
of thy soul.

Reading-Gaol the 3 d day of the 3 d month, 1665. From a Sufferer for the
testimony of a good Conscience, and for keeping the command of the Lord Jesus,
in which I have peace with him, which no man can take away. J. C.


The Assizes being holden at Abingdon the 7th and 8th days of the 5th Month
called July, 1665; to which place Twenty six of the Prisoners were brought by
the Jailer, viz. The twenty one before mentioned, who at the Sessions at
Newberry were put off to the Assizes to have their Trial, and A Curtis, and S.
Lamboll, who were committed as dangerous and suspicious persons; and the other
three were, Christopher Cheeseman, A. Sharp, and S. Binfield, who were
committed on the third account for meeting, and were called to the Bar before
Judge Ti^rell, who (after some questions of Name place of abode, what they were,
etc.) said to the Prisoners at the Bar:

Judge. What, you go to unlawful Meetings and Conventicles, and will not obey
the Kings Laws, etc.


One of the Prisoners answered, I am clear from all evil against the King, and
of all Plots and contriving Insurrections, etc. for our doors stand open, and
our Meetings are public, (not in holes nor corners) where any that will, may
come.

So they were put by.

And having much ado to patch up an Indictment against Christo: Cheeseman,
there being no record of his second offense according to the Act; for he was
never taken and committed on the second account; being in a strait, they called
for Christoph: Cheesemans Commitment; which being given to the Judge, he asked
if those were all the Commitments?

The Jailer answered, Yes.

The Judge finding no second Commitment, turned to W. Armorer, saying, Your best
way is to let him go, and take him again.

Upon which Justice Alseworth stood up and said to the Judge, If you let this
man go, he will go about the Count^y preaching, and do much hurt, before you
can take him again.

So then they proceeded, and called the three persons before mentioned, and
read an Indictment against two of them, viz. C. Cheeseman and ^. Sharp; to
which they pleaded, Not guilty.

^hen the Judge called to S. Binfield, and asked what age she was? But she not
answering, the Judge called out in the Court, saying, Who knows what age she is
of? No answer being made, he said to her, I think you are but fifteen years
old; and by that time you are sixteen, I hoar you will have more wit. So she
was freed as under age, it being but the second time of her commitment, it was
supposed they would not meddl^ any farther with her upon that account.

So the Indictment being read against the other two, which was very false in
many particulars; as, That Christopher Cheeseman, with other evil persons, to
the number of five, did meet in contempt of the Kings Laws, and to the
disturbance of the people, etc. and much more of the same nature.

A Jury being called, some of whom were so drunk, that they were hardly able to
speak or stand, but as they were supported by others ^n the throng.

Prisoner said, I desire there may be some Witness produced to prove that I go
to any such Meetings to plot against the King, and that I have at any time been
taken at such a Meeting; for we meet in the fear of the Lord, and our Meetings
tend to holiness of life, and love and unity among our Neighbors; and this the
Liturgy of the Church of England does exhort men unto; and here is the Law
(having it in his hand) which speaks positively to the matter, as in the la^^
Clause of the ^reamble to the Act, which shows the very grounds and reasons
wherefore the Act was made, viz. To prevent plotting and contriving
Insurrections, as appears farther by the words of the Act, which says, That if
any person of the age of sixteen years, shall be present at any Assembly,
Conventicle or Meeting; under color or pretense of any exercise of Religion,
in other manner then is allowed by the Liturgy, etc. (which does allow, that in
all places, and at all times men ought to perform holy duties to God, and to
seek him, etc.) Now if any Witness can come and swear, That I was there upon
such account, then let me suffer the penalty which the Act provides. Therefore
I desire the Witness may be produced to prove what is falsely suggested against
me.

Judge. That is no part of the Law, the whole body of the Law follows; calling
to the Clerk to read the Law; so he read that clause, If any persons to the
number of five, or upward, under pretense of tender Consciences, shall meet in
exercise of Religious Worship, contrary to what the Liturgy does allow, etc.
after lawful conviction of the third offense, sentence of transportation shall
be given, etc.


C. Cheeseman. The Law does not say, that people should not meet really to
worship God; nor yet enjoin them where, or what house to meet in; but says;
That if any persons to the number of five, or upward, shall under pretense of
Religious Worship, meet to Plot, etc.


Judge. That Is no part of the Law.


Pris The Law was made to prevent plotting and contriving Insurrections; that
was the ground and cause wherefore the Act was made, (and not, I hope, to
hinder any people from worshipping of God, or to make them offenders for
seeking him) so unless it can be proved, that I was found plotting, etc. this
Act concerns me not.


Judge. Here are the Registers under the hands of the Justices; and here is Sir
William Armorer, an honorable Gentleman, that is one of them.


Pris. He is honorable, that is a virtuous man.

But the Reader may take notice, that there was no Record for the second
offense; for the Prisoner was never committed on a second.


Judge. You are an impudent fellow.


Pris. I am not an impudent fellow, but do speak the truth; for William Armorer
is a common Enemy to me, and has used violence toward me diverse times; and he
is a partial man, and therefore no competent Witness; and I have much to say
against him, and do desire that Witness may be brought forth, if there be any,
to prove the breach of the Law; for there are two principal clauses in the Act,
upon which you ought to insist for trial of me. The first is, Whether it can be
proved, that I under pretense of tender Conscience, did meet to plot against
the King, and contrive Insurrections among the People. And secondly, Whether I
did meet, and was found exercising in Religious Worship, contrary to what the
Liturgy of the Church of England does allow.


Judge. I tell you, That the Clause in the Preamble of the Act, is no part of
the Law.


Pris. It Is the very ground and substance of the Act and Law made against
unlawful Meetings; Such that under pretense of tender conscience, do meet to
plot against the King, etc. But ours is no such Meeting, neither has there
been any witness from first to last, to prove any such thing against me.


Judge. We have witness here, if need be, (looking about him in the Court) but
none appeared.


Pris. Take heed what thou do, for it is the Cause of God, and matter of
Conscience toward God only, for which I am this day called in question.


Judge said, It Is no matter for Conscience, but for disobeying the Kings Laws.

Pris. I do affirm as in the presence of the Lord, That it is matter of
Conscience only, and nothing else; and there is no proof of any thing to the
contrary.


Judge. Well, Jury, you hear how it is, and what the Law says, That upon proof
made before the Justices against such offenders, shall be sufficient
Conviction; and here are the Registers (though there was no second offense)
under the hands of the said Justices.


Pris. You that are of the Jury, I know not the faces of any one of you,
therefore I leave it to you without any exceptions, desiring that you would
take notice, That it is matter of conscience only; for the Law says, That if
any under pretense of tender Conscience, shall meet to plot against the King,
and to contrive Insurrections, or to exercise in Religious Worship contrary to
what the Liturgy of the Church of England does allow, etc. So that there ought
to be proof made that I was found (under the aforesaid pretense) plotting etc.
and exercising in Religious Worship contrary to what the Liturgy does allow,
etc.


Judge. You of the Jury, you have heard what he says; they would be
interpreters of the Laws, and spiritual things too: you hear what the Law
says, That if any persons to the number of five, or upward, shall meet
together in exercise of Religious Worship, contrary to what the Liturgy
allows, upon proof thereof made before the Justices and Registers under their
hands, (but here was neither Witnesses, nor but one Register of the first
offense; for there was no second, as is said, and therefore the Judge would have
had W. Armo^er have let him go) shall be sufficient Conviction. Jury, go
together.


But the Jury went not from the Bar, neither did they call to see the Register
under the hands of the forementioned Justices, nor yet for any other witness
or testimony, whereby to be satisfied concerning the Prisoner, but rather like
drunken men, not valuing the Liberty or life of a freeborn English man.

In a small time, the Judge having them near him, said, Jury, what say you,
Guilty or not guilty? And two or three of them answered, Guilty.

Judge. What have you to say for your self, that sentence of Transportation may
not be past against you?


Pris. I have much to say for my self, and for the Cause for which I am this
day called in question; for it is the Cause of God, praised be the Lord who has
judged me worthy to bear testimony to his Name this day --


The Judge called to the Clerk to read sentence.

So the Clerk took the Act, and read that Clause which says, That such
offender being lawfully convict, shall be transported beyond the Seas for seven
years; and if he return before that time be expired, to be proceeded against as
a Felon, etc.

The other Prisoner, Anne Sha^p, pleading also, That there was never no witness
from first to last, appeared to their faces to prove a third offense. Howbeit,
she was also sentenced to lie in prison twelve Months, being a woman under
covert. So were both returned to the Gaol.

The other twenty one prisoners, who were by the Justices at their Sessions,
ordered to the Assizes, were brought to the place aforesaid, in order to their
Trial, were not called, but returned back again to the Sessiions, which was
holden the 11th day of the same month, at the same place; and the proceedings
was much on this wise viz.

Anne Curtis, and Sarah Lamboll being called, nothing was laid to their charge
of danger and suspicion, as was mentioned in the order of Sessions; but they
tendered the Oath of Allegiance again to them, and returned them back again to
the Gaol.

The next day, being the 12th of the month, the twenty one prisoners upon the
account of the Oath, were called to the Bar, and an Indictment was read
against them, (Tho: Holt of Abingdon being Judge) to this purpose, That they had
wilfully and obstinately refused the Oath of Allegiance, etc.

To which the Prisoners pleaded Not guilty, and demanded a Copy of the
Indictment, but never had it. So the Jailer had them back again to the Gaol.

Again the 23 d of the same Month, W. Armorer came to the Meeting, and Tho:
Kenton Mayor, and took Eliz: Tudway, Mary Winter, and Judeth Smith, and sent
them to the Gaol on the third account, though it was but Eliz: Tudways second.
Also sent Joan Dee to the Gaol for six months. And Hannah Emerton, Ellin
Binfeild, John Walker, and Henry Day, to the House of Correction for three
months.

The 27th of the 6th month, called August, 1665, W. Armorer and Edward Dolby
came to the Meeting, and took Eliz: Kemboll, Hannah Kent, and Mary Lamboll, and
sent them to the Gaol on the first account; and Thomas Conicke, Joseph Phipps,
and John Thorn, to the House of Correction; Thomas Conicke for six months, the
other two for three months.

The third of the eighth month called October, the Sessions was held at
Newberry, to which the abovenamed Eliz: Tudway, Mary Winter, and Judeth Smith,
were brought; the Bill being found against them, they were indicted on the
third Offense, so called and having pleaded Not guilty, were sent back again to
Gaol, and to be tried the next Sessions following.

And the 9th of the 11th Month called January, 1665, the Sessions was holden at
Reading, where Anthony Barker of Sunning, sat as Judge.

The same evening before the Court broke up, the Clerk (Champion) called to the
Jailer to bring the Quakers in the morning; and W. Armo^e^ bid them get a good
Jury.

Accord^^gly the next morning early they were had to the Town Hall, and called
to the Bar, all the twenty one Prisoners, except John Pain, (who could not
go, being sick in his bed) and a Jury was picked according to W. Armore^s
desire, one Charles Belwood being one, who was formerly W. Armorers Coachman,
John Aust^n the Shoemaker, and Daniel Seamer the Tailor, Will^am ^age the
Glover, and one Cooper, commonly called a Conjurer, and some others like them,
and one who is a Papist, (as the people did inform us) but the Prisoners
objected against some of them; for on^ o^ them, Daniel Seamer, had said in open
Court, at a Sessions held at Newbe^^y, That he hated them as he hated the
Devil: But Justice Pamer of Oakingham, said, Unless you will take your Oaths of
that, we will not put any of them out of the Jury, though he knew they made
conscience of an Oath.

So he, among the rest, stood in the Jury, which were their Judges, and the
Indictment being read, That they wilfully and obst^nately refused to take the
Oath of Allegiance, mentioned in the third of King James, etc. The Prisoners
pleaded, first, That there was no Statute did empower them to tender them this
Oath. Secondly, That it was not the Oath mentioned in the third of King James,
because they tendered it to them by the Name of King Charles the Second.
Thirdly, That it was not according to Law; for the Law says it should first be
tendered to them ou^ of Sessions; and the ground of such tender should be upon
some presentment or complaint from some Ordinary, or others, and then a tender
in Sessions, and that by the major part of the Justices.

All which things, and much more, as in that case is proved in the Statute,
ought to have been first, which has not been to us.

Then stood up Edward Dolby a Councellor, saying, That if two Justices had
power to tender it out of Sessions, they had, no doubt, as much power to tender
it in Sessions upon complaint, etc.

One of the Prisoners bid them take notice it must be upon compla^nt: But it
was not so tendered to them, but as a snare, after they were cleared by the
Jury, knowing that they could not swear in any case.

Much more the Prisoners had to say, but they would not hear them, but called
to Champion the Clerk, and one Staples a Councellor, to swear that the Oath had
been tendered to them according to Law.

Being done, the Jury went forth. Being returned again, the Judge asked if they
were agreed on their Verdict?

Who answered, Yes.

He asked, Whether guilty, or not guilty?

To which the Foreman answered, That so many as the Oath was legally tendered
unto, and they refused to take it, so many were guilty.

Then William Armorer and the Clerk said, It was legally tendered to them all.

One of the Jury, Charles Belwood, replies, Yes, yes, then they are all guilty.

But many of the standers by said it was a special Verdict, the Prisoners not
being suffered to come to the Bar to hear it, and one of the Prisoners being
sick in his bed at the Gaol, as before is said.

So the Court being adjourned till after dinner, and being come together again,
they called the Prisoners to the Bar to hear their sentence; but some of the
Prisoners told them, they did not understand that the Jury had brought them in
guilty; but they would not hear them. And one of the Prisoners told them he had
an Arrest of Judgment. But the Judge, Anthony Barker, said, They had time
enough for that, and then said, Hear your sentence.

Because you have refused the Oath of Allegiance, and the Jury has found you
guilty, you have incurred the Penalty of a Praemunire.

And after some words spoken by the Prisoners to them, they were had away to
the Gaol; for they were resolved to do their work, if not with the Law, without
the Law, and their reward accordingly they shall receive; and the Judge, A.
Barker, is since dead.

But the same day, by the same Jury, Eliz: Tudway, Judeth Smith, and Mary
Winter, were tried upon the third account formeeting; and though it could never
be proved that Eliz: Tudway had be^n twice convict, yet had W. Armorer and Tho:
Seikes, set their hands and seals that they were all upon the third account.

Upon which Eliz: Tudway (knowing the thing to be false) sent presently a
Messenger to Tho: Seikes, to know whether ever he committed her to prison while
he was Mayor. His answer was, he could not tell; but if his hand were to it, it
must needs be so.

The Prisoner s^eaking something concerning their unjust proceedings again her;
the Clerk, Champion, said, she deserved to have her mouth stopped with a
handkerchief.

So the Jury brought them in guilty; and the Judge, A. Barker, past sentence
against Mary Winter, and Judeth Smith, to be sent to Barbados, etc. and that
Eliz. Tudway should lie in prison twelve Months, being under covert; the Judge
being in some confusion, would have sentenced her for time of life, had it not
been prevented by some that stood by.

The next that were called, was A. Curtis, S. Lamboll, and Robert Wilson, who
was fetched out of his own house in Newberry, at a Sessions time, and had to the
Court for opening his shop-windows on one of their Fast-dayes, whom they also
ensnared with the Oath of Allegiance. And being indicted for wilfully and
obstinately refusing the Oath of Allegiance, etc. they pleaded Not guilty; and
the Clerk asked them whether they would enter their Recognizance?

One of the Prisoners asked, What they did mean by it?

The Clerk answered, The Court is willing to favor you, and to let you have
liberty till next Sessions, giving Sureties.

The Prisoners answered, They had no Sureties; but if they would take their
words, they would promise to appear if they were well.

Which not being taken, they were returned to the Gaol.

The next day a sufficient man of the Town (hearing that the Court had
proffered to let them have their liberty upon Security, till the next Sessions)
went to the Clerk of the Sessions, and proffered to be their Security till the
next Sessions; that is to say, for A. Curtis, and S. Lamboll.

But the Clerk told him he could not do it without an Order under the hands of
two Justices of Peace.

So he went to W. Armorer, but he would not take Sureties for them.

The 14th day of the same Month, W. Armorer his man came to the Meeting, and
seeing Friends meet together, went out and pulled the door after him, (the
Meeting being in a room next the street) it being a spring-lock, caught; so he
locked himself out.

In a little after, his Master came in great rage, and called to Friends to
open the door, or else he would break all the Glass Windows. But the Friends in
the Meeting sat still; for as they had no hand in shutting of him out, they
were not willing to let him in Upon which he called for a Smith and a Sledg,
there being Ranold Thornberry the Constable, and one Richard Davis, that uses
to attend on the Butchers, and some others with him; the Sledg being brought,
with many blows they forced open the door, and W. Armorer looking in, said, He
is not here: Whereby it appeared, that he had information of some person that
was not there. So having set some to keep the Friends in the Meeting, he went
to an inner door of the House of Tho: Curtis, and broke that open, and searched
the Court, the Wood-house, Brew House, Stable, and Hey-loft, and then broke the
door into the house, and after that, broke another door to go up stairs; and
finding one Chamber Door locked, though the Key was in it, yet he broke the lock
and ^he door to pieces, and entered into the room, and searched all the house
from the bottom to the top, no body being in the house, the Maidservant being
gone to prison to carry Necessaries to her Master and Mistress. What was lost,
is unknown, excepting a knife and a bolt. A stander-by affirms, That Whitcher
the Tailor, Daniel Seamer his Son-in-law, told him, That they went into the
house to search for writings, and to see how the house was furnished. Having
broke open six doors, and searched the house, came forth again to the
Meeting-room, and caused the Friends to be had to the Counter; and after their
Worship was ended (it being the first day of the week, which they call their
Sabbath, on which day he usually does this work) he sent for them to his house
before himself, and Edw: Dolby; and because three of the Friends, being young
men, did not put off their hats to him, he (W. Armorer) called to his man to
fill them with water; the man not doing it presently, he gave him a kick on the
breech: Then his man took the Hats, and filled them with water. W. Armorer bid
him set them down full on the ground; being done, said, Now let them put them
on their heads. But the Constable threw the water out, and gave them their hats
again, it being very cold weather.

Then W. Armorer called the young Maidens, whom he took also at the Meeting,
and stripped up their sleeves, and asked them if they had any black strings or
ribbons: And having done, let them go. So caused a Mittimus to be made for the
three young men, viz. Joseph Phipps, Henry Adams, and John Thorn, and sent them
to the House of Correction for six months, and sent Anne Webb to the same place
for three months, and Anne Sharp to the Gaol for three months; and in some
days after, he sent privately for that Mittimus, and charges that she should
not see or know of it; and sent another Mittimus for Anne Sharp to be kept a
Prisoner for twelve Months.

The 15th of the second Month called April, 1666, came W. Armorer and Edw:
Dolby to the Meeting, with Ranold Thornberry, Constable, where was Robert
Pain, Anne Hatt, Hannah Emerton, Eliz: Tudway, Mary Webb, Mary Kent, and Sarah
Kent; and after many words, W. A. bid the Constable take them to the Counter.

One of the Friends said, there was not the number, Five of age.

He said, he would take them if there were but one of age, if there were four
children; and said it was the Chanchellors Judgment.

And being had to the Counter (the Town-Prison) after their Worship was done,
he committed Hannah Emerton to the House of Correction for six Months, Robert
Pain for three months, and Anne Hatt for six months, to the Gaol; and Eliz:
Tudway for twelve months; and then said, he would make all them that were under
the age of sixteen years, pay twelve pence a piece.

The 24th of the second Month, called April, 1666, Anne Curtis and Sarah
Lamboll were had to the Sessions at Newberry, in order to their trial; but W.
Armorer not being there, they were not called. Anne Curtis speaking with diverse
of the Justices at a private house, relating the manner of the proceedings
against them, demanded of them a Trial, being brought for that end; and if the
Jury did find them guilty, they were willing to suffer; if not, they should
clear them.

And after some words, they bid her withdraw.

And meeting with Justice Doleman in the street, who knew her, she related
their case as to the other. He answered; He would go to the Lo^d Loveless, and
the Justices, and tell them her business, and bring her word what might be done.

And after some time, he came again to her Lodging, and told-her, That the
King's Evidence was not ready, and therefore they could not have their Trial:
and that the Justices thought it an unreasonable thing that they should be put
from Sessions to Sessions, and still kept in prison; therefore you may have
your liberty, giving your words to appear the next Sessions.

To which she answered, We proffered our words to appear, the last Sessions,
and it would not be taken.

He replied, But it will now; and that they did intend to write a Letter to Sir
W. Armorer, to that purpose.

So she said, If they would have us to appear, we shall, if well, and at
liberty.

So they returned to Reading, to their own Houses.

But the next day W. Armorer sent the Gaolers man to fetch them in to prison
again. The man told W. A. That the Justices had given them liberty till the
next Sessions. At which he was very angry, and replied, What have the Justices
to do with MY PRISONERS? and threatened that he would lay him by the heels, if
he did not fetch them in.

So he fetched in S. Lamboll; but A. Curtis was gone with her brother toward
Bristol, to see her Relations; and at her return, hearing that he was angry
with the Under-keeper, she went to him, telling him of it, viz. That she heard
he was angry with the Under-Gaoler because he had not fetched her in; and that
she would not have any one have anger for what she did; and thought she went in
her own right, as having liberty from the Justices till the next Sessions.

W. Armorer answered, 'Twas no such thing.

To which she replied, she knew nothing but what he they call Sir Thomas
Doleman, told her, repeating to him what he had said to her at Newberry.

Then W. A. said, If she would give security, she should have her liberty; if
not, he would send her to her Husband.

A. Curtis replied, I perceive it was the rest of the Justices desire, we
should have our liberty, but thee only opposest it.

And he answered, Yes, it is I; and said the Justices did it in opposition to
him, (and yet this man all along pretended great kindnesses to her for her
Fathers sake.)

Much more was spoken, too much here to mention.

And a few days after, he sent Ranold Tho^nber^y, Constable, with a Warrant,
to apprehend her, but not being at home, mist her at that time.

The 19th of the 4th month, called June, 1666, John Withram the Under-Sherif of
the County, with one Thomas Rosse the Duke of Monmouth's ^utor, came to the
Gaol, and called for Tho: Curtis and Geo: Lamboll, and told them they had a
Warrant from the King to seize upon their Estates; and presently Geo: Thorp and
they two went into their Chambers, and seized on all their Books, Papers and
Writings, and on 1501. in money of Tho: Curtis's, (there was more money lost in
his room, it was judged about fourteen pound, but they said they had it not)
and when they came down again, they locked them out of their rooms, and went to
the House of Thomas Curtis, and looked over his Good, and seized on it; and
then went to tbe House of Geo: Lamboll, and did the like there, and took an
Inventory of all they could find; but did not remove the Goods, for they
promised to be accountable for them*

The same day W, A. sent Edward Lawrence, Constable, with a Warrant to
apprehend A. Curtis, and had her presently away to the Gaol.

And some time after, he sent to the Gaol for A. C. and being come to him, he
told her, That the Gentlemen who were concerned in her Husbands Estate, desired
me to set you at liberty; and here is your discharge, giving it into her hand.
A true Copy whereof, here in after follows.

Burgus de Reading in Com. Berks.
To the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said Borough, and to his Deputy
and Deputies there, Greeting.
THese are in the Name of the Kings most Excellent Majesty, to charge and
command you immediately upon sight hereof to set at liberty and free the body
of Anne Curtis, Wife of Thomas Curtis, of this Borough, Woolen-Draper, out of
your custody, and from her Imprisonment.

Dated under my hand and seal the 22d day of August, Anno Dom. 1666. W. Armorer.

The 29th day of the fifth Month called July, (66) came VV. Armorer and Edward
Dolby to the Meeting again, and looking into the Meeting, left his man at the
door, and went into the House, and searched from Room to Room and under the
Beds, pretending that some were gone out of the Meeting, and found only four
of age, sent two of them to the Gaol, and the two other, viz. Joseph Phipps and
Hanah Kent, he sent to the House of Correction, I. P. for three Months, and
Hanah Kent for six Months, and demanded of Lydia He sant, Ma^y Kent and Sarah
Kent, Twelve pence a piece, for not being at his Church that day, they being
under age, for not paying of which, he sent them to the Gaol, where they have
been prisoners above twelve Months; and another Child, Eliz: Whithart being
taken with them at the same Meeting, having but one Arm, a Neighbor having
told him that her Father was dead, and that it was judged the cause of his
death, was his being kept long in Prison, through (W. Armorer) his means, in
the extreme cold weather, at last he let her go.

The 19th of the 6th Month called August (66) Anne Hatt (who was committed for
six Months, only for being at a Meeting, to wait upon, and Worship the Lord in
Spirit and in Truth, being kept in, in the heat of Summer in the Gaol, where W.
Armorer had thronged up so many together, and caused to be kept in so close,
that he could not endure to hear of one abroad) dyed in the prison, and
finished her Testimony for the Lord and his Truth, being found faithful in her
day, in which she walked in Gravity, Sobriety, and the fear of the Lord, whose
end is blessed among the holy Martyrs for evermore.

The 15th of the 11th Month called January, 1666, The Sessions began at
Reading, and the next day being the 16th day, Joseph Phipps and Sarah Lamboll
were called to the Bar; But the Jury being gone out upon the Trial of a Friend
that was committed on another account, brougbt him in not guilty; which thing
not pleasing the prisoners adversaries, Joseph Phipps was put by to be tried by
another Jury; and accordingly in the afternoon when he was to come to his Trial
(which was upon the third Account for Meeting) W. Armorer called to the
Bailiffs, saying, go out and pick a Jury, there are honest men enough in the
Town you, know. Tho: Skeats the Baliiff answered, yes Sir William, I Will fit
you; upon which he went forth, and warning one Charles Belwood, formerly W.
Armorers Man, he seemed very unwilling to come, which when W. A. understood,
sent for him again the second time, threatening to fine him if he did not come
(it may be, believing he would be a man fit for his purpose, for he hardly ever
failed in any Jury, to bring in a Quaker guilty.) So a Jury being called, one
of the prisoners Sarah Lamboll (wife of George Lamboll, who is one of the
Premunired persons) was called to the Bar, and they tendered the Oath of
Allegiance to her again, and sent her back to the Gaol.

Then Joseph Phipps was called to the Bar, and his Indictment was read, to
which he had pleaded not guilty the Sessions before at Newberry: So he pleaded
that there were not the number of five that was of age when he was taken at the
Meeting. Edw: Do^by who sat Judge, replied, that was no matter, though there
were but one of the age of sixteen years, yet if there were five at the
Meeting, he would send that one to prison as a breaker of the Law: The Prisoner
replied, how can they make up the number, if they are not takeable?

Judge, yes, they do make up the number, being persons, though we cannot punish
them by that Law; but we have another Law, by which we can fine them Twelve
pence a piece for not going to Church.

Ay, says W. Armo^er, there are the three Girls (Lydia Hersent, M. K^nt and
Sarah Kent) I sent to prison for not paying their Twelve pence a piece, and
there they shall lie till they pay it; other words were spoken to the same
purpose, and so the Jury went forth, the Judge very much insensiing the Jury
against the Prisoner, that they might bring him in guilty. And W. Armorer sent
the Clerk with them with the Act and Indictment, to inform the Jury: and after
some time, the Court sent to know whether they were agreed? answer was
returned, no: So W. Armorer sent Rich: Grover his Clerk, who returned, saying,
they are not agreed, and I think never will. And after a little space, they
sent for the Jury, and asked if they were agreed? they answered no, the Court
asked why? they answered, they were not satisfied as to the number of persons,
that were at the Meetings, and that there was nothing proved as to matter of
exercise, and if there were the number, there was nothing proved what they did
there: The Judge then called to R. Grover, who was the witness against the
Prisoner, to know what he said, who answered, That the Prisoner confessed that
they were there to seek the Lord. Upon which the Judge doubled the words over
again, s^ying* look you there, he said, they were there to seek the Lord: The
Prisoner replied, saying* is it a crime worthy of Banishment to seek the Lord?

The Judge Edw: Dolby, said yes, (by which the Reader may perceive what lodges
in these men's hearts who would be called Christian Magistrates.)

Oh unheard of Cruelty! let the very Turks and Heathen be astonished to hear of
these things! and let the names of such be buried in Infamy for ever, and let
their memorial rot, who account a crime worthy of banishment or death, to
confess the seeking of God. Well, but not to digress, though it be hard to go
over these things without continual admiration; but that we desire not to be
larger then a bare Relation of their unreasonable proceedings, leaving it to
the ingenuous Readers understanding for amplifications.

So then, W. Armorer spoke something to the Jury, and that he could never find
our Friends in any exercise, etc.

Upon which one of the Jurymen replied, That he looked on it as an unequal
thing that he should be Witness and Judge too.

At which W. Armorer began to be angry, and demanded what the Jury-man was, and
would see his face, and bid him pull his Hat from his Nose, and asked whether
he did go to Church, and whether he was not one of them?

Who answered, No, he was none of them, nor never was at any of their Meetings;
and that he did go to Church.

So the Jury being called over by their Names, the Court bid them divide, those
that would find the Prisoner guilty, from those that could not, which were six
of each.

Upon which W. Armorer began to threaten those that could not find the Prisoner
guilty, and would have had them fined.

The Judge said, No, let them go together again, and it may be they may be
better satisfied.

So the Jury went out the second time, and after some time the Court sent out
to know whether they were agreed.

Answer was returned, No.

But the Court sent in again, threatening the Jury that they would adjourn, and
then would not accept of any private Verdict, but they should be kept there all
night without fire or candle.

Which accordingly after a little space was done, and the Court broke up, and
order, was given that none should come at the Jury, and that they should not
have fire nor candle, etc.

The Jury being kept all night, and the Court being sat the next morning, they
sent to the Jury to know if they were agreed.

Who returned answer, No.

But after some time, two of the Jurymen began to yield, it is judged rather
through fear and weariness, then being satisfied in their judgments. And some
of them cried, A verdict, a verdict; and so they came in.

And the Court asked if they were agreed?

One of them answered, He was not satisfied.

W. Armorer replied, You shall be satisfied; and the Foreman saying Guilty,
they took no farther notice, though four of them were not satisfied, but in
have calling the Prisoner to the Bar, the Judge, Edw: D^lby, past sentence on
him, That he should be transpo^ted to some of His Majesty's Plantations, there
to remain seven years. So was returned back to the Gaol. The Prisoner seeing of
them resolved to do their work, said little to them; but some short time after,
sent a Letter to Edw: Dolby; a Copy whereof here follows.

Reading-Gaol the 23d of the 11th Month, 1666. Justice Dolby,
SEeing thou satest as Judge of the Sessions the last week, and gave sentence
of Banishment against me, and being not permitted to speak then for my self in
the Court, but threatened to be gagged, though my life was concerned; I now send
this unto ^hee, desiring thy ser^ous consideration hereof: And what has been
done against me, and how unjustly I have been proceeded against from first to
last, till sentence of Exilement from my Native Country be past, I leave to
the witness of God in thy own Conscience, which can bring thy actions to thy
remembrance, and will speak the truth of all things as they are: To which I do
refer thee for a more particular account of all things that have past; and with
which I leave my cause to be pleaded even in thy own conscience, between the
Lord and thee; only hereby I give a hint of some things, etc.

Thou may remember, that when W. A^morer and thy self came to the house of
Thomas Curtis, I was there with two persons more above the age of sixteen
years, besides A. Curtis, and some children, who are not to be accounted as
persons to make up the number five: And it appears by the Act, that four may
meet; and also W. A. and several others of the Kings Justices, have told us
that four may meet, and they would not meddle with us; and it is ridiculous to
think that children of twelve or fourteen years of age will plot or contrive
insurrections; for against such persons as do so contrive insurrections, and
plot against the Government, the Act was intended, according to the Preamble of
it, etc. And besides, if such childrens being there, do make up the number, how
is it that you punish not the children by that Law? And if the children are not
under the breach of that Law, how can three persons break it, there being no
more there? I leave to thy consideration. And the Witness did only say we were
there to seek the Lord, (or that we said so) now I hope the Act will not
(simply in it self) take hold of such as meet together to seek the Lord, for
that is according to the Liturgy of the Church of England, which says, That in
all places, and at all times, men ought to perform holy duty to God; and no
other could be proved against me, but that we said we were there to seek the
Lord; and is it not a sad thing that men should so far lose their reason and
moderation, and deny Christianity, as to banish people for meeting together to
seek the Lord, and to perform holy duty to him, when nothing else can be
proved, except they will make it a crime worthy of Banishment and Death, to be
at the House of Tho: Curtis, which no Law does; for no man can prove, nor ever
shall find, that we meet to contrive Insurrections, or plot against the
Government; and the God of Heaven knows, (who knows the intents of the hearts
of all men) that we never so much as thought, much less intended any such
thing; and thy own conscience may tell thee the same. And this not being
proved, how can any impartial Jury find us guilty of the breach of this Act,
and bring us in guilty of Banishment, (and Death if we return) when nothing can
be proved but that we were at such a place, and said we were seeking the Lord?
For nothing else did ever appear: And yet notwithstanding the Jury must go on
right or wrong, or else be threatened with fines, etc. in case they bring in not
guilty, when they are upon their oaths, and ought to go according to the
Evidence, and not to put their consciences to the vote, and to give away the
Liberties, Lives, Rights and Privileges of freeborn English men, and to
oppress and destroy the Kings Subjects, by violating his Laws, and turning of
them to a wrong end, as in this case. This Act was made against such as do at
their Meetings contrive insurrections, etc. and not against such as do meet
really to seek the Lord, as appears by the Preamble of it: Therefore such as do
punish people for seeking the Lord, do go quite contrary to the Act, and turns
it to a wrong end, and are no true Friends to the King in so doing, though they
pretend Law, and to act according to Law, when indeed their own wills and
malicious minds, leads them contrary to Laws; and how contrary it was to the
Consciences of some of the Jury-man, thou might see, who were not satisfied,
no nor (it is believed, and credibly reported) are not to this day, but is a
load upon their Consciences, and may well be, in that they gave away their
power, and indeed the power of the Law, being overawed by high words; for they
ought to have been sat^sfied in their own Consciences, and not to have looked
at the displeasure of any man, being sworn well and truly to try, etc. which I
doubt not but thou very well know, if thou had but done accordingly; and
whether these things be according to Reason and Equity, upon which the ancient
Laws are said to be grounded, I say, I shall leave to the Witness of God in thy
Conscience, which answers the righteous Law, and which will deal truly and
plainly with thee, and will either condemn or justify thee in the day of
Account. For Friend, know this, and mind also in secret, That an account to God
the Judge of quick and dead, must be given by thee, and all men upon the earth;
and assuredly he does behold and mark thy actions, and they are recorded in a
Book of remembrance, which shall be accounted for; and though thou may hide
thy self as from man, yet thou can not hide thy self from him who is the
searcher of all hearts, and the tryer of all reins; who will proceed in
judgment according to Justice and Equity, by the impartial Evidence of his
Witness, the Light of Jesus Christ in thy Conscience, which will bring all thy
ways and doings to remembrance, and lay thee open and naked before the Lord
God. And Friend, to receive the sentence of condemnation, and to be banished
for ever from his presence will be a very sad sentence, and far worse then to
be banished from the Land of ones Nativity, into a strange and Foreign
Country, for the exercise of ones Conscience toward God, in meeting to seek
and wait upon him, and to have and enjoy his presence with one; yet such as do
so banish, do very badly in so doing, and which God will undoubtedly call them
to a strict account for. And in this is my comfort, that though thou have
sentenced me to Banishment, yet thou can not banish me from the Lords
presence, nor deprive me of the peace of conscience, which is received through
Faith, and living-obedience to the will and requirings of God, and because it
is not for evil-doing, for cursing, swearing, drunkenness, blaspheming the Name
of God, hurting or wronging any man in this place in which I was born and
brought up, etc. but only because I was met with two or three more to seek God.
Oh! may you not be ashamed to profess the Name of God and Christ, and banish
those that meet in his Name? and profess Christianity, and yet banish it out of
your coasts. And if Christ were now here among you, as he was among the cruel
Jews, would you not banish him if he met with his Disciples? who met upon
Mountains by the Seaside, and other places, separate from the Jews and
Heathens Synagogues and Temples, which he and his Apostles gathered people
from, to worship God in the spirit and truth, and brought them to know their
bodies to be the Temple of the Holy Ghost. I say, if he were here now, and did
meet, would you not banish him, as you do his followers? And in as much as you
do it unto them, you do it unto him, against whom ye are striving, who will be
too hard for you; for never did any strive against the Lord, and prosper.

And that thou should be found in this work beyond most in the Nation, will
be no credit to thee; and truly this action has far out-stript the cruel Jews,
who though their Law allowed forty stripes, yet would the Executioners give but
thirty nine, because they would not deal with persons to the rigor of the Law,
which you have cruelly gone beyond; and exceeded upon me. And as the Lord God
does mark thy actions, so will men also mark thee, and take notice of thy
doings.

Wherefore it would be well to consider and repent of what thou have done, and
not rashly to run (nor to be led) on in this work of persecuting of innocent
people for the exercise of their tender consciences toward God, considering
the reward that has attended Persecutors in all ages, and how their Names have
been a reproach and a stink in after-generations; and will not such much more
stink, that sentence people to Banishment for seeking the Lord, and put Irons
upon them, and then link two of us together in Irons as if we were such
intolerable offenders, as were not worthy to live. For as soon (almost) as I
came in, Irons were clapped on me, and then linked to Christopher Cheeseman, who
had Irons also; but through Justice Armorers means (as I am informed) the Irons
were taken off again, and only the Locks remains on our Legs, which I doubt not
but thou might cause to be taken off, if thou would: However I am well
contented, knowing I have not deserved this cruel usage at the Gaolers hands,
nor at thine; but this cruelty and the bitterness of Envy, is hereby in some
measure made manifest.

But I shall forbear to lay o^en the Gaolers cruelty, it being not pertinent to
my present business, and rather desire thou may consider of the things
before mentioned, so as to amend thy ways and doings, whereby thou may free
thy self from that guilt, which no man can acquit thee of, which thou will
attract by these unneighbour-like, unchristian-like, yea, and I may say,
unlaw-like Proceedings.

I remain a lover of thy soul, a witness against injustice and unrighteousness,
in the long-suffering spirit of Jesus, for whose sake thou have given sentence
of BANISHMENT against me from the Land of my Nativity, who have learned to do
good to them that hate and persecute me, who am called

Joseph Phipps.


The 27th of the 11th Month called January, 1666, W. Armorer came early to the
Meeting again; and there being but four young Maidens, viz. Hannah Kent, Sarah
Binfield, Eliz: Whiteheart, and Anne her Sister: He said, Here is a goodly
company: and commanded one of his men to fetch some water: His man went to Dan:
Seamers, and borrowed a Bucket and a nasty Bowl-dish, and having brought the
Bucket of water into the Meeting-room, W. Armorer took the Bowl-dish, and
filling it with the water, threw it with great violence in the Maidens faces,
filling the dish many times so fast one after another, that with the violent
throwing in their faces, and the coldness of the water, one of the Maidens was
like to lose her breath, and sat down, being wet in such a cruel inhumane
manner, that it run down their necks, and wet them very much, so that they were
fain to go bome and change their clothes, it being in the Winter time. And
having turned them out of the Meeting-room, he went his ways.

And how unlike a Justice this was, let the Reader judge, but more like a rude
savage creature, indeed hardly like a man, and yet this is the man that rules
as King in the Town of Reading, that does what he will without control. Well,
again

The 17th of the first Month called March, 1667, W. Armorer and Tho. Coats,
Mayor, came to the Meeting, and took Henry Adams, Sarah Binfield, Eliz:
Whitebeart, Mary Webb, and Eliz: Tudway the younger, and sent them all to the
House of Correction, though there were but four of the age of sixteen years, H.
Adams on the third account, Eliz: Whiteheart and Mary Webb for six Months, S.
Binfield for three Months, and Eliz: Tudway, being not fourteen years of age,
till she paid Twelve pence for not being at his Church.

A day or two after, a Neighbor of Eliz: Tudways (the woman having a love to
the child) went to W. Armorer, and offered to pay the twelve pence;
notwithstanding W. Armorer refused, and told her, That except she would pay
twelve pence more, she should not be discharged, though she was committed but
for one twelve pence.

But the woman refusing to pay the other twelve pence to his Clerk, Richard
Grover, the child remains in prison to this day, her Father and Mother being
both Prisoners also at the County-Gaol, having three small ch^ldren besides.

And having sent the five above named to prison, they (W. Armorer and Tho:
Coats) went into the house of Tho: Curtis, and going up stairs, went into A.
Cu^tis her Chamber, where she was not being very well. W. ^rmorer protested he
would send her to Gaol because the Meeting was cont^nued at the house; but if
she would shut up the doors, and suffer no more Meetings, she should have her
Liberty.

A. Curtis replied, the house was her Husbands, aad he might do what he would
with it; and bid them judge whether they themselves would look on it as an equal
thing for their Wives to contradict their servants in what they did require
them to do.

And after some other discourse of this and other things, being going away, W.
Armo^er bid A. C. make her ready, protesti^g he would send her to Gaol: And
accordingly sent up the Constable, Jo: Stretch, to her Chamber, to have her to
the Gaol, saying, That Sir William had s^nt him. To whom she answered, That she
was not then in a capacity to go. So the Constable civilly went away.

But the next day W. A sent him again, being very angry, and threatened if he
did not carry her to Gaol, he would lay him by the heels.

So the Constable came to her again, having a Warrant authorizing him to take
the body of A. Curtis, and have her to the Gaol, to be ^ept upon her former
Commitment, from which she was freed, as appears by the discharge under his own
hand before mentioned, of which the Reader may take notice. So she was had to
the Gaol, where she now remains.

The 16th of the second Month, called April, 1667, the Sessions was holden at
Newberry for the County; to which place Hen^y Adams was had, being committed on
the third account for meeting. And heing called to the Bar, an Indictment was
read against him for being at an unlawful Seditious Meeting, etc.

To which he pleaded Not guilty of any Seditious Meeting, or plotting, or
contriving Insurrections, etc.

So the Court asked the Prisoner if he would give bond to appear the next
Sessions.

He answered, He was a stranger in that place; but if they would take his word
to appear* he would promise to appear.

But being not accepted, the Jailer took him away, and had him back again to
the Gaol.

The Prisoner being returned, his Father, Henry Adams, living in the Town, and
hearing that the Court had offered him liberty till the next Sessions, upon
bond of appearance, went himself to W Armorer, and offered to be bound for his
Sons appearance. Yet notwithstanding it had been proffered, W. A. would not
take it, but began to rail against the Quakers, and telling such stories
concerning strings, etc. which are incredible to any man of understanding.

The 9th of the 4th Month, called June, -- 67, W. A. came again to the Meeting,
and pulled out the Friends there met, and so let them go; which was not usual
to let any go out of his hands after he had taken them.

And the 14th of the 5th Month, called July, -- 67, W. A. his man came to the
Meeting, and having looked in, went out at the door, and pulled the door after
him; it being a Spring-lock, caught, and shut himself out.

Soon after came W. Armorer, and finding the door shut, sent for a Sledg to
break it open; but one of the Friends perceiving that he would break open the
door, went and opened it, saying, I do open the door, that that thou may see
our innoc^ncy, that we are not plotting against the Government; for if we were
(as he has often accused us) we would not have opened the door.

He replied, If you had not, I would have broken it open, though his own man
locked it.

Daniel Seamer (one of the Neighbors) coming into the Meeting-room with them,
said, Sir William, I hope the next Rejoycing-day, all these forms and stools
shall be brought out to help make a Bonfire. To which W. Armorer willingly
assented.

So R. Grover his Clerk took the Names of nine, viz. Rich: Hutchins, John
Litleworth, Anne Sharp, Eliz: Tudway, Mary Coal, Hannah Kent, Martha
Cheeseman, Francis Greenaway, and Eliz: Booth; and being had to his house,
where was also Edw: Dolby, they committed five to the House of Correction for
three Months, Martha Cheeseman being one, whose Husband is a Prisoner at the
Gaol; by which he shows his destructive spirit to humane society. And in some
discourse Eliz: Tudway, one of the Prisoners, telling W. A. that these things
must be accounted for one day: He answered, Aye, you shall see at the Day of
Judgment, whose arse will be blackest, yours or mine. And such like
communication he has many times, which is almost a shame for Civility to
mention, but that people may see what a man this is to make a Justice.

And going to another, Eliz: Booth, stripped up her sleeve, asking her if she
had any black strings about her arm: She answered, No, she was no Papist. But
(said he) you are bewitched.

So a Mittimus being made, they sent Mary Coal to Gaol for six Months, (her
Husband Leo: Coal, being there a Premunired-person, and two of his Brothers)
and A. Sharp, Eliz: Tudway, and Hannah Kent, to the Gaol on the third account.

And the 16th of the same Month, the Sessions was holden at Abingdon, to which
place H. Adams, A Sharp, E. Tudway, and H. Kent were had; and the same day the
three women were called to the Bar, and an Indictment being read against them
for being at an unlawful Meeting, etc. they pleaded Not guilty. So the Court
told them, That if they would give Security for their appearance the next
Sessions, they might have their liberty. Upon which a Neighbor of E. Tudway's,
Tho: Skeats, proffered to be bound for her. And another man standing by, said
he would be bound for her, though he never ^aw her face before. But the Clerk
of the Sessions, Geo: Champion, hearing that, said, They might do that at
Reading, and they would leave it to Sir W. A. and Justice Dolby: So they were
taken from the Ba^r, and after they came to Reading, there was a very
sufficient man of the Town, Jo: Kent, went to W. A. and proffered to be bound
for his daughter Hannah her appearance the next Sessions, but he would not take
it.

Then H. Adams was called to the Bar, and W. A. and the Justices called for a
Jury, picking such and such men; naming them, the Judge, Tho: Holt, saying, Put
down such a man, he is an honest man. The Jury being sworn well and truly to
try, etc. the Indictment was read, to which the Prisoner had pleaded Not guilty
the Sessions before at Newberry. So now he desired that Witness might be
produced to prove what the Fact was, or the evil he had done; and if he had
done any evil, was willing to suffer accordingly. But no witness appearing to
prove any thing that he had done, neither that he was at any Meeting, the Judge
called for the Records; upon which the Clerk made diligent search, and sent his
man out of the Court to look after them, and his man returned with great Rolls
of Paper under his Arms, but could not find the Records. Then the Judge stood
up, saying, If you have lost the Rec^^ds for the first and second offense, we
can^^^ p^^ceed, but ^his mu^^ go for the first offense. Upon which W. A. stood
up in great fury, saying he would take his Oath that the Records were true,
though they were lost. So they gave him ^he Book, and he kissed it, and sat
down again on the Bench as one of the Prisoners Judges.

Then the Judge Tho: Holt turned his tale again, like himself, and many others
such as he is, who can turn sometimes one way, and sometimes another, said, You
Gentlemen of the Jury, you see here is Sir W. A. has t^k^^ hi^ Oath, (having
only taken the Book in his hand, and kissed it) That the Records are true,
though they are lost; and you may conclude there was a first and second
offense, before there can be a third (though there was no witness to prove a
third offense, but because W. A. had kissed the Book, and said the Records were
true, though they were lost, for the first and second; therefore they would
conclude too, that this was the third) and said the Judge, You cannot but find
him guilty.

So the Jury went forth, and in a little time returned, and their Verdict was,
Not guilty.

Then the Judge stood up, saying, How so? has not Sir W. Armorer sworn that the
Records are true?

And after the Jury had given some reasons why they could not find him guilty,
they went forth the second time, and a Bailif was sworn to lock them up, and
that none should come at them. Yet notwithstanding, soon after they were gone
out, W. A. went off the Bench to the Jury, and threatened them, as some of
themselves did since confess; and a little after W. A.'s return to the Court,
the Jury came in, and the Foreman said the Prisoner was found guilty: But some
of the Jury not being satisfied, would not come into the Court, for they did
not agree to the Verdict; and one of them said he never would agree to it: And
being in a confusion, being much threatened, they would not appear; but the
Court being in a hurry, and angry, the Judge said they should be fined if they
did not come in: Upon which (being overawed by high words and threatenings)
they came in; and being called over, they called the Prisoner to the Bar, and
asked him what he had to say for himself? The Prisoner said, Was there not a
Bailif sworn that none should come at the Jury, but they should be locked up,
etc. and which of you have made this man forswear himself? was it not thee?
pointing to W. A. At which they laughed, saying it was by the leave of the
Court. The Prisoner replied, Well, I see you have a cunning way to swear, and
your wills are your Law; and it is to little purpose what I say to you, for you
are determined what to do; and if I must be a sufferer for well-doing, the will
of the Lord be done. (For nothing of evil could be proved, no not so much as
the third offense, neither Records for the first and second, as is said.)

Much more was spoken, but this in short was the substance.

So the Jailer took him away, but no sentence was given against him, and so he
was returned to the Gaol where he now remains. And having since asked the
Jailer what order he had from the Court concerning him, telling him that he had
no sentence, and yet remained in Prison. The Jailer answered, Harry, thee art
for Transportation, they have done it since among themselves.

Now whether these things be according to the Law, according to which these men
pretend they proceed, let all that have any knowledge therein judge; but we are
sure it is not according to Reason and Equity, upon which the Laws ought to be
grounded: And if these proceedings be not according to Law, how can these men
bring honor to the King and his Government, by these things? Let the wise in
heart judge; and the Lord give men understanding and hearts to look into these
things, lest the pretense of Law and Legal Proceedings, become a ^nare and a
Ginne unto the Innocent and Righteous.

And this is as short Account of the Proceedings of W. Armorer, as we could
draw up, to keep the substance. Many circumstances we have omitted, for we
desire not to wade in such things, but rather to speak the least of things,
then to go one jot beyond. But much more we could say; and these things our
very Adversaries themselves may remember, if they will but call to mind their
actions. And though the said W. Armorer has dealt thus hardly with us, to
throw us into prison heaps upon heaps, we may say; yet his enmity against us is
farther made manifest, in that he has many times charged the Jailer not to
suffer one of us to go over the threshold, but to keep us in very close, both
in the extreme heat of Summer, when many thousands have dyed through Infectious
and Pestilential Diseases, and several in this Town; even then have we been
thronged together, as if it were on purpose to destroy us: And also in the very
cold Winters, three of which we have patiently endured, and now almost four
Summers; and if any should ask the reason, why the foregoing Relation may
answer for us, which will tell them, It Is for seeking the Lord, for waiting
upon him, for worshipping him, for making conscience of our ways, and because
we cannot transgress his righteous ^aw and Commandment, who faith, Swear not at
all; and no^ for any evil-doing: For if out adversaries t^emselves had a^y evil
to lay to our change* no doubt they would publish it to the w^ole world* and we
desire they may. And yet though we have bee^ (...) us hardly used, yet blessed
be the Lord we are yet alive, thoug^ our health may be much impaired, or some
of us at least; and but one has dyed in prison, and one not long after he was
released, which was judged his Imprisonment might be a great cause of, being
kept in, in very cold weather, and taking great cold; and when we have been
sick, and have desired to go out to take things necessary, which could not well
be done in the prison, where so many Prisoners are, it has been denied, and we
must not be suffered, though our lives sometimes have been concerned, except we
would give such Bonds and Engagements, which it is not unlikely but he himself
knew we could not for Conscience Sake do, and only to be at a house in the same
Town. And A: Gurtis being not well a little time since, the Jailer sent to him
to know if she might go home to her house, it being extreme hot weather, and
having but little room in the Gaol, he would not permit her: And a Friend being
with him afterward, and telling him how they were thronged up together, and how
extreme hot it was in the Gaol, the Jailer being present, said, Sir William
will let any of you out, giving security. He answered, No, Mrs. Curt^s should
not if she would give security, but should l^e there till she rot.

And also Christopher Cheeseman, another of the Prisoners, being very sick,
almo^^ unto death, his wife went to W. A. with a Letter, to desire liberty for
him to go to his own house, being almost over against the Gaol, to take things
necessary for the recovery of his health, being kept in a cold Garret among
many Prisoners, in the cold Wintertime; but W A. not only refused to grant the
woman's reasonable desire, but refused to take the Letter also, saying he should
lie there till he rot, before he would do it.

So that he does not only throng them up in Prisons, but makes himself as aoler
also; so that though the Jailer know his Prisoners, and ^an trust them, as
being true and faithful to their words; yet he must not let a Prisoner stir
over the threshold, for fea^ of displeasing ^ir William: Which dealing can
hardly be paralleled in England, that Justices should be seekers after men
without any complaint, Accusers, Judges and Gaolers, etc.

And now it may not be amiss to give a short Relation of the proceedings of
Humph^ey Hide, a Justice so called, n the same ^ounty, against foam of our
Friends, being h^s Neighbors and Tenants, it being one in quality with W.
Armorer's, though not in quantity.

William Mathews, John Langly, Mary Slade Widow, and Richard Slade her Son,
being summoned to appear at Abingdon at the general Quarter Sessions, hold en
the 14th day of the 5th Month called July, 1663: At which place accordingly
(having done no man wrong) they did appear, and being called to the Bar, and
called by Name, an Indictment was read against them for not being at their
Church in four Months before; and the Court asked them if they would conform
and come to Church, or no? The Friends answered, They could not come to their
Church, because the^ had never enjoyed the ^resence of God there, and that was
the cause of their absenting. Upon which the Court presently began to proceed
without any delay, or time of consideration) to fine them according to the Law
which was made for the paying of twelve pence for every first days absence
from their church. But one of them began to quest on whether that Law would
hold them. A Lawyer standing by, took up a Statute-Book, and found a Statute
which was made for the Papists, to fine them twenty pounds a month, and said
(...) would hold them, he was sure of it; so they read the Statu^e to them, and
fined them twenty pounds a month for the four months, which was eighty pounds a
piece. But Humph: Hide who sat Judge. pre^ended he was sorry for Rich Slade,
and W. Mathews, saying they were good Harvest-men, (for they desired, that if
any there had any evil to accuse them of, they should speak) and H. Hide said,
he did believe that neither of them were able to pay the Fine: Which did the
more manifest his hard-hearted Cruelty toward them, because he knew they were
not able to pay such a great fine, which he, with the rest, had imposed upon
them, being his Tenants, their Lives being in some of his Estate, viz. Mary
Slade, Widow, an ancient woman of near seventy years of age, and not a tooth in
her head, being his Tenant in possession, and Richard her Son in reversion,
after her; and William Matthew in reversion, and John Langly a Tenants Son,
being all his Neighbors, and labouring-men, and having little but what they
work for, being always his Neighbors. And some time after they were committed
to the Gaol, William Matthew his Mother-in-law went to their Landlord, Humph:
Hide, to see if she could prevail with him to get William's Liberty. He
answered, He could not do any thing in it. She asked if he would give his
consent to his coming home. He answered, No, never while he did live; for he
did not love them so well: And so they have remained Prisoners above these four
years.

Also another poor man and his wife, the one about 74 years, and the other near
thereabouts, because they could not go to their Worship, the woman being almost
blind, the Constable going to their House to distrain, and finding no goods,
made a complaint to Humph: Hide, who caused the old man and his wife to be
brought before him, and made a Mittimus, and sent them to the Gaol, being above
twenty miles from their habitation, because they did not go to their Worship,
to which he would force and compel them, or else the Gaol must be their
habitation. The old man's Name was John Cook, and Jane his Wife.

The first day of the 5th Month called July, -- 66, Humph: Hide sent a party of
Soldiers with a Corporal, and Capt. Garret with a party of Horse and Foot, to
^he ^ouse of Bartholomew Mallam, in Lamburn Woodlands, and meeting with some
Friends in the fields, they took them, and had them to the Hou^e, and put them
in at door, and then accused them for being at a ^eeting, and so took them, and
had them down to Lamburn Town; to which place H. Hide, with some other
Justices, were gathered; and being brought before them, they commi^ted Richa^d
B^^kes, Oliver Sansome, and one more, to the Gaol for three months, and seven
men more, to the B^^^ewell at Abingdon for three months; and Barthol. Mallam,
the man of the house, they committed upon the Statute of the 35 of Queen
Elizabeth, to the Gaol.

And about the 4 th of the 8th Month, called October, -- 66, the Sessions was
holden a^ Newberry, to which place B. M. was had, and indicted for being at a
Meeting: To which having pleaded Not guilty, they demanded ^^^eties till next
Sessions, upon which two of his acquai^an^e e^g^ged for his appearance, and so
he had his liberty til next Sessio^^.

And the ^ext Sessions being holden at Reading the 16th day of the 11th Month
cal^ed January, -- 66, he had his Trial, and the Jury brought him in Not guilty
of the breach of that Statute, but guilty of not coming to their Church,
because the Constable swore against him that he had not seen him at their
Church in two years; so he was fined.

Reading the 15th of the 6th Month, 1667.
Remains PRISONERS in the Gaol, Forty.
Twenty one having the Sentence of a Praemunire past against them. Three for
refusing the Oath of Allegiance. Five under the Sentence of BANISHMENT. Three
fined twelve-pence a piece, being under the age of sixteen years, taken at a
Meeting. Four for being at meeting, three on the third account, one for six
months. Four fined eighty pounds a piece, for not going to Steeple-house.
Prisoners remaining at the House of Correction, Eight.
Five committed for three months, for meeting. Two for six months. One Child
fined twelve-pence for not being at Steeple-house, being taken at a Meeting.
THE END.

