TO THE Suffering SEED OF ROYALTY, Wheresoever Tribulated upon the Face of the
whole Earth; THE SALUTATION Of Your BROTHER Under the Oppressive Yoke of BONDS,
in ROME -- PRISON of Madmen. JOHN.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at (...) of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Windmill, in (...) Grand, 1661.

To the Suffering Seed of Royalty, etc.
IN the Everlasting Bowels and Spirit of Love, Unity, Pity, Compassion and
Mercy, I truly set my whole Mind, Soul, and utmost Strength unto the Weight of
Your Yoke, bearing your Burdens in breathing and burning flames of the
Righteous Zeal of the Temple of the Lord God, and for your sakes am a man of
sighs, sobs, sorrows, tears, cries, groans, and of supplications and prayers
night and day in my poverty and weakness, pleading and wrestling with the Most
Strong and Mighty One for you all, in this the day of your Temptations and sore
Trials, that you may stand on the Foundation of the Heavens, which was before
the Earth and the slippery places thereof were created or manifest; that whilst
your Enemies watch for your downfall, ye may walk as Mighty men; and whilst they
seek for your haltings, you may run sevenfold more swift in the Race; and
whilst they seek to cast you down to the ground, you may mount up into the
Heaven of the Glory of God, as with the Wings of Eagles and Angels; and whilst
they think they have you in woeful places, you may live as in Princely Palaces,
clothed with soft Raiment, fed with the Bread of Saints and delicious Meats of
Angels, consolated with the Harmony of Heaven, and crowned with Diadems of
Glory: Surely I have cried aloud, aloud, aloud, even with a lift up voice unto
my God, saying; O my Lord God of all Mercies, is not Israel thy Son, and
Jerusalem thy only Daughter? or, Was Israel of old, in the ancient days of
Moses, Joshua, and the rest of thy Servants like unto Sion thy Son in this the
day that thou have made him a People? Though they murmured against thee, and
repined in the times of their straights; yet thy Mercies failed them not in the
time of need: And can thou forsake or forget this thy Chosen Generation,
which trust in thy Power to the utmost, and in the deepest straits are ready to
say in their hearts, Our God is the best of thousands, and more amiable and
desirable than all besides Him that is in the Earth or Heaven? Can thy
Righteous Soul forget to be merciful, and remember no more to be compassionate
unto the languishing distresses of thy own poor and tender sucklings, and
little ones, which cannot stand without thy help, nor walk without thy
assistance? Shall the Enemy say, Lo, they were always as a bruised people, as
if the Countenance of God had never been toward them, and now his fury is
fallen down flat upon them? Oh Lord, why shall the sluices be always open to
the floods, and thy plants to the storms of the winter? If I have found grace
or favor in thine eye, O Lord my God accept of me, if it be to be nailed hand
and foot on a Cross, or torn asunder with wild horses. Oh but what could the
destruction of my flesh please, satisfy, or give content to the Will of the
Holy One in? for thou requirest the heart, which I offer unto thee, with the
body and its tears, and the deepest groans of my heavy soul for thy Israel,
that Thou in thy Sion may be glorified, who art ten thousand times more unto
me than all thine Israel is. And for this cause of thy Glory in Sion and
Jerusalem, know thou not that I could willingly dye with a heart broken
indeed with unspeakable grief and sorrows? Surely my God, thou see and
know it, in whose sight O that I could be accepted to the thing indeed, even
for Isreal's Ransom; for then should my sorrows be joys unto my soul, and with
gladness would I fly unto grief, as a shaft that is shot to the mark: But
alas, alas, I am a Child and a Fool before the Eternal God, and what am I to
speak to His Majesty, but that surely He has Mercy, and His Compassions can in
no wise fail.

And behold, the God of Heaven rent me as a Rag with his Power, and tore me as
a Paper with his Word, and clove me asunder, and even ground me to dust and
powder, and melted me as Wax, and made me run down as a River of water; for He
has power over hearts, and can make contrite as he pleases, and broken as his
Power moves; whose Goodness answered me, saying,

I am God, even the Lord God of all Dominion and Supremacy, which holds the
Covenant of Compassions and Mercies, who changes not, but am as yesterday, so
this day, yea, and for ever and ever, who speaks unto thee: Israel is my own
Seed, he is begotten of mine Eternal Love, and born of my choicest Affection:
and therefore let Israel, the Son of my bosom, and Love of mine own heart,
know, that though a father might cast out the son of the seed of his loins born
in his own image, and though a mother might hate that the fruit of her womb
should at all be suckled or nursed; Moreover, though Man and Beast might grow
out of all natural kind, and the Earth, Seas and Rivers, and all that in them
is, become wholly unnatural in their kinds; yea, if the Heavens, with the Sun,
Moon and Stars, could be changed from their glory, and no more be seen as
Lights; yet cannot I alter mine Affection, nor turn the tender bowels of my
Love from Sion my firstborn, and Jerusalem my only daughter; but I who have
begotten, formed and created him in the womb, do hold the Treasures of Mercies
in store for him, and the Eternal Riches of all Compassions to be revealed; Yet
a little, and it shall be in mine appointed time (wherein I will magnify mine
Eternal Glory) to his most exceeding and surpassing Joyfulness, even for ever
and ever. And therefore though I, his tender compassionate Father have led him
into the Wilderness to be tried and tempted, that he may be thoroughly cleansed,
sanctified and purified, yet lo, I am walking in the midst of the Trees of the
solitary places among all his Tents, speaking comfortable things unto Sion my
Son, and Jerusalem my Virgin-Daughter; for this is the place wherein I will
allure her, and that with the promise of Certainties, and not of Flatteries,
for I am the righteous and faithful God of Heaven; whilst I speak unto Sion, O
Sion, my Son, and Jerusalem, my Daughter, appear ye as my Offspring; and as I
live, says the Lord, I will appear as your God. I have born the Iniquities of
all Ages, bear ye therefore a little in this Age, that ye may be known to bear
my perfect Similitude and Image in your Age. And then behold, I thy God, who
can bear all things, but not thy bruises, nor suffer the Oppressions that are
on thee (for that thou art tenderer to me than the Apple of mine Eye, because
thou art weak and feeble, poor and helpless in thy self, and have no weapon of
vengeance with thee, save that thou castest thy griefs upon me, and thy
sorrows, as darts, into my bosom) even I will arise as the she Bear that is
robbed of her young, and as a Lionness bereaved of her whelps; yea, I will roar
with the voice of terrible Thunders from the Heavens, and will rend in the
Earth beneath, and make the horns of Cattle to smite against the horns of
Cattle, the black against the bloody, and the speckled against the griefled,
that the Flock of my Pasture may live. And thus I have decreed the work of my
Hand, and by the push of the Horn of an Unicorn, Fortresses shall fall, and the
Doors of Dungeons shull be opened, and my Seed sing Psalms of Deliverance; for
I the Faithful One am the Savior of mine own Remnant, which says, we will
stand still and not move; nay, we will not move hand against our enemies, nor
finger against our fiercest foes: but will commit our cause to the Holy One,
who marketh the footsteps of our way; and if he suffer us to be a spoil, then
will we be a spoil indeed, because through our spoil, He can gain himself a
prey of thousands; for He is the Wise One, even the wonderful wise One, whose
way is past finding out: Wherefore we will rest and be still, and hold our
peace in Content, until He has perfected our Patience to his praise. This is
the Seed to whom I have covenanted Glory, I the Faithful and Holy One have said
it; I will cloth them with my Sabbath days Robes of Righteousness, and attire
them with the Ornaments of mine own perpetual praise: their path shall be as
the purest Gold, and their habitation as a Palace artificially cut in a most
clear Cristal Rock, and each in his dwelling shall be as the Sun in the
Firmament, shining through the Walls of his Habitation, that no flesh living
shall be ever able to behold them for Glory: And behold, as their souls have
gained hunger after Righteousness in the laboring days of their trials, and
thirst after my Glory in the hottest oppressive hours of their Persecutions and
Tribulations; and whereas, the more they have been oppressed, the more they
loved it for my Name and Righteousness sake: therefore the day comes that they
shall eat no Bread but my Life, nor drink no Wine but the Rivers of my Breath;
neither shall they be as the sons of men are, but as the Angels of my Glory in
Heaven; And yet at this time I will neither tell thee, nor the train of mine
Host in the upper places, what I will do for these tender Lambs of my pleasure;
for they shall be mine for ever and ever, says the Lord God Eternal of
Righteousness, and of all Love and Mercies.

Ah Children, children, now let me your Brother in the Lord, speak in his grace
unto you; Though the Day is as the like has never been unto you before, shut
up in Dens and Holes, in crowds and clusters, Male and Female, old and young,
strong and weak, without respect unto the feeble, or any regard unto the infirm
and tender of Body; yet, Who is it that waits upon his God, but feels Mercy
taking him by the hand? What Babe among you is it that cries unto the Father,
in this the Day of the Captivity of your Mother, but has the openings of the
breast of Consolations, and sensibly sucks of the refreshing and reviving Milk
of Joyfulness? Verily, I am one with you in your Comforts and Gladness;
feeling, with you, how sweetly your Father swadleth you, and bears you in his
Bosom, and with his own right hand rocketh you in the Cradle of his everlasting
Repose and Rest; and as you hunger, puts pap into your mouths; and as you
thirst, quenches the drowth of your desires with the very drops of his own
fountain, and so feeds you to the full, and makes you prosper in the way of
his Power; and though your Dens are noisome, and your Dungeons darkness, yet
the Breath of your God is a precious Perfume continually in the midst of your
dwelling, and his Presence as the light of the Sun in your habitation; and now
more than ever you know him to be God indeed, and very gracious and good
indeed, a sure shelter and a safe refuge indeed, which will never fail you, as
you never fail trusting in him, but stand to the utmost, and say in
faithfulness, and in the countenance of his favor, as my tender Soul has
said, What is Liberty without God? And, What is more pleasant than a Prison
with my God? Oh! Oh! my Father's Lambs, I can never tell you the riches, the
largeness, the fullness, the vastness, and the everlasting Treasures of his
eternal Love wherewith he has visited my Soul; and therefore my whole heart
must ever remain ready to say, Blessed be the Day, yea, thrice blessed be the
hour wherein I was born for proof and trial in the sharpness and severity of
Bonds; and yet you know not the weight thereof, neither can I tell you a tenth
part thereof: I say, for all these things I must bless the moment for ever,
wherein I was born unto them, because never had I such sweet union, fellowship,
and conversation with my Maker and Husband, as I have had in these most extreme
times of my trials; which I tell you the rather, that it may provoke your souls
unto a perfect willingness and readiness of submission unto the same pleasant
Yoke; for you are the Lord's Cattle, linked with the Chain of his Love, to the
Plough, which shall turn up the whole Earth, and make Wildernesses planted
places, and solitary Woods and Deserts, Vineyards of Red Wine; yea, barren
Hills, Olive Plantations, and parched Mountains, most fruitful Corn fields;
that after your labors, you may eat the fruits of increase, and drink the Wine
of your travels. And therefore, O ye tenderest Doves, lift up your heads, and
rejoice, and be not afraid nor dismayed at any thing without you, but watch, and
fear to hold the Testimony in faithfulness within you, and then shall the
Covenant be certainly fulfilled unto you, even as the Faithful One has sworn
it unto you in faithfulness.

And yet a little hearken unto my Experience, as Counsel, because the Lord has
instructed me from on high, and showed me the works of his Hands in the Deeps,
and made me know the Good Fishes of his Love, from the others that chase to
devour, and the Beasts of the Prey from the Lambs of his Pasture, and the
ravening Fowls from the harmless Birds, and the subtle Serpents from the
innocent simple Worms; for I have been driven in the Deeps with Whales, and
hunted in the Earth by Foxes, Wolves and Lions, and been subtly wept and
lamented for by cruel Crokadiles; yea, Cockatrices have spit venom in my face,
and Serpents have followed hard after me, to find out my footsteps, and Dragons
spued out floods to overwhelm me: Besides, Oh it cannot be told, the works of
the fiery flying Serpent, and his blazing appearances as Torches! Oh the Snares
that he has polished, and Traps that he has beautified with leaves of gold,
which nothing could discover unto me besides Him that searches all hearts; in
all which I had no safety but in the secret clift of the Rock, making fear my
Bread, and trembling my Cup of Wine, and so I bolted my doors with trust, and
double-barred them with confidence, and made my bed of patience, and pillow of
peace, and covered my self with the clothing of Content; which I tell you all
as Counsel, that you may do the same, and abide in the same Pavillion of
safety, and Munitions of the mightiest Rocks; and then shall you find your God
to be Walls of Fire and Walls of Brass about you, speaking unto you, as He
has often spoken unto me in the many hours of my trembling, saying; Fear not,
worm Jacob, for I am thy God; there is no Enchantment shall prevail against
thee, neither shall Weapon formed against thee prosper; yea, He gave me
wonderful Signs when I sought them not, and Voices when I asked not for Answer,
but waited in my simplicity, and made it the care of my soul to watch in his
pure Content; for I burned with zeal for his Glory, and therefore often and
carefully with numberless tears, and a heart melted like Wax, I have prayed and
beseeched his Mercy, rather to cut me off; without giving me the sight of the
light of another day, than that I should sin against his Grace, to make his
Truth a reproach in the mouths of the Thousands which have gaped to swallow me
up as a morsel; which I communicate unto you for all your Encouragements,
assuring you, That the Lord God will never fail you in the Humbleness,
Contriteness, Fear, Trembling and Trust, but will be with you to the utmost,
saving and preserving you, and magnifying his Name in you; To whom be all
Glory, Praise, Honor, and Renown, Amen, Amen, Amen; Even for ever and ever,
Amen.

THE END.

