BEAMS OF Eternal Brightness, OR, BRANCHES OF Everlasting Blessings; Springing
forth of the Stock of Salvation, to be spread over INDIA, and all Nations of
the Earth, To the Uniting all Mankind, as one single and simple Body of
Everlasting Love and Peace, in the Original Glory and Creator of all things.

Written by a Member of Truth, JOHN, Who is called a QUAKER.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Windmil, in Martins Le Grand, 1661.

Beams of Eternal Brightness, or, Branches of Everlasting Blessings, springing
forth, etc.
O All ye Kings, Princes, Rulers, and People of INDIA, and the rest upon the
face of the whole Earth, I can in no better way and manner salute you, than in
this of the Blessing and Counsel of Eternal Life, In which you may come lively
and joyfully to know the true Power which has created all things, and rules
and governs all things according to his own Will and Pleasure; who by Name,
so as to be distinguished (in every man's understanding) from every other
thing, is called The Searcher through all Darkness, or, The glorious Sun of the
Soul, or, The Wonderful Power, or, The Incomprehensible Wisdom, or, The
Immutable Holiness, or, The from Eternity to all Eternity; because these
glorious Qualities are only proper to his infinite wonderful Essence, as
unspeakably more are, which I neither do nor can here mention.

This is the Power, Wisdom, and Glory which I speak of, who in Himself is
infinitely more than all things; by whose Word all things were created in the
beginning, and is a Being invisible to every fleshly thing, of whom diverse
Nations do hold diverse Opinions, and so do make him in their Imaginations like
unto diverse things, and accordingly do worship in diverse manners and ways: but
he being but one who created all things, and not likened unto any thing that
man makes, is only known aright, and worshipped aright in one living, pure, and
holy way. For which cause I hereby greet all the Indians, together with all
Mankind upon the face of the Earth, in the feeling of that Power, Wisdom and
Life of Glory, which is able to reduce them all unto the true knowledge of
himself, to the end that they may all become but of one heart, mind and soul
for ever, worshipping according to the true knowledge and pure understanding of
him through an universal feeling, seeing, and perceiving him arising and
appearing in his Power, Wisdom and Glory in all their inward parts: So that
when all men in all Nations, Countries and Lands shall attain to the true
knowledge of the Life, Power, Wisdom, and Glory of their Maker and Creator in
themselves; then they shall have no need of any other instruction (touching the
knowledge of their Maker) without them; and so knowing their Creator appearing
in themselves, will also know from him, (who so appears) the true and living
way, of his true, living and pure Worship, which he teaches all in the Unity
and Truth of his own Wisdom and Knowledge, the which must certainly put an end
unto all that which is diverse and from the way of his own Life, and pure
Nature.

But because the Nature of man is contrary to the Nature of the Glorious Sun of
the Soul, I hold it necessary to show what the Nature of the one and the other
is, that as they are in contrariety, the worst may be forsaken, and the best
cleaved and adhered unto, and for ever loved and lived in, in the Power, Wisdom
and Glory thereof.

1. The Nature of the Glorious Sun of the Soul, which was before the outward
Sun was, is pure, holy, clean, undefiled and full of all Light and Virtue, even
of all which stands in an Eternal Life; as also in it is the virtue, of
reducing all things unto nothing again, as by it all things of nothing were (in
the beginning) made and created.

2. But the Nature of man is evil, corrupt, unclean, brutish, and full of
darkness and ignorance of the true knowledge of the Power of Eternal Life.

How and where the one and the other is to be rightly understood and known? To
it I am free to answer thus; showing introductionally,

is the sensible living part, that has its being in the body of flesh, or
humane tabernacle, whilst the perceivance of breath is left therein, whereby
man has the sense and feeling of joys and pains, pleasures and sorrows, etc.
To which inward part in all mankind I speak of the Sun of the Soul, testifying,
That the Light thereof in every soul, is of such a purity and cleanness,
shining in the inward parts of the Intelect or secret understanding of man,
that it has no unity nor fellowship with his uncleanness and beastliness;
showing him, when no flesh does speak unto him, that he having a rational soul
put into him, should not be like unto the beasts of the field (which have not
received that faculty) in his loathsome acts of defilement, and that he should
not in other cases be worse than the beasts of the field (which only eat and
drink to their satisfaction, and having so done, when rest is needful, do lie
down in quietness, without inventions of mischief; and which in their mute
state, have not a mind of the vent of Execrations, Curses, Oaths, Blasphemies,
Lying, Cheating, Stealing, Murdering, or the like things and acts of
wickedness) I say, the Light shows, that he should not be worse than the
beasts of the field, in such words and works, or exercises of Drunkenness and
Gluttony. Which Light in all Mankind never consented to any act of filthyness,
beastliness, or wickedness, but in all does stand near the Soul, telling the
Soul the evil of such things; so these two being joined together, (to wit) the
Light of the glorious Sun of the Soul, and the Soul it self to the Light in
true knowledge of any thing, I call Conscience, because Conscience properly and
rightly imports a joint knowledge, testimony, and witness, by two knowing
properties in Mankind of the Good or Evil of all words and works whatsoever are
spoken, done, or wrought by them: Seeing then every man has this Principle of
knowledge in himself, given by the eternal Sun of the Soul, as a measure of
Light into their immortal Souls, hereby they come to know the nature thereof,
according to the measure thereof; and in it discerning the vast multitudes of
Mankind (which are not united to the Light) to be in the beastliness and evils
which the Light of the Sun of the Soul does reprove, judge, and condemn; hereby
they may know in themselves, that the nature of man is contrary to it, being
very sinful and abominable in wickedness and beastliness: So touching the
contrariety, as to the place where it is found, briefly this is the sum in
answer; It Is found in the inward parts, known in the Conscience, and discovered
by the Light, which shows all things in the day of what color and nature
they are.

In order therefore to the true and pure Knowledge of the eternal Sun of the
soul, it is absolutely necessary for all people to understand, That nothing
corruptible can see that Glory and Brightness which is incorruptible, to
discern aright what it is, that they may not be always seeking, and never come
to find, and ever learning, but never able to come to the true Knowledge;
seeking in the backward way, and learning in a Book of Lies. And next to know,
that man's station is in sin and corruption, in absolute contrariety to the
Pure Nature of Incorruption, and consequently has no unity with the Glory of
the Incorruptible One, nor has the true knowledge of Him, and therefore in
worshipping, he worshippeth he knows not what; which if, contrariwise, all were
united in the Life, to the Life and Glory of the Eternal Sun and Power, then
would they all know that Incorruptible One, and accordingly worship in the true
Knowledge of Him, who is the Eternal Brightness, Glory and Power over all
things.

Seeing then that no man knows aright, but he which is redeemed out of
Corruption, and consequently not worshippeth aright, being in Corruption, the
next thing that is needful to be informed of, is, How, and by what means all
men may come to be redeemed out of the state of Corruption, thereby to have a
true knowledge of, and unity in Life with the Incorruptible One, and so to
worship aright? By which assuredly all Nations will come to be of One heart,
mind and soul, seeing the cause of Variations and Divisions may hereby be
perceived to stand in the Life and Nature of Corruption, Sin and Transgression;
which if all come to be redeemed out of, and united to the Life, Power and
Glory of the Incorruptible One, must infallibly be united to each other, being
all in Him, who is but one in Love, Peace, pure Life and Nature.

To which purpose and glorious matter (tending to the everlasting Blessing of
all Nations and Peoples upon the face of the Earth) I (as follows) hold forth
and show that plain and easy path (of which it was prophesied to the Jews that
it should be revealed) in which the wayfaring men, though fools, cannot err;
which leads out of Transgression into a pure life of Incorruption. Of which
perfect happy way I speak to every Conscience of man, to whom this shall come,
that it may witness in themselves to this living and pure Path of the glorious
Sun of the Soul and Eternal Power of Creation, whereby all shall be for ever
left without Excuse in the sight of the Eternal Sun, who hate and refuse the
way, and by the Power of the Eternal Sun shall be judged, condemned and cast
out for ever from the Eternal Life and Glory thereof.

Soul is infused by the Eternal Power who created him (which is more than the
Beasts, or any other creatures have) yet is brutish in his understanding and
knowledge, occasioned through the Law, or rather lawlessness of his Lusts,
which (as I have hinted) are worse than beast-like, daily put in practice, both
by utterance of words, and operation of acts, in his Life and Conversation; so
that although his Creator has provided him a Law, a Way and a Leader, by and
in which he may come to be redeemed out of that sad and miserable state and
condition of his blindness, darkness, and ignorance of soul and mind, in which
he is bound and chained by the power of Evil and Corruption (which I call the
Power of Darkness, inasmuch as that spirit is the original and principal cause)
yet he giving more way unto the Power of Darkness, than yielding unto the other
Power which is Light, has lost the true Way, and erred from the true Guide and
Conducter (which is able to lead him into an unity with his glorious Creator,
who is the Power of Brightness) and entered into the Adulteration, and now lies
wallowing like the Swine in the mire of filth and loathsomness of his own
excrement, yea, rouling himself in the blood and pollution of his unwashed
body, tumbling upon the ground of noisomness and abominable stink, as a
helpless wretch, without a shelter and without a shade, naked and miserable
without a garment or skirt of covering, without the Bread of Hope, or Water of
Faith; beaten of his Foe, without hope of Redemption from his Oppression, and
bruised of his Enemy, without belief of his Restoration unto his first innocent
Freedom; and thus stands bound unto death in the heavy chain of captivity: and
alas, poor miserable blind man! though this is his lost condition, yet he knows
not, nay, nor perceives it not, and so lays not his misery to heart, which is
his double fetters of Iron; so though he has a feigned hope and imagined faith
in himself, yet being in the Adulteration from the Life of his Creator; as his
life is sinful, so his faith and hope in that corrupt nature is utterly
deceivable, which can never unite his soul again to his Creator, but
fraudulently perish it everlastingly in the darkness under which he is held
through sin and corruption. And though thus has been the state of man almost
from the Creation in the beginning, nevertheless it has pleased the Eternal
Wisdom now in these latter days (as it was prophesied of to the Jews) to open
a path, wherein man may return again unto Himself in that pure and perfect
shape and likeness in which he was created by his Glorious Power: In order to
which Return through the living Way, and leading by the true Leader, I hold it
in estimation of the Eternal Wisdom and Counsel, first, to show all the
Indians, That Man in the beginning was created holy and pure, and not in sin
and corruption; which in this manner they may all plainly understand, viz. That
whereas the Eternal Power and glorious Sun of the Soul is in Himself pure and
incorruptible in Life and Nature, could not therefore create a thing corrupted
simply so, (that is to say) made in Corruption in his hand, without becoming
corrupt himself thereby; which is impossible that ever that should be, Because,
as his Essence is Eternal from all Eternity, so his Nature is immutably and
unchangeably pure. And again, Because He being the Eternal Wisdom, who made the
Sun in the Firmament of the Heavens a glorious brightness, and the Moon and
Stars glorious Lights in their places, which are visible Creatures to the
corruptible eye of Man, it would not stand with his Wisdom, as unto the
retaining of his Glory in Himself, to beget an invisible soul in an unclean,
filthy and polluted state, which was the greatest of all Glories which were
ever created: Wherefore, I say, for these three Causes, of his Purity,
Immutability, and Wisdom, ye may perceive that Man was created a pure Soul in
the beginning, by His pure Power, in His pure Glory, through His pure Wisdom,
of which the Jews have the Record, written from the beginning in the Hebrew
Tongue, showing at large Man's Creation in Innocence, the Law that was given
him in that state, and likewise how he erred from the Law, and thereby became a
subject of the Power of Darkness, droven from the Eternal Glory into the Curse,
whereby the whole Creation became a Curse unto him, which at first also were
blessed (of the Pure Eternal Brightness) unto Him; for, says the Record, When
He had made all things (speaking of the Eternal Power) He saw that they were
good, and blessed them: whence you may all understand, as Man remains in the
state of Corruption, all the Creation (which he accounts his Good, Blessing and
Happiness) are assuredly unto him as his Curse, his Evil, and Bond of his Woe
and Misery: In knowledge of which, you may all come to savor and relish the
blessedness of my Salvation of you all, now forwarding you (in all willingness
of the Spirit of Truth) to the Way, and the Conducter (which is able to guide
and lead you all in the same true Way, out of Sin, and save and redeem you from
Corruption, which was the cause of the Curse) into the Holiness, Purity and
Incorruption, that all your Kings, Princes, Rulers, People, Cattle and all
created things, may become everywhere blessed, they unto you, and you unto
them, that the Glory may be with, and in all, as it was in the beginning, even
henceforth, and for ever, and for evermore, Amen,

Illustration of the way of Redemption from Sin and Curse that it brought, I
discover the first step of Order, and Principle to the True Worship (which is)
to bow down; To bow down in Heart, Mind and Soul to that Light of the glorious
eternal Sun, which is given into your Souls for a Law, a Guide, and a Leader.
Turn all your minds unto the Light in your Consciences, which discovers in
all your secret thoughts the things that are evil, sinful and beastly, and not
of the nature of the Holy and Glorious One; and whenever you find in your
secret thoughts the power of Corruption and Darkness, tempting to draw you
resignedly and resolvedly into verbal or actual Sin and Transgression, which is
contrary to the Law and way of the holy and incorruptible measure of the Light
of your Immortal Souls; Take ye that Light for the guide of your minds, and in
so doing, you will come to feel a War of the two Powers in you; that as the
Power of Corruption and Darkness (which is of the flesh fleshly) does tempt
you, showing you the Delights, Profits and Pleasures of that Evil unto which it
tempts you; the Power of the Light (which is of the Spirit spiritually) will
stand up against it, representing unto you the Evil of the thing, the
Cursedness of the thing, and the end of the Evil, which causes a Separation
from the true Life of Glory and Salvation; So here, standing in the Power of
the true Guide, it wins the Soul, and begets it into a greater Love and
Affection with the Incorruptible Life and Glory, than with the Abomination and
Evil, which causes Everlasting Darkness, Ignorance and Separation from the
Glory which endures to all Eternity: Thus Man enclining himself, drawing his
mind more and more from out of all that which cursed is, into the Light and
Power of Salvation within him, comes to be delivered from all Evil: For to this
every man's Conscience shall affirmatively answer me, That in the Light of the
Soul (that comes from the Glorious Eternal Sun) never was any Sin or Evil
committed; but out of it, and contrary to it, every act of Transgression has
been done and wrought by all men; wherefore, if all men take that for the true
Way (which is not of the nature of Darkness) and the same for the true Guide
and Conducter (which is not of the nature of Sin, but in its nature contrary to
all Sin) giving up their Souls always to be led in it, and guided by it; this
must needs lead all from and out of all things which are sinful and
corruptible, into its proper Life and Nature, by its virtuous Power operating
in the inward parts; for except it could save and deliver from all Sin, then it
could not appear to be a Virtue of the Eternal Creator, or else, that the Power
of Darkness has gotten such a Supremacy, that it is become greater than the
Power of Light, that created all things; which can never be that it should so
come to pass, because the Power of Light is Eternal, even from Eternity to
Eternity; but the Power of Darkness came in in time, and therefore of necessity
must also have an end in time, and so appears to be infinitely the lesser power:
and seeing its end must come, I hereby direct all Souls unto the Way and Power
by which it is to be brought to an end, to know the End thereof within
themselves, even in every man's particular Soul: And the Power that is to end
it, must be a Power that is in nature opposite unto it, else it must always be
strengthened, and never come to be ended: Now the Power that is opposite in
Nature, Virtue, and Operation unto Darkness, is the Light, which (as aforesaid)
convinces in the inward parts of all Evil; yet a little to illustrate its
deliverance of the Soul from all Evil, in this lowly and uncovered manner I
show, That the Light in the Conscience convinces of the crime of cursing
words; the which being loved, owned, and delighted in the Convincement,
delivers from the Evil that it convinces of, through begetting a shamefulness
and hatred in the Soul against the Crime, and a pure love unto the virtue of
the Thing that is found in nature, quality, and property, in opposition to the
Crime from which the Soul is delivered; and here in the sense of this
Deliverance, in measure, from Sin, arises a little hope of Redemption, which
places a grain, or seed, of Trust and Confidence in the ground of this
Deliverance from one Sin, which though the Faith in that state be but like a
grain of Mustard Seed, yet mark the end of that Faith, for in a pure Belief,
through the experience that the Soul has found in the Light, strengthens it
self in an holy Love and Enclination to follow the pure Motions of it in all
things, in which Faith (working by Love) it comes to find the perfect Effect;
that as the Light was obeyed in the least appearance, which accordingly
delivered from the least Sin, the same being obeyed, loved and followed in
every appearance (whereas it is pure, perfect, powerful, and of the nature of
the Immutable Creature) cannot alter from its Nature, Property and Virtue of
saving and delivering from all Sin; So then this is the End of that grain of
Faith, which is sown in the Light, it removes from the Oppressed Soul the Rocks
and Mountains of Sin and Corruption, under which it is pressed down, and breaks
the Chains of Transgression wherein it is bound in captivity, and sets free in
the liberty from Sin, and unites the Soul to the Original Glory from whence it
is descended: Wherefore this appears to be the true and undeceivable Hope in
which the Soul witnesses its Purification, and the true Faith which gives
Victory over Sin, which is the Blessed State; but all other Faith and Hope in
the Life of Corruption, under the Power of Darkness, is that which deceivably
perishes the Soul, and is the Cursed State.

Yet, besides this Declaration of the Power (which unto every Rational
Intellect may appear plain, clear, and manifest) doubtless, thousands (who of a
truth this day do live in the Light, and are directly led and guided by it)
together with this Witness, can experimentally testify at large, that they in
substance, Truth and very deed, have found, and constantly do find it
redeeming, delivering, and saving them from all verbal and actual Sin, and from
all resignations of mind unto Sin, in which formerly they were held under a
woeful Captivity by the predominating Power of Darkness; these therefore are
they to whom the true and living Sun of the Soul is truly and rightly known;
who answerably to the true and living knowledge do worship in the true and
living Way: and these are all of one mind and soul, living jointly and
unanimously in one individual Spirit of Brightness, which created all Souls,
and in this Life are at peace together for ever; So here are no Quarrellings
nor Wranglings, Stirs, Brauls, Fightings, suing nor persecuting one another for
the visible created things, which in the Worlds nature are corruptible and
cursed; neither can such a thing be among them, because the free Law that is in
them, leads to the nourishing and cherishing each other, as flesh of the same
flesh, and bone of the same bone, being all Members but of one incorruptible
body; And ye know, that no man hates his own flesh, but nourishes and
cherishes it: much more (therefore) they, though many, yet being molded from
the corruptible into the incorruptible Spirit of Light and Glory, are become
but one, living in the Unity, which is everlasting, as Members meetly composed
to show forth the Glory of the Eternal Sun of the Soul, in the endless Life of
Love, Concord, and Peace.

Thus having showed the Way or Redemption from Sin, and sanctifying the Soul
unto its Creator, which leads unto the true Knowledge in a pure Union with its
Creator: I would next show the true and living Worship, according to the true
Knowledge which I have received from him in the true Way.

The first step of which, (as I have before said) is, To bow down, and incline
the Mind unto the Light, which inwardly enlighteneth the Soul; and the next
step after bowing down the Mind unto it, is, To wait in it, to know the Mind
made subject in all Obedience unto it, whereby the perfect work of
Sanctification may be thoroughly wrought in you, that ye may be all made meet
Vessels, Tabernacles and Temples, to receive the Virtue into, which make the
Sacrifice, Service and Worship accepted of the Holy Eternal Power, before whom
you draw near to offer; for except the Sacrificers and Worshipers be of the
nature of the Holy Power to whom they sacrifice, that their Worships may be
performed in the same, both the Adorations, and the Adorers, are but a stink in
the pure sense of the holy Life of the Eternal Power and Sun of the Soul; and
this you may all easily know: for if you put Crystal Water into a stinking
noysom unprepared Vessel, the Water immediately corrupts, and partaketh of
the stink of the Vessel, and being poured forth, is unfit then to be put into
another clean Vessel, lest that Water (that was first sweet in its own simple
nature) should defile the other Vessel thereby; and the like is, if Excremental
Water should be first put into a clean Vessel, etc. And since it is so, much
less then can Corrupt Sacrifices or Sacrificers, have any Acceptance with the
Holy One; for in such a thing he should be no more Holy, but as one that is
joined in unity with the Defiled and Unclean; which thing can never be, because
(as I have showed) of his Eternity and Immutability: But ye, by waiting in the
Light, in all pure and living Obedience, will come (as pre-cited) unto the true
purification and Renovation of the whole Mind and Soul, which bears the fleshly
Tabernacle, or Temple, about it.

Again, Waiting in the Light, with your Minds turned in all singlness into it
in your inward parts, being patient in that state and condition of Waiting, and
standing a while in holy Content in that step of the true Worship of the
Eternal Power, (who spoke to the Hebrews, saying, To obey is better than
Sacrifice) you will at length, in His Glorious good Pleasure, come to feel the
Rising of His Glorious Power in you; which Appearance I call, The Dawning of
the Everlasting Day; for it is to be understood, that all the time of the
Darkness, is the time of the Night, of which Sin and Corruption are the Clouds
which bar and bolt men from the Glory of the shining Day; yet in that state of
the night there is a secret power set to rule, which dispensation is called the
Light of the Moon, that as the visible Moon was created to rule the Night in
the visible appearance; even so the Invisible Light, was put into the Invisible
Soul, to rule in the time of darkness and ignorance, by which power (though the
whole world stands in a Chaos of Confusions, and because of the darkness they
know it not, yet) the World is preserved, so as that every man thirsts not
after the blood of his neighbor, which if there were not an invisible and
secret Power of the Light ruling in the darkness of the Night, the whole Earth
would outwardly become as an Ocean of Violation, and her face be overwhelmed
with Blood, yea, what might I say? Murders would reduce all men to the last
man; and what would he do? even Murder himself also under despairation of the
former works of his hands. But all men now coming to grow in mind and soul out
of the Night, into the glorious Light of the Sun of the Soul, which opens the
Everlasting Day, through waiting in it will come to feel the rising of the
Power unto a greater beauty and splendour, whereby they will come to see the
Light of the Moon to become as the Light of the Sun which is arisen in the open
day, and finding the operation of it increasing in the inward parts, breaking
them forth either into brokenness and contriteness of heart, or the spiritual
praise of the Eternal power, or forcing them to pour forth Supplications and
Prayers unto Him, or in his dread to sound the Trumpet of his Voice, declaring
his Jubilee and acceptable year, which is at hand; this I still call the rising
of the Eternal Sun in his glory and brightness in them, and they in this
performing the duty required of them, the which they having fulfilled, quieting
themselves as it falls in a sphere or degree lower; here unto them the Promise
is fulfilled (which was prophesied of to the Jews, saying) from the rising of
the Sun, to the going down of the same, Incence and Sacrifice shall be offered
in the Temple of the Eternal Power.

Moreover, As all men abide in the same Power of the Rising of the External
Sun, through a careful and constant watch of the mind in it, they will come to
see it arise in such a glory, that as first the Light of the Moon that ruled
the night, became as the Light of the Sun which rules the day; So the Light of
the day that is now spring from on high, shall be as the Light of seven days,
abiding as an Everlasting Glory of Brightness, even for ever and ever; and then
will their Maker make his Tabernacle among them, and they shall be his Temple
and Habitation, and he will be their Dwelling, Rest, Peace, Joy, Life and Glory
eternally, Amen.

matter, nor the manner, nay, nor the times plainly in which man shall worship
in Prayers, etc.

matter of Prayer, It is to be understood, that Prayer is a Petition or Desire
poured forth for something that is needful, either to a man's own particular
state and condition, or else, that is necessary for other men. Now seeing the
whole Creation stands in the alone disposal of the glorious Wisdom of the
Cretor of all things, he therefore knows best what is needful unto every man's
estate, which no man of himself does know, neither can know what is necessary
for himself, or any other Soul, but by the pure and immediate openings of the
Light in the Soul, which purely does proceed from the eternal glorious Wisdom;
therefore I teach no man words, but labor to lead all men to the understanding
of the eternal Wisdom and Power within them, in this Light to wait, that in his
Life they may feel the Risings of the Power of his Wisdom, which then may give
utterance of words unto a man, that were never known before by a man, even such
words as shall be suitable to the state of want either of himself or others,
and sometime also for the preservation of all souls in the blessed state: all
which (in the good time of the Eternal Wisdom) shall be answered, who cannot
deny himself, nor that which is of his own Nature, and performed in his own
Life and Power: So then this in brief, no man of himself, knows what to Pray
for as he ought, but the Spirit of Light of the Eternal-Wisdom helps the
sanctified man's infirmities (that is to say) his weakness of knowledge, and
gives unto him either sighs, groans, thoughts, or words, which answers his
Eternal Will in the Power of Wisdom, which is the true matter of Prayer,
whereby every man's Formality and Willworships comes to be abolished; wherein
also much may be understood, as to the manner and time, seeing it leads out of
prefixed words and times, that likewise stand in the adulterated will, wholly
into the will and time of the Eternal Wisdom, in which still, as a motion, is
inwardly found the matter was given, and so his purpose comes to be revealed
and known.

In this order of Worship all People may be thoroughly satisfied, That that which
a man receives in the Eternal Power, and immediately from the Eternal Wisdom,
into a sanctified Vessel, is a Matter and Worship at a real certainty and
assurance, and in no ways dubious, and therefore may well be believingly
received, and perfectly owned by a man, whilst all other sort of Worship (if
the eyes of men were but a little open to see it) must needs be doubted,
because it is of that which a man knows not what, nay nor can say that his
method, matter, time, nay, nor yet his own person or soul has any acceptance
of the unknown thing that he does worship in his vain imaginations.

Yet it is in me to instance another uncovered Case, that in its nakedness
every man may discern between the true and the false Worship, and accordingly
choose the better, if their hearts can take an affection to the better.

All People upon the face of the Earth may take one set form of words, manner
and time, and in that custom pray all days of their lies, and yet live and dye
in enmity one to another, as it is this day manifest among many Sects that have
set-forms of words, manner and times appointed for Worship, yet are of these
minds; some of them flattering others of their Brethren and Fellow-worshippers
to their faces, whilst they hate them in their hearts, and revile them behind
their backs; And others of them there are, that love one another to day, for
the sake of the corruptible things, and the same persons on the morrow seen
fighting one against another, to gain the most of the corruptible things, or a
seat of presumption one above another, and so rest in envy and malice one
toward another, even unto death; this is the spirit of the power of darkness,
and all the Prayers and Worships in it stand in the adulteration and separation
from the Life and Power of the Eternal, Immutable, Love, and therefore is
absolutely manifest to be the Cursed state.

But all People drawing to worship in the Spirit of the Power of Light, which
is the Eternal virtue of Love and Unity, here must certainly be found unanimous
prayers with joint hearts; or rather (as I have formerly showed) with one heart
and soul, because the one Spirit and power of Love, makes all but of one soul;
so to every Prayer and Supplication in this Spirit, all souls in the same
Spirit say, Amen in Truth; and when they are (according to every man's occasion)
separated and departed in body one from another, yet still they are together as
one individual body in the individual Spirit of eternal love and unity; and
thus they live in the body to the end, and thence for ever in the same Spirit
rest everlastingly out of the body without end: These therefore I call the true
Worshippers in the true worship, and is the Blessed State: Because, as the
first stands in the Adulteration and Degeneration from the true likeness of the
holy Creator, and therefore impossible that that state can have acceptance of
him; so this latter mentioned, being in the true likeness, and therein finding
the true Unity with the Power of Brightness in which the Worship is performed,
and therefore must infallibly have acceptance of him. From this Testimony
(which stands not only in the Letter or Declaration, but in the power of an
Endless Life and Unity) it appears without controversy, that this, and only
this latter of the Spirit of Love and Unity, is the Blessed State.

A few things I have still to show unto the INDIANS, even such of them who have
not yet known the eternal glorious Wisdom and Power of Creation, who of himself
being without beginning of days, and end of time, made, composed, and created
all things in the beginning of time, that as they come to the true knowledge of
him, may be turned from trusting in, or worshipping of any created Glory, and
only believe and trust in him, and come to worship him who is the Creator of
every Soul on Earth, as likewise every visible Glory that is placed in the
Firmament of the Heavens. To all therefore that believe that the visible Sun in
the Firmament (which rules the visible day) is the Supreme Power by which all
things are ruled and governed, and accordingly do worship it, and the Moon that
rules the external time of the night: I have to give you to understand, that
in the whole Creation of Fishes and Worms, which are in the Waters under the
Earth, together with the Worms that are in the Earth, the Plants, Trees and
other living things that are upon the face thereof, with every Glory of the
Heavens, (viz.) the Sun Moon, Stars, Clouds of Rain, Hail and Snow, Dews,
Winds, Rainbow, Lightnings and Thunders, and whatsoever else may be sensed by
the external Seeing, Hearing, Feeling, Tasting or Smelling of the body of man;
I say, in all these the Eternul, most holy Wisdom, and glorious Sun of the Soul
is hid and veiled from man in his state of Sin and Corruption, agreeable to
what I have signified touching the contrariety between Corruption and
Incorruption, Light and Darkness, Purity and Beastliness; the which I pass by
for the present, drawing to the discovery of a few things in the Light of the
Day, wherein it may be understood, That the visible Sun in the Firmament, is
not the Supreme Power, but that it is a Created Glory by the glorious Sun of
the Soul, which is the Eternal, Invisible, and Supreme Power. First, from the
nature of the visible Sun, as it is a simple creature, which is hot, fiery,
scorching, and burning; so that if there were not a Supreme Power above it,
ruling and governing it in a most glorious Power of Wisdom, by sending Rain in
due season, (which as a distinct and simple creature, is contrary to the nature
of the Sun, being cold and moist) the whole Earth would become dried up, and
utterly unfruitful, by which means every thing upon the face thereof must of
necessity die and perish: Wherefore in the Light of thee Sun of the Soul you
will come to know, that the visible Sun in the Firmament was made and created
to serve man, and consequently, not for man to how down and worship it: To
serve Man thus, In one respect, as a light to the sight of Man's fleshly or
bodily Eye, whereby he might travel, work and labor in the time of the day for
the sustenance of his outward being, as the Eternal Power in his Wisdom has
appointed: And in another respect, tending also to Man's subsistence, the
Eternal Wisdom has created it to serve Man, yielding unto the Earth of the
strength of its heat after the cold times and rain, drawing up from the Earth
visible and bodily shapes of Trees, Herbs, Corn, and all the good Increase that
the Earth in due season does yield.

Again, It is to be understood, that the visible Sun has its Decree and
Appointment from a Power above it, as it is manifest in its Rising and Falling
in sundry Degrees, in Winter and Summer, and also by its constant course, in
twenty four hours compassing the Earth, as a Circle; and so it is evident, that
it is not its own Ruler and Governor, because it is limited to a course in
all Seasons of its Appointment, and therefore cannot be the Creator of any
thing; but must of necessity be as the other Creatures, a Created thing;
because if one thing visible be created by a Power, certainly all things
visible must be created by the same Power, and consequently the visible Sun and
Moon also; and that Man, Beasts, Worms and Fowls were created by a Wisdom and
Power, is very plain, appearing by their several kinds and services; and also
being dead and rotten, their very dust shows of what they were made in the
beginning; for whilst their End is seen to be dust, their Beginning or Creation
must needs be understood to be of Dust also: and the same Power that created
the Earth, and all that in it is, also created the Seas, and all that in them
is, which is an Element contrary to the nature of the visible Sun, where the
visible Sun has no power of burning, nor yet of making Food in the Deeps to
grow at the bottoms thereof, to feed the Fishes that are therein: But the same
Eternal Power and Wisdom which fills all places, provideth a sustenance as
well for the Fishes in the Deeps, and all the Worms of his Workmanship, in
their Bottoms, as He does for Man, Beast, Fowls and Creeping-things that live
upon the face of the Earth, unto which the visible Sun, Moon and Stars, with
the Clouds of Rain, Dews and Winds are servants, ordained and appointed by the
Eternal and infinitely wise Creator of all things visible and invisible. So then
thus it may be clearly apprehended touching the Work of Creation, That none
other can possibly be the Creator of all things, besides a Power and Eternal
Essence which has something of a Being in all things in the Tranquillity,
Love, and Peace of His own Life in Himself, by, and in which all things are
upheld and preserved in their due and appointed courses; for that which Created
all things, must absolutely be the Life and Preservation of all things by his
Continual Presence; and undenyably also the death of all things, through the
withdrawing of his Essence and Presence; because, as the Creator is but one,
and his Life but one, doubtless therefore it is but his Life alone that does or
can give Life, his Presence that gives Being, and preserves Life; and the
withdrawing thereof, the fall of all flesh unto Death. Whereby it appears
that his Glorious Wisdom has hid and concealed Himself from all the children
and seed of Corruption, in the Decree of the Death of Man's Body by Sickness,
Poisoning, Drowning, Burning, Strangling, Wounding, Starving, etc. for He
having created all things, could make Man to live Under Waters, in Fires, not
feeling Wounds, without Food, etc. but his Glorious Power and Wisdom will not
be tempted, because He will be reverenced and greatly feared in all things, and
in Fear, worshipped and served as the Creator of all things. Now, as for the
visible Sun, being naturally contrary to the Element of the Rivers and Seas,
cannot possibly dwell with the Fishes that are in their Waters, so as to give
them a constanr subsistence of Life, the which the meanest capacity may easily
perceive, being a fiery Element; for, if a burning Coal of Fire be cast into
Water, it becomes quenched by the Water; or, if a Drop of Water be cast into a
great Flame of Fire, it consumes to naught in a moment: therefore it is not the
visible Sun that gives the Fishes their being in the Seas, nor yet Man his life
upon the Earth, but the visible Sun (as aforesaid, together with the Fishes and
all other Creatures) was made a servant unto Man, unto whom all things unto
this day are so continued, that he having the service of all things visible,
yea, of the Glory of the Winds, which is an invisible Creature, attending him
with sustentation, according to the Providence of the Glorious Eternal Wisdom,
should with his whole soul seek and feel after his Creator, to attain unto the
true knowledge of Him, therein to worship Him with all Thanksgiving, Glory,
Honor, Obedience and Praise, who as he made every thing to serve his Body
(into which his Glorious Wisdom infused a perfect and upright Soul, which was
the greatest of all Glories that in the beginning were created, in how much it
had a true resemblance in invisible manner of the Invisible Power and Glory
that created it, of which none other creature had the like) could not expect
less from Man, than that he should worship and serve his Eternal Goodness,
with every Faculty of that Soul which He put into him. But yet I draw nearer to
the most certain and true Witness in every Conscience of Mankind, to
remonstrate (a little) the Glory of the most Glorious Sun of the Soul, showing
how it is a Glory in the most Glorious Part, where the external and visible Sun
reaches not to enlighten nor shine about; That so, in a little measure,
discerning the Excellency of the One, in Glory exceeding the Other, you may
come to know aright the True, Living, Eternal, Wise and Supreme Power, which
rules and reigns over all things. In proceed whereof, it is to be
apprehended, That the Soul and Mind of Man is the most noble part of Man, in as
much as every Member of the Body is acted as a continual Servant in Obedience
to the Motions of the Soul and Mind of Man; and also, because the Soul is the
Immortal Part, being not formed of a dead substance, as the Body was of the
Earth, which returns to Earth, but of an inspiring Breath of Life, that for
ever abides in a quick and feeling state; the which Soul being taken out of the
Body, leaves it (as aforesaid) to a Conversion unto its first Mould.

Wherefore, seeing the visible Sun only enlightens the Eye of flesh, which is
the servile part, and reaches no further to shine about a Man, than without a
Man, from which a Garment, Shelter, or House, is able to shade, Cannot be the
Supreme Power and Glory; But the Eternal Sun of the Soul shines into the Soul,
and enlightens the Inward Parts, and searches the Heart, and tries every
secret Thought, and is secret unto all things, as having perfect knowledge of
all things, from which nothing can be hid: For let a Man ascend to the Skies,
it will reach him, and search his dark heart there; or, if he go down into the
Deeps, it will follow him and be with him there; and when the visible Sun is
set, and gone down under the Horizon, even at Midnight, the Light of the Soul
can rip up every word and work (in the inward secret thoughts) of Sin and Evil,
done and committed by a Man, and call the Soul to witness with it, which brings
a Judgment and Condemnation in the Conscience, that smites a Man with Fear and
Trembling within himself; which the visible Sun in the Firmament cannot do: for
a Man may commit Beastliness and Murder whilst the visible Sun shines on him;
which he cannot do in Countenance, nay, nor without Condemnation of the Light
of the Sun of the Soul; and therefore the visible Sun must needs appear to be
infinitely short of the Glory of the Invisible Light that created all things.

Again, If the visible Sun had created the invisible Soul of Man, then must it
also search and save it, and so be the greater Power, and of a Nature doing all
things, which all may know that it is not so; for, in its proper nature, as a
single Creature, it does but serve in the things (aforementioned) not blowing
any Wind, nor raining any Water, nor can it so much as drive back one Cloud of
all that the VVind blows over it, and so shakes not the Trees, nor troubles
the Seas, which the storms of Wind do; all which are created, ruled and
governed by the Eternal Power and Sun of the Soul, of whom I speak but as a
Child and Suckling, He being in his Power, Wisdom and Glory Infinite and
Incomprehensible; Yet in His Light I show, that although the Soul of Man is so
inferior to Him, that the Souls of all Men in the Earth are comprehended of
Him, as a drop of Water in the Sea, and as a Sand in the bottom thereof, (which
every Man may feel within himself, in his own particular Soul) yet the low and
poor Soul of Man reaches to the height, yea, and far above the height of the
prefixed Course and Circle of the visible Sun's appointed daily Race; So then
the visible Sun (as I have said) reaching not within a man to search his Soul;
nay, nor (as it is placed in the Firmament) neither by Ray nor light of Ray
thereof can enter so much as into diverse Artificial places, Caves or holes of
Darkness made in the Earth, through the Invention of the Soul of Man, where the
more servile part (to wit) the fleshly body of Man can enter; being therefore
in its glory so far (yea, and far more than I stand to mention) below the poor
Soul that it is infused by a Power into the body of Man; Surely infinitely much
more must it needs appear to be below the Glory of the Eternal Sun of the Soul
and Power of the Creation, by which the Soul was first made in His own likeness
of Holiness and Innocence, and comes again to be renewed into the same Image
and Similitude, to live in the invisible Glory of his most Glorious Life, in
the perfect Inheritance, Fruition and Possession of his unspeakable Joys and
Pleasures for ever and evermore.

Now (to the Purpose of the Universal and Everlasting Unity) I am opened to
speak of Three Properties of the Eternal Brightness, That as all Men come to
the Renovation into the first Similitude of Innocence and Union with their
Maker in that Glory, (as the way is plainly and easily held forth unto all,
wherein they may so come to unite in their Maker as one sanctified Body for
ever) may see, and sit down in the Joy of their happy Benefit therein.

1. One Property of the Nature of the Holy One, is, Peace, perfect Peace,
without ever having disquiet in himself. All Souls therefore uniting to the
principle of his Brightness in them, and dwelling in it as He abides and
rests in Himself, will come to see themselves swallowed up (as in a
bottomless and endless Ocean) in the same property of his Nature, (viz.) in
Everlasting Peace of the Soul, felt and enjoyed inwardly, which will wrap up
all Souls in such a height above disquiet, or any thing of that Nature that is
adulterated from the Holy Similitude, that all will choose that their Earthly
Members may dye, (that their Souls may for ever possess the Peace) rather than
to live in the body of flesh, to break the Peace of their particular Souls, or
the Peace of any of the Souls of the Spiritual Body of Peace, to whom (in the
Eternal Peace) they are united, which is the immeasurable state of Blessing,
passing all Understanding.

2. Another Property of the Nature of the Holy One is Love, perfect Love
without Hypocrisy or Envy in Himself. All therefore uniting unto the Power of
Restoration unto the Glorious Likeness, will come to see the Eternal Love
feeding, and saving his Enemies; and the Restored being of the same Similitude
of their Maker, must in that respect do as their Creator does, love and feed
Enemies; for they cannot do otherwise, being of the Bowels of their Maker: And
whilst this Spirit loves Enemies, much more must love the united in the Love
unto it: if it cannot hate not envy Enemies, much less the united Friends: But
all in this Spirit are full partakers of the unspeakable Bowels of Eternal Love
to each other, which is the immeasurable state of Blessing, passing all
Understanding.

3. Another Property of the Nature of the Holy One, is Mercy, perfect Mercy
without passion of Cruelty in Himself. All therefore joining to the Power of
the New Creation, will come to see the Power of Mercy, which is able to rent
all Hearts perceiving it; for whilst Man has turned in Cruelty (even unto
murder of the sighing and groaning measure of the Light in himself) against his
Creator, (who first gave the measure in the bounty of his Everlasting Love,
that Man by it should be led to be like Him [the Giver of it] in holy merciful
bowels) Yet, as in Mercy upon Mercy, has now lastly provided Him a Voice to
call unto it, as a crying Bloodshed upon the Earth, and also to awaken his
Bloody Soul that shed it, drawing his Soul near unto it, to reconcile himself
with the Soul in and by it, though the Soul has treacherously dealt with him
and murtherously fought in Rebellion against him. This shows Mercy to Enemies,
Pity to Rebels, Compassion to Bloody Traitors; wherefore, as all come to Unite
unto the Power of Mercy, to be led into the true Image, and accordingly in
Union with the Eternal Fountain of Mercy, not one will be able in it to do a
thing contrary to the nature of it. But the whole World comes to be as one
entire glorious Body of Mercy, Pity and Compassion, whereby no Distress,
Languishing, Want or Misery will be found upon the face of the Earth, which is
the immeasurable state of Blessing, passing all Understanding.

Happily some may say, That it is evident, that Peace, Love and Mercy is the
immeasurable state of Blessing, passing all understanding; and therefore
Discord, Envy and Cruelty, being the three quallities in contrariety, must be
the woeful estate of the Curse; yet may desire more largely to know, How the
Curse came, through an opening of the Original Cause and Universal Chain of
Discord, Envy and Cruelty, which is the Cursed State?

One Original Good (as I have plainly manifested) who created all things, and
put into his creature, Man, that living part that sensibly thinks, which is
called the Soul and Mind, the which he created in an infinite degree below his
immutable holy Essence (who can never change from his pure Nature to think in
Himself a thought of Evil, yet he knows the thoughts of Evil in every Man's
Heart) For though He made it in his likeness, pure, clean, holy, innocent and
wise, yet made it in none other state, than that he ought to know, that it had
a Creator and Maker, and, by whose Power, that made it, could only be kept and
preserved in the similitude of Him that created it; for being put into a body
of flesh, he gave it a sense of Feeling there, as likewise in it a sense of the
rest of the Creation, as Beasts, Fishes, Fowls, etc. to whom this was the
substance of the first Comandment given him in his state of Innocence, That he
should not go in his Mind (out from the Power that created him a living Soul)
into the flesh for knowledge or pleasure, for thereby he should adulterate his
Soul with the flesh, and so both the Soul and the flesh become a Corruption and
Curse of Death; and in so doing he should go from the Likeness of his Creator,
who cannot go out of Himself into any creature for knowledge or pleasure; But
Man's Soul entering into consultation with an aspiring Concupiscence in the
feeling of his own flesh, yielded to know, and gave himself thereinto, and so
became as a wedded spouse unto Corruption; in that day was his first Evil, and
the Birth of the first Devil; whereby it may be understood that the Eternal
Wisdom never derogated from his Glory of Holiness in the Creation, so as that
any man may say, he created a Devil immediately in his hand, which could never
be (as I have formerly showed more largely) by his Eternal Holiness,
Immutablity and Wisdom, but creating all things in themselves mutable, even
Man's innocent Soul also in it self mutable as well as any other of the
Creatures, and reserving Immutability only in himself, that Man might know Him
as his Maker, and so live only in Him, as the Immutable One, in his Holiness,
Wisdom, Life, Glory and Joy; but he letting forth his Mind out of the Immutable
Power of Wisdom and Preservation, became (as aforesaid) an Evil-doer, and then
his Thoughts were not like unto the Thoughts of his Maker, nor his Knowledge,
nor Nature, like unto that in which he was created, but all his Faculties
alienated, degenerated and separated in the Adulteration, from the Likeness,
Life and immutable Power and Wisdom of his Creator; so that being the first
actual Evil, must needs be the birth of the first Devil, seeing the Devil is
that Mind that does evil in every man; and therefore nothing could be called an
Evil-doer, until an Evil was first done and committed; which I speak, to the
end of stopping and putting an end to all blasphemous suppositions and
imaginations, and of sanctifying the Name of the Holy One (in the eyes of all
Nations) whilst I speak of Him in the Glorious Power of His Wisdom in the Work
of his Creation. Thus then as follows in Answer.

Man's Adulteration from the virtue of the Life of his Maker, alienated the
Faculties of his Soul, and brought upon it horrid Darkness and Confusion, which
spread over him, as an extreme and mighty Power, until which there was no
Enmity, Envy, Discord nor Cruelty known in the Earth, but man was at Peace and
Unity in his Innocence with the Holy One; Therefore the Original Cause of
Discord, Envy and Cruelty, was Transgression, and the Chain thereof to this day
among Men is the Power of Darkness.

For the sake therefore of your Redemption, I am again pressed in Spirit, to
remind all with the Power that breaks the cursed Chain of Darkness, which is
the Light, that is able to do it, (as all draw their minds into it, and dwell
in it in their inward parts) and restore again into that state which was before
Transgression was, in the perfect Freedom and Liberty from Envy, Enmity,
Discord and Cruelty, in the Glory and Brightness of Innocence, where the Wisdom
comes to be received which keeps and preserves the Peace, Love and Mercy in the
Everlasting Power and Virtue of Life: and here the Earth that once was the
Kingdom, becomes the Footstool, and Heaven becomes the inherited Kingdom for
ever, which cloatheth the Soul with a Garment ten thousand times ten thousand
fold brighter than is the Glory of the visible Sun; for the Raiment is the
perfect Glory of the Eternal Splendour, which wraps it up as with the swaddling
of the Rainbow of Joys, which is the Eternal Fruit and Benefit of the
Blessedness of its Change, from the nature of Discord, Enmity and Cruelty to
the Spirit of Peace, Love, Unity and Mercy; from Corruption to Incorruption;
from Folly to Wisdom; from Darkness to Light; from Condemnation to
Justification; from Death to Life.

Yet furthermore, for the opening of the Counsel of the Mystery of Salvation; O
all ye Kings, Princes, Rulers, and People everywhere throughout the Earth,
know ye in your selves the Light of the Eternal Sun of Glory to be the bathing
and washing Fountain that is able to make the Soul in every Thought even as
white as Snow; and feel it in your selves as the Refiners Fire, which is able
to purge you until you be made as pure as the Gold that is seven times tried;
and therefore wait in the Operation thereof, that you may see its blessed
Effect, in which Righteousness will run down as Streams, and the Knowledge of
the Glory of the Eternal Wisdom will cover the Earth, as Waters cover the Seas;
and here you will come to see your selves as the Crystal Channels through which
the living Waters of the Fountain of Heaven will be a continual Current, the
sweet Streams thereof overflowing the blessed Valleys within you, and watering
every Plant therein, making all things fruitful in you, and among you; fruitful
in Truth, fruitful in Hope, Faith, Love, Mercy, Peace, Fear, Humility,
Meekness, Patience, Content, Prayer, Praises, Thanksgiving, Knowledge, Wisdom,
and all Virtue; this will be a Beauty in your Faces, and a Diadem of Glory upon
your Heads, in which the Wonderful Counselor will take pleasure to speak unto
you in His Mysterious and Oraculous Language, which shall be but one throughout
all the Earth, and will open an Incorruptible Eye in you, even to see the Glory
of his Eternal Face, which will overcome you with Joys, and ravish you with
Eternal Pleasures, as a Generation that is carried up out of the Earthly
Places: Verily I cannot express the Sweetness, as my Soul possesses it, within
in the Spirit, what besides my own state saved in the Eternal Sun of the Soul;
Oh! my Ravished Mind, in the consideration of the Day wherein Nations shall
embrace the Heavens of all Love, and plentifully suck the Milk of her Breasts,
which gives the nourishment of Eternal Life. Oh! the Everlasting Consolation
which the Children of Brightness shall possess and inherit in the Bosom of the
Eternal Glory, even for ever and evermore! Amen.

And now, Are not the thoughts of this Glorious Salvation, Unity, Peace, Love,
Joy and Pleasure of Life (which may in this way be found, possessed and enjoyed
to the End, among all People and Nations upon the face of the Earth; and in,
and with the Glorious Brightness in the Heavens above) enough to persuade, woo
and compel all Souls (even with one draught of the Cord of Love) to receive and
embrace it? as they may sink down into the Deeps, and consider in what a good
time their days are fallen into, wherein so glorious a Way is now come to be
opened in such plainness, clearness, nakedness and easiness, wherein they may
all attain to every tittle of the Benefits, yea, and a thousand fold more than
the tongue of man can mention, exceeding all that is before said, inserted and
written? Surely methinks, he that would miss a Portion of the pre-cited
Blessings, and eternal joyous Inheritance for want of looking for it in the
True Way, being so faithfully spoken unto him, as to within him, and therefore
so easy to be found, as not to look without himself to seek and find it, must
not only confess himself to be a Fool in his own heart, but also as a Devil in
his continual words and works, and sevenfold worthy of Condemnation under the
power of Darkness and Death, unto its Pit of the burnings of Woe and Torment for
ever and ever. What therefore might I more say, that the Dead might hear and
live? or that Rocks might rent and become hearts of flesh to perceive and
understand? for, the Word is quick, the Voice is piercing, and the Life is
powerful, in and under which I rest in the pure, perfect and blessed Peace;
hereby showing forth, in measure, my Spirit and Soul (created anew in the Holy
Love) unto all Nations and Peoples, without respect of persons, upon the face
of the whole Earth; wherein I stand clear, whether they will hear or forbear.

By that all Kings, Princes and Rulers are (in the Light) come thus far; some
may happily make forth their Convincement of the Truth, saying, It is certainly
true and evident, that an Universal Peace and Unity, Love and Amity cannot be
perfectly and purely had, held and enjoyed among all Nations besides, in the
one Principle that unites to the Eternal Power in his own Life and Nature; for
He only being the Glorious Wisdom that created all things, must necessarily be
the alone Preserver and Upholder of all things; and whatsoever stands united
unto Him in the Life, abides in the Perfection of the Peace, Love, and Mercy of
the Immutable Spirit of Wisdom and Glory: And none other way can there be unto
Blessing besides the Light in the Conscience, which is given of the Eternal
Wisdom for a Way and Leader unto all Souls.

But what does this Light end and abolish?

ends all the Wisdom, with its effects and fruits, which stands in the
Adulteration and Separation from the Eternal and unlimited Wisdom of Holiness
and Brightness: It ends all Customs, Traditions, Ways and Worships, and
whatsoever may be thought, that stand in the degenerate and cursed nature; and
breaks all Briars and Bulwarks of limitation that stand in the Curse, as a
fence against its full, powerful and unlimited Propagation, that through its
free and unlimited Operation it may lead all unto the Blessed state of
Everlasting Union with the Holy Unlimitted One, where there is no more
Transgression nor Curse.

Now if any particular King, Prince or Ruler, should further add to his
persuasion, saying; This is the Truth, and the true and living Way in which
only the Holy One can be known and worshipid aright; and therefore I am
henceforth resolved and resigned in my whole Soul, to live, walk and worship in
the same: But whereas I have a Kingdom, Province, or Territory under my
Authority, What shall I do to these People to make them be all of this mind?

the true and living way, blessed art thou having found it, if thou walk and
abidest in it; therein to be led from degree, to degree day by day, more and
more into the likeness of Him, who anew creates thy Soul within thee; for
herein thou shall reap a plentiful harvest of his Wisdom in thy Inward parts,
which will give thee in the Day of Brightness to see, that He draws all into
Himself with the Cords of the Power of Love in his Glorious Wisdom, whose
Counsel will accordingly instruct thee to retain the perfect similitude of his
Glory, and therefore shall draw all by the same love of Wisdom, into the same
Light and Virtue of Love and Wisdom, and in none other Power shall thou work
with any man besides that by which thy Maker works in thee; for else thou will degenerate and go utterly from the likeness of thy Creator, as the wicked
and rebellious Rulers of the Earth do, to Envy, Imprisoning, Persecuting,
Killing, Murdering, and spilling of Blood; all which stand in the adulteration
and separation from, and in the cursed enmity to the Life of thy Creator, which
is Peace, Love and Mercy; and thus, instead of seeking to draw others to Him,
thou thy self wilt run like a Fugative and Vagabond from Him, and bring guilt
upon thy own head, by shortning the days of such as thou do imprison and
persecute, to whose Life thou art not able to add a day; and for killing that
which thou can not make alive again: And there also the weighty price of
Souls will be charged grievously upon thee, for which thou can never make
satisfaction; and if through thy Cruelty thou should turn any to thy self, it
is but unto that life which is wholly cursed; and therefore keep thee toward
all men, as thy Creator keeps toward thee, loving all men, as He loves
enemies, and has greatly loved thee; and wait upon thy Creator, praying to Him
for all men, like as a long while He waited upon thee, for thus thou growest
into His true Similitude; and (mark the end) in His Time, he who formed and
renewed thy Soul in Himself, will do the like to many more of thy Region and
Dominion; and then as the Soul of thy Maker was rejoiced in thy Return unto
Himself; so will thou have an exceeding Joy in their Return unto Him also, for
whom thy Soul travelleth and thirsts in secret fervent desires: And as in
this Particular, so in every Particular Case, walk thee as one that is molded
into a new frame, like unto the Holy One thy Maker; and in so doing, thy Fruits
will be abundant to His Praise, and He will take pleasure to enrich thy Soul
with His Everlasting Virtue and Treasure of Wisdom, and his Spirit of Power and
Glory will rest upon thee.

Yet, in respect of the Universal Public Service of the Holy One, How may it
be ordered in relation to Assemblies and Congregations?

Eternal Wisdom of all Power is but one infinite Spirit of Love, all that draw
into Unity with Him, must certainly draw into an infinite Love and Unity one
with another; in which state (that the Unity may be held in the Joy of Eternal
Love) the Power of Wisdom sets in this Order, first, appointing convenient
Places for Public Assemblies; and next, determining convenient Times, wherein
the Congregations may be kept, not by constraint or violence; for as the Love
of the Eternal Virtue and Power of Love is free in Himself toward every Soul;
so requires He that all Souls should be like Him, ready in heart, and free in
mind to assemble together, and not in any other way or manner; because neither
the Constrainer, nor the Constrained retains the perfect similitude of his Love
and Freedom, but are in the degenerated Will, wherein every Sacrifice is
abominable. And when both Place and Time is appointed for Public
Congregations, all that are united in the Eternal Virtue, as one Soul and Mind,
and Members of one Spiritual Body, must needs congregate and flow together, to
the end of nourishing and cherishing their own flesh; for waiting together in
the one Spirit of Holiness and Eternal Power, the Power will arise in and among
you, and the Word of Life will go forth of the mouths of many, on which the
whole Body will feed, and by it be cherished and nourished unto a Life af
Immortal Purity, Joy and Glory; So that when all have found the experience of
this sweetness in the Order of Assemblies, as we have found, will make them
flow, even as we fly (in the Spirit of Unity) unto the Holy Congregations,
distinated and appointed by the Spirit of Wisdom.

Again, in respect of Government, Seeing the Creator of all things is an
Infinite Wisdom, must absolutely therefore be the Author of Order and not of
Confusion; By what Laws then shall all Nations be ruled and governed, for the
preserving all things in meet and pure Order?

Order and Government is of the Life of Eternal Wisdom; Therefore, in relation
to the Love, which keeps in the true Order (whereby the true Government comes
to be known) this may you all understand; He that created all Things and Kings,
I call the KING of Kings and of Glory; is the One Almighty Ruler over all his
Creation and Workmanship, and requires that all should be subject to his
Government, whose Law is but one, which (as I have showed) is written in the
inward parts, which is the Light of the Sun of the Soul, that was before
Transgression was, and leads into that state where Transgression is not: This
only is the true Law that is to rule in all inward parts, to rule all Minds
which rules all Members; and the Minds being ruled by it, all the Members
become subject unto it, whereby the whole World of Mankind comes to be drawn
into the Likeness of the Life and Power that created them, in which state
Transgression is not; so here the Law is a Savior, and not a Judge: which Law
thus teaches, (to wit) Do unto all men, as ye would that men should do unto
you. And again, it always teaches, That all Kings, Princes, Rulers, and
Judges, should keep to the true similitude, like unto their Creator, in matter
of Judgment, by a Law; and consequently, not to judge any man in any other way
and manner, or by any other Precept or Law, than in and by that Law which
judges and saves themselves in the Inward Parts, which still draws to the
Similitude, and preserves the Soul in the likeness of the Eternal Power and
Wisdom that created it; So then, in case of Rebellious Subjects in a Land, that
would live in a lawless life, of destruction of the King of Glorie's Creation,
wilfully and presumptuously, in Lewdness, Beastliness, Violations, or what
other wickedness so ever; Kings, Pinces, Rulers and Judges shall have no need
to turn out their Minds from the Law within, to search Books or Records (of
their Lands or Peoples) without them, to find a Law to judge such Transgressors
by; for that alienates and adulterates from the pure Similitude, seeing the
Creator cannot go out of Himself into Books without Him for a Law, but keeping
to the Inward Law of the Creator (that preserves in the Glorious likeness) and
judging all in it, and according to it, answers the same in all, and leaves
them without Excuse in the sight of the Eternal Searchers of all hearts; in
which Judgment they hold the Unity with their Creator, and stand justified
before Him, and by that of Him in all Consciences, which answers the
Judgment of it: Seeing therefore it is evident, that the eternal Judge is but
one, and his Law but one, the Judgment that is of Him in it, is the Blessed
State; but that which is contrary to it, is the Cursed State.

Moreover, it may be plainly understood, That he who made all Men in his own
Eternal Wisdom, certainly was, and is, the Wisest to make a Law for all Men
that he created, which in His Wisdom (is evident) He accordingly did decree,
and has placed it in the Inwards, near unto the most noble part of Man, which
rules all his Members, (to wit) the Soul, wherein all Transgression comes
first to be conceived, before any is ever brought to the birth. So then, he
that alters from his Law, and makes another Law to judge Men by, contrary to
that Law which his Creator has placed near unto the most noble part of all
Mankind, and even in his own Conscience, as well as in the Conscience of an
another Creature; that very Ruler stands in the Presumption adulterated and
separated from his Creator, showing himself as if he had a Wisdom above his
Creator, to make a Law to judge his creatures by, which is a most horrid
Rebellion against his Creator, and his holy and just Law. Awake, awake
therefore. O all ye Kings, Princes, Rulers and Judges upon the face of the
whole Earth, and answer your Creator in this true point of Judgment.

Now if the poor men should make forth their Convincement of the Truth, saying,
We are persuaded of the Glory of the Truth of the Sun of the Soul, for we
experience it in the inward parts, and can set our Seal to the Testimony
thereof, to be altogether Holy and Pure within us; in which sense of the Love
of our Creator toward us, we are truly willing and desirous to live and walk,
so as that our Souls may be, made worthy of such a glorious Infusion and
Inspiration of the Eternal Love and Mercy: But what shall we do, seeing the
Rulers of our Land stand in opposition, and we cannot so walk without an
absolute peril of severe Imprisonment, sharp Tortures, loss of earthly Estate,
or Life it self?

created you, is the Eternal Power and Almighty King of Kings, who reigns
over all in the Kingdoms of Men; and gives them to whomsoever he pleases:
Stand ye therefore in the Life of his Pleasure, which is in that (whereunto you
are inwardly directed) which begets and forms you in the pure and perfect
similitude of your Creator; and there you will come to see Him to be the
everlasting Patience and Eternal Content; which is a greater Felicity and Glory
for you to know in your selves as being molded into the same Resemblance, and
so united to Him in the Power and Life thereof, than the enjoyment of outward
Liberty, possession of Ease in the Flesh, Earthly Treasure, or Life it self in
the body; yea, a Heavenly Happiness it is, infinitely surpassing all that ever
can be thought of below the visible Sun; the living sense and feeling of which
in the Eternal Power, makes the Imprisonment of the body a sweet freedom of the
Soul; the Tortures of the Body, the joyful pleasures of the Soul; the loss of
Earthly Goods, the purchase of an Heavenly Treasure; and the Death of the Body
of Flesh, the Everlasting Glorious Life of the Soul; Thus for every finite
Loss, is reaped an infinite Treasure of Gain. So then as ye grow into this
Life, committing all things, House, Goods, Silver, Gold, Wife and Children,
Liberty and Life, into the good pleasure of the Everlasting Patience and
Eternal Content, you come to reign as Kings in the glorious Life of the KING of
Kings, over all Earthly Kings, and they see it not, nor know it not; who
persecute you, being themselves in the act of Persecution adulterated and
alienated from the Life of the Eternal Patience and Content, and in enmity to
his power of Love and Mercy, which is the Cursed State of Darkness; So you
knowing your Advantage of Treasure, and Prerogative of Dominion in the power of
Patience and virtue of Content, ye may well say in your selves, As we live and
abide in the fear of our Creator (which preserves in the continual possession
of his Immortal Rewards and Treasures of all Joys) we need not fear Earthly
Kings nor Princes, nay, nor loss of Lives, nor any other Creature: for here we
perceive temporal loss, can be no loss unto us, but as an Earnest-peny
offered and given by us for the price of an Eternal Gain; And therefore we will
run our Race in the fear of our Maker with joyfulness, holding the similitude
of his own Holiness; that if we are persecuted, we will love and pray for our
Enemies, even as our Creator loved us whilst we were his Enemies; and we will
bear with them, as he bore with us; and forgive them, as he has forgiven us:
Thus will we live, and thus will we dye: and the Name of our Maker be evermore
sanctified, hallowed, honored and praised by and in us to the end, Amen. And
ye being entered into this everlasting blessed State, you stand (as I have
said) in his good pleasure, who reigns in in the Kingdoms of Men, and gives
them to whomsoever he pleases; and then whosoever turns against you, to
persecute you, turns against the pleasure of his Creator: And mark the
battle, the Pot fights against the Potter, who will therefore break it to
pieces in his sore displeasure: the Dust fights against its Maker, who
therefore will blow it away, even with the fierce Whirlwind of his utter
displeasure, and gain himself a Renowned Glory over every rebellious Creature;
for even now is He arisen in his Jealousy, and it is his Day to work, and none
shall let; and he which rules against Him, he will remove from the Throne; for
He will set up an Everlasting Dominion and Government, and of his own Scepter
of Righteousness, even from end unto end of the four Winds of the Heavens.
Sevenfold happy therefore is that Soul that beleives in Him, and suffers for
his Righteousness sake.

And is it not an unspeakable shame, to a Ruler to persecute innocent Souls,
new created Souls in the Glory of the similitude of their Maker? Is it not a
woeful shame to Rulers, to persecute them, that watch to recompense good for
evil, and to show the deeps of the bowels of Love and Mercy to such as heaped
upon them extreme weights of Oppression and Cruelty? Can Rulers answer the
bonds of humanity in such acts? Nay. How then can they answer the power of
Sanctity in them?

For the sake of Edification of all Souls, to Three Questions more I am drawn
forth (in the Light) to answer.

What are the first powerful Operations of the Light in the Soul, after
Convincement of Sin?

JUDGMENT, CONDEMNATION, and DEATH of the Mind of Transgression; which must of
necessity be, for the cause of the Righteousness of the King of Glory, unto
whom no life in Sin and Corruption can unite; for the Soul going into it, went
out from Him into the Enmity against Him and His Law of Righteousness, and no
part of that can ever enter into Him, because it was never of Him; and because
He has infused a righteous Law into the Inward parts, of necessity therefore
there must be a power of Judgment to execute the Righteousness of the Law (in
the place that it is put) upon that which brake it, which Power in
Righteousness must absolutely bring Condemnation upon that mind which is the
Transgressor in man; and the Condemnation must as surely bring Death by the
power of the Executor, that no part of that Mind may evermore live, but the
Mind in which no Transgression is, which was before Transgression was, which
must be perfectly wrought before Man can enter again into the first Similitude,
to unite with the King of Glory. So here all may see the Judgment truly set
up, and executed in the inward parts, bringing Death upon the Transgressor,
produced the benefit of a most Blessed Fruit, (viz.) of Life, Peace and Joy,
and opens the door of the Fountain of Mercy, giving the perfect knowledge
thereof, which then rejoices over Judgment; for which cause of Mercy the
Eternal Wisdom first instituted the Law and Power of Judgment to come,
fulfilling Righteousness in the Inward parts, which thus appears, bringing a
Righteous Death upon an Unrighteous Life, that by its Death a Righteous may for
ever live, wherein the Joy and Glory is partaked and inherited: So then in the
Judgment and Condemnation of that Life unto Death, the Power and Glory of Mercy
appears in the wonderful Wisdom, that it might be for ever loved and lived
in, and the work of Wisdom admired and prized, and the Worker of Salvation (in
the Power and most Excellent Glory of Mercy, manifest in Judgment) magnified
over all everlastingly without end, in all that love the Operation, and
accordingly are partakers of the sweet and happy Fruit of its Salvation, in
which the Unity with the King of Glory is witnessed.

Of every frame of Soul, or fashion of Mind in Man, which is the most certain
of holding the Union and Fellowship with the King of Glory in Spirit?

Watchfulness in Fear and Cross: Watch to fear the risings of the Concupisence
which the Soul feels in the flesh, toward the flesh and the World, and also
now lastly toward the Devil, and there enter into that Internal Power, which
stands in the Cross to the other Nature, which will daily slay every carnal
Affection in the first suggestion and appearance, and break the Cockatrices Egg
before the Serpent is hatched; and thus all will come to see that the inward
and visible Cross, to the inward Mind of the World and the Flesh, keeps the
Soul clean out of the mind of the World and the Flesh, in the mind of the
Eternal Spirit.

Again, Watch to fear in every Joy and Enjoyment of every Glorious and Heavenly
Gift, lest the Joy should slip out of the true measure, and a sense of the
Glory of the Gift exalt the Heart above the measure of the Light, through which
it comes, and in which the Unity with the King of Glory stands; and here all
which come to see that Fear keeps every Joy and Enjoyment of Heavenly Gifts,
perfect to the measure, wherein all Perfection is witnessed according to the
proportion of all Gifts as they are given, and come down from the perfect
Giver: So then the invisible Cross which keeps clean, and Fear that keeps the
Soul low and humble to the measure within in the Conscience, will always be
found the safest frame and fashion of every man's mind to hold the most certain
Union and Fellowship with the King of Glory, as long as they are clothed with
the body of flesh, until it turns to the dust from whence it came, and the
Soul be from thenceforth clothed and arrayed with the Glory of the Life of the
King of Glory, even for ever and evermore.

Whether Man (after being restored unto the Brightness of the first Similitude,
and entered into Unity with the Incorruptible Glory, through death of the
degenerated part) may not fail from the Glory, and enter again into the
Degeneration and Curse?

simply was not created immutable, though clean, pure and holy, in a state of
Innocence, for the Eternal Wisdom reserved that Virtue, Power, and most
glorious Property of Immutability in Himself only, that He above all things
might be known as the Supreme Power over all the created things, and
accordingly feared, loved, obeyed, and lived in: which state I have showed Man
went out of, and degenerated from, and also have opened the direction unto the
way and power of Redemption, from the fall and loss, and Restoration unto the
first Similitude of the Holy One, which unites with the Incorruptible Glory;
unto which state it is possible (in the Light) for all Mankind to attain; yet,
if they abide not in the immutable Power of Perservation that created their
Souls, but go from the unchangeable Life into the variable consultation with
Flesh and its reason and sensual Wisdom, they may return backwards, as the Sea,
Locust and Canker, and become as the Swine that was once washed, but lo,
wallows again in the mire; and the house may be clean swept, yet except there
be a Watch still kept seven unclean Spirits may enter, that are worse than the
former which were driven forth; and a Virgin state may be attained unto, but
unless the Oil of Wisdom in Watchfulness, Diligence, and Fear, be retained in
the Lamp, always burning and giving light to the whole Soul, it may turn into
the darkness of folly and filthiness, and again may become adulterate and
degenerate from the Life of Incorruption, and Immortal Unchangeable Glory,
which is the Cursed State. Wisdom therefore smites the strokes of Death upon
the head of Presumption, and keeps the Watch upon the Watchtower of the Light,
which discovers the Approach of the Enemy, and retains the Fear, as a
strength for Courage, and clothes the Soul with the humbleness and
contritedness of heart; for with such the Immortal Power dwells, in whose
immutable strength the Salvation and Preservation is witnessed; so in Him the
Redeemed have the continual enjoyment of a surpassing Sweet and consolating
Repose and Rest: First, in the knowledge that the Gracious Power (that has
united them unto Himself in the Life of Incorruption and Innocence) can never
vary, change, nor altar from his Grace, Love, and Faithfulness; and next,
though a change may be, which cannot be by the unchangeable King of Glory,
unless it be first by the degeneration of Man's weak and mutable mind from his
Power of Holiness, yet the Soul in the fear and watchfulness (out of the
Presumption and Arrogance) in the ground of Meekness and Lowliness comes to
grow in such a strength of the power of Hope, Faith and Trust in the Immutable
Preserver of the Low and Humble, that in the living and sensible persuasion it
comes to utter (through its assurance of the immediate Unity) that neither
Afflictions, Trials, Tribulations, Temptations, Reproaches, Buffets, Wounds,
Tortures, Prisons, Life nor Death, Principalities, Powers, Heights, Depths,
Things present, nor Things to come, shall be ever able to separate the Soul
from its Life and Unity, in, and with the Immutable Preserver and King of Glory
in the Joy of his Everlasting Virtue.

Ah! who therefore would not run as a Greyhound in the course, and flow as the
Floods of the Spring-Tyde; yea, and fly, as the Dove to her Nest, unto that
which unites with the Original Fountain of all Excellency, Wisdom, Sweetness
and Joy, to be swallowed up in its Ocean for ever? Oh! the Felicity of
Consolation in the state of Redemption! how can my weakness declare its
Ravishing Power? forasmuch as in the state of the Souls Restoration unto the
first Beauty, Glory and Unity with the King of Glory, there is found a Tower of
joyous Safety, far exceeding the Safety that the first Man had in his state of
Innocence; knowing, that though he was innocent and pure, yet wanted the
knowledge of the mutability and changeableness of his Soul, from the Power that
only could preserve it in the Immutable Life; and therefore the Concupisence
said, Ye shall not surely dye; which was a Lie, by which the Innocence was
beguiled and overcome, to taste of the fruit of knowledge in his own flesh, and
then in the Loss he saw not the Recovery, but clouded himself more under it,
by covering the defiled parts; but whereas the Soul now sees its unity with the
Immutable Glory, and knows the changeableness of the Souls of all Men out of
the Unchangeable Power, and comprehends the Power of Darkness, with its Works
and Perdition; and also knows the Power of Redemption from Curse, Restoration
to Bliss, and Union with the Immutable Glory; I say in the knowledge of all
this (which Man in his first state of Innocence knew not) stands more glorious
armed, and securely fortified on the Watchtower of the Light, in the pure
fear, than the first Man in his state of Innocence did: And by how much also
the Mercies, Pitties, Compassions, Love and glorious Wisdom of the Creator is
now revealed in his work of Redemption, Restoration, and uniting the Soul of
man again unto Himself in the power of his quickened Spirit, these Walls of the
Eternal Love (which the united Souls now enter to within) is a Glory, Fort and
Fortress, infinitely exceeding that of the first Man's state of Bliss in
Innocence; Yea, I might even speak as a tongue without end, of this matter, and
yet never speak enough (of the revelation of the Power appearing in Glory to
the Redeemed, Restored, and United Souls) how far it surpasses that of the
knowledge of the first Man in Bliss, who in his state of Innocence, before
Transgression was, could not know what Pity, Compassion, Mercy and
Reconciliation was, being not then in a condition of the service of such
properties and qualities, that were hid in the Eternal Wisdom of Glory; who
though He was dishonored at first by Transgression, yet such is his infinite
Wisdom, that He gains Himself the greater Honor through the Power of his
Redeeming Man out of Transgression. Wherefore the discovery of the face of
Glory being now the more excellent and greater, the Walls and Bulwarks of Love
must needs be the stronger, and the Unity infinitely nearer and dearer, than
the tongues of ten thousand multitudes can ever utter or express; which may be
joyfully received, as the Everlasting Consolation of all Consolations, by all
the Innocent Lambs, who through the Glorious Redemption do know their Unity in
the Immutable Power that created them. Who therefore (thus in brief) can
witness to every Opposer and Gain-sayer, that questioneth their state and
condition, We are in the Immutable Life and Power.

Finally, The knowledge of Unchanableness only consisting in the Eternal Power,
cuts off the strength of all Insults of Reproach (by the seed of enmity) cast
upon the Truth, and the Redeemed People that do abide walking in it, because
one or two, or a few have turned (from it) like the Dog to the vomit, and the
washed Swine again to the wallowing in the mire; which cannot stand upon the
Immutable Power or Principle of Holiness; because, if all Souls should turn
from it, as it is a manifest Light in every Conscience, yet the Light and Truth
changes not, but is still the same in it self, in Nature, Power, Virtue and
Glory, (which no man can justly deny) though veiled, clouded, and in greater
measure hid from the mutable Soul that is turned from it; Nor can Reproach or
Infamy justly stand upon them that abide in the Unity with the Immutable Glory;
because by the Power thereof they are preserved out of evil walking before all
men innocently, not giving any occasion but of good reports, to fill the mouths
of all men: Therefore, if any man should reproach me and my Brethren, whilst we
continue and persevere in the Life of Restoration, united to the Unchangeable
Holiness, because others, one or two, or a few, are gone out into the
Defilement and Curse; this shows, that he which so reproacheth us, stands
disunited unto, and adulterated from the Life of his Creator, (who is the Power
of Equity) and entered into the power of the blackness of Iniquity; giving false
weight and false measure in the Balance and Bushel of Enmity, which is the
Cursed State; Because his Creator cannot do the like in the Balance of his
Sanctuary, but is righteous to every man's cause. So then the Reproacher (by his
own unrighteous reproach) writes the mark of Guilt in his own Forehead, and
draws the sentence of Righteous Judgment upon his own head, as a rebellious
son of Enmity, and Despiser of the life of Integrity. And thus the Eternal Sun
of the Soul, Power, Wisdom, Holiness, and King of Glory (in Himself, and in all
his Redeemed People) stands magnified, honored glorified, praised, and
renowned eternally, Amen.

THE END.

