A DISCOURSE OF Toleration: In Answer to a late BOOK, Entitled, A DISCOURSE Of
the RELIGION of ENGLAND.

ROMANS 16.17. Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions, and
Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them.
LONDON, Printed by E.C. for James Collins, at the King's Head in
Westminster Hall. 1668.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. l. 1. read men. p. 4. l. 25. r. succeeding, p. 6. d. 12. r. extract,
p. 21. l. 37. r. in resisting, p. 22. l. 11. r. Law, l. 12. r. the Emperors,
l. 30. r. had, marg. r. v^ternosae, p. 23. l. 11. r. that, p. 32. l. 37. r.
Discourser.

A DISCOURSE OF TOLERATION.
SECT. 1. To form a right Judgment of Toleration, it is necessary to consider
the subject of it.
THere is so much malignity in our corrupt Nature, that Detraction and envious
Reflections are easily believed; and we daily see one man sport at the loss of
another Fame. This corruption appears in nothing more than in the case of
Magistrates; to speak ill of whom, is mistaken for Liberty, whilst the
commendation of their just actions scarce escapes the infamy of flattery, or
servitude. Hence it is, that Writings which pretend to plead the cause of a
Party, whose Interest is judged inconsistent with the public, have a great
vogue, because they do insinuate the ill management of Superiors, imply their
Want of Love to the Truth, Ignorance of their own Concerns, and Cruelty to the
Innocent. And such are Discourses for Toleration of Dissentions in Religion,
which find acceptance with weaker Spirits, because they are both prone to
pity even those that suffer justly, and have too jealous a fear of those that
are in power.

But yet to do right to our humane nature, we must acknowledge, that though it
be corrupted, yet is not the Light of it wholly extinguished; nor has it
utterly lost its Notices and Inclinations to good, though it may sometimes be
deceived by its own passions in the pursuit of it: so that when any thing is
discovered to be ill in its nature, the product of some infamous causes, and
attended with consequences of rain, then reason will prevail (unless some base
lust has wholly debauched the Soul) and vindicate it self from the impostures
of a mistaken interest: And however men may be kind to a Toleration, when it
is considered barely, as a bearing with Dissenters; moderating the Rigors of
those whose fortune, and power tempts them to an insolency; as it is a pity due
to the Infirmities of mankind which is subject to err; and has a semblance
to the Meekness of Christianity; yet when they consider the subject of it,
which are Dissentions in Religion, whose prime causes are for the most part
hateful, and the consequences terrible, they will boggle at it, as being that
which will quite enervate Religion, and also shake, if not overthrow all
Societies. To form therefore a right Judgment of Toleration, we must first
consider the Nature, Causes, and Events of the Subject of it.

SECT. 2. The Nature of Dissentions in Religion.
WHat Dissentions of Religion are in their nature is best known by reflecting
upon the ways and means which Christ has appointed for the maintenance, and
continuance of Religion in the World.

Our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ having purchased a great Salvation
for Mankind, and made known the means of obtaining what he had acquired, that
this knowledge might be propagated through all Ages to those that were capable
of his benefits, did establish a Society which should be conservers of these
truths, into which all those that did believe what he had done and said, and
would submit to those conditions he required, upon the solemn profession
thereof by Baptism, were to be admitted, without any distinction of State, Sex,
or Nation. And this is his Church. That this Society might perform its Office,
and be preserved to this great end, Unity of the Members among themselves was
more necessary for it then for any other Community, because it was for greater
and more glorious ends than ever any Society of man was established for; and
without unity it could not possibly attain these ends: For if those who
pretended to show men the way of Life, did disagree among themselves, were
divided into several factions, mutually abhorring each others Communion, and
condemning each others for false or defective Churches; how could those who
were without believe the truths which all pretended unto, and yet every one did
mutually deny to be found in another? since these truths (not like those which
Philosophers pretended unto, that were but the Collections of men's Observation,
and Conclusions of Discourse) were all asserted as such which had been revealed
by the most Wise and Faithful God, and were the manifestations of the pleasure
of his Will, wherein was no place left to humane invention: every pretender
contending, that what he delivered was spoken at first by the Lord, Heb. 2.3.
and confirmed to following ages by those that heard him.

Besides, those who some way or other had convictions of the truth of Jesus,
and desired to be more fully instructed in that way, and to do those duties
which Christ commanded one Christian to do with another: these I say, must be
much distracted (being yet Babes and Novices in Christ, and so supposed not
able to determine) by reason of all those controversies of the different
parties with whom they might join themselves unto the Lord: so that without
this Unity the Church cannot perform those great ends for which it was
instituted by our Savior.

Therefore to preserve this Unity, Christ has done all those things which he
thought necessary for it. He poured out prayers to his Father That all those
that believed on him might be one, Joh. 17.21, 23.
and be made perfect in one. He has ordered that the Supplies of his Spirit
should be administered by their holding of him their Head, and by being fitly
joined, and compacted together. Ephesians. 4.16.
1 Cor. 12.12.
He has so dispensed the gifts of his Spirit in that way and measure, that the
Members of his Body might have the same dependence, the same benefits as one
member of a natural Body has from another, and so conserve so strict an Unity,
as may entitle the Church to the Honor of his Name, and be called Christ. He
commands them to maintain their Unity by a constant, and frequent Communion of
his Sacraments. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.
What weight has he put upon his command of Love, the principle of Unity, and
there is no duty more pressed by him and his Apostles, than those of Unity and
Peace. Yea, all those Precepts of Longsuffering, Gentleness, Goodness,
Meekness, Patience, are in order to this great end of Unity among the
Professors of his Doctrine. Thus the necessity of Unity, and methods by Christ,
appointed for its preservation, must needs argue Dissentions (which are
destructive of it) to be of a nature hateful to every soul that has a true
sense of Christianity.

SECT. 3. The Causes of Dissentions and Schisms in the Authors of them.
BUt besides this, they are more odious in their causes, whether we consider
the first Authors of them, or the Followers. As for the Authors of them, the
Apostles set forth them to be persons led by such motives as did abandon all
respect to Christ, Romans 16.18.
that They served not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Belly. 2 Cor. 3.3.
Gal. 5.20. Phil. 3.19. 1 Timothy 1.19.
They were called carnal, Seditions, and Heresies are reckoned amongst the
works of the flesh. They are said to be the enemies of the Cross of Christ,
whose God is their belly, and whose glory is their shame. The putting away of a
good Conscience, and making shipwreck of the Faith is their character. Pride
and covetousness are said to be their grand principles. ib. c. 6.4. Tit. 3.11.
Subversion and Sin is their state of Life. S. Peter, and S. Jude give them
characters full of horror. Thus in the ^ucceeding ages of the Church, the
Historians who give us an account of those Heresies and Schisms which arose in
it, do also tell us how great Monsters they were which did bring them forth;
and there was in every Sect many opinions and practices that rendered all
Christians (of whose number they pretended to be) odious even to the Heathen.
The abominations of the Gnostics are not to be named even by a sober Heathen,
for the vilest acts of uncleanness which would dishonor even a Stews, were
taken up by them for Duties of Religion, which showed the causes of their
dissentions to be exceeding hateful.

It would be tedious to survey all, and give a particular account of the causes
of every Sect. One instance will be sufficient, and it shall be that of the
Donatists, a great and lasting dissension, which had a complication of
Wickednesses to bring it forth into the world. It began at the Election and
Ordination of Caecilianus, Bishop of Carthage, whereby the ambition of Botrus
and Caelesius, two Presbyters of the same Church, and Competitors of the same
Dignity, being disappointed, to depose him they conspire with other Presbyters,
to whom Mensurius the preceding Bishop had in the times of persecution
delivered the Church-Plate, to be kept private, that it might not be a spoil to
the Persecutors; these men had refused to deliver to Caecilianus (to whom at
his Ordination the Inventory of Church Goods was given up) the things committed
to their trust; and that they might ascertain the prey to themselves, they
labored to draw the people from Communion with the Bishop. This separation was
forwarded by one Lucilla; a rich woman, who having been displeased with
Caecilianus, because when he was a Deacon, he had admonished her to behave her
self as the other Christians in the public Worship, she continued her passion
to him now made a Bishop; and by her gifts and promises corrupted others, that
they should depose Caecilianus, and set up in his stead one Majorinus, who
lived in her house. To strengthen this Separation, they call to Carthage,
Secundus, Bishop of Tigisita, Primate of Numidia; who, together with other
Numidian Bishops in a Council at Cirta, had mutually convicted one the other,
to have been Traditores, (i.e. such who had delivered up the Holy Scriptures to
be burnt by the Gentiles:) and so having pardoned one the other, that they
might not be questioned by the other Churches of Africa, did willingly embrace
this occasion of making and completing a Schism at Carthage, whereby also they
might hide their Indulgences one to the other at home, by their severity to
others abroad, removing from themselves the suspicion of that Crime, which they
condemned in others. These men being entertained at Carthage, by those whom
Ambition, Anger, and Covetousness had made factious, did condemn Caecilianus
unheard, as being ordained by Faelix Bishop of Aptungita who was accused to
have been a Traditor, and then set up Majorinus in his stead, and so formed
that Schism, which for a long time troubled all Africa, and polluted it with
much blood. This one instance is enough to show how Dissentions in Religion
may, and sometimes do owe their Original to the lusts of men, and that evil
Affections, though different and various, may yet amass men together in the
same Schism; and that however we hear of nothing now (as it was probable they
did so then) pretended for a dissent, but Conscience: Yet we know that men live
and dye by the same rules, and the same lusts in this age will work as they did
of old in the same circumstances; and whatsoever is of such an extract must
needs be hateful.

SECT. 4. The Causes of Dissentions in the Followers.
AS for the Followers of these Dissentions, although it is possible many of
them may be led aside in the simplicity of their souls by the sleight of men,
and cunning craftiness of such as lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4.14.
yet we find the Scriptures often censure such of lusts also, which give them
over to the arts of those who lead them captive. 2 Timothy 3.6. 2 Timothy 4.3. 2 Pet.
2.19.
As an Averseness to the sound doctrine which contradicts their lusts, an
Affectation of Novelty, having itching ears, or of too much Liberty, greater
than will comport with the Discipline of the Truth: An affectation of some more
then ordinary knowledge, thus the Apostle says, Col. 2.18.23. Jude 16.
some were beguiled by things which had a show of wisdom. St. Jude says that
the Heretics of his time did speak great swelling words, by which he employed
the Gnostics, who did abuse the people with a strange noise of words that
signified nothing, but their followers imagined to have the secrets of wisdom.
And thus St. Augustine says, that he was a follower of the Manichees for 9
years together, (having slighted the Religion his Parents had educated him
in), and that because they promised not to require any man's faith, Aug. lib. de
Vtilitate cred. c. 1.
unless they made the truth clear and evident; and therefore this captivated
him, being young; and when he was by reason of some knowledge in the disputes
of the learned Garrulus and Superbus, i.e. talkative and proud. 2 Timothy 4.3. 2
Pet. 2.19.
Another cause may be a want of love to the Truth, 2 These. 2.10. Hence comes
their Loathing all pains that are necessary for the searching after the Truth,
and from this a Compliance with those opinions that are importunately imposed
upon them by their Relations. Add to these the Envy at those whom the
Providence or Spirit of God has advanced either by more useful Graces, or to
more splendid conditions, (this was it which made much of that noise which was
in the divided Church of Corinth). Weakness in not differencing between the
Lives and Professions of those that continue within the Church, (so Audius as
Epiphanius says began his schism) and sometimes Injuries received from those
that are for the Truth, make morose and choleric minds join themselves to
those that are Enemies. Thus the calumnies which some of the Roman Clergy
spread of Tertullian as a Montanist, made him in truth after embrace that Sect.
The advantages also that a man may promise to himself in a Party, which he
cannot hope for in a peaceable Church.

These and many other may move a man to herd himself in a factious
Congregation, and to separate from an established Church; and therefore
Conscience, though it be generally pretended, is not the only cause of
Dissentions in Religion. And indeed, how can it otherwise be imagined of the
far greatest part of Dissenters, but that as the Scripture says, They are
laden with diverse Insts. When they trample upon so clear, and frequent
Commands of our Lord Jesus Christ to follow after Peace, and Unity, and those
things that tend to Edification, and stick at some thing that either is not
commanded, or not forbidden by God, and therefore left to the Magistrates
liberty, or which is but obscure and doubtful. When they swallow great sins,
(as Perjuries, Rebellions, Falsehoods) and yet strain and scruple at an
indifferent Ceremony. When they place so much of the essence of Religion and
the Worship of God, in the forbearing an indifferent Rite, that they think God
is profaned by it, and refuse Communion with those that so worship him. When
they praecipitate themselves either through Envy, Passion, or Design, into the
several Sects of dissenters, without a search after the Truth, and so
ignorantly that they know not what it is they embrace, but only that it is
contrary to what they have forsaken. When their Separation is attended with so
many works of the flesh, (as bitterness, evil-speaking, slanders of those who
disagree, lies to support their way, reproaches of the Government, cruelty
against their opposites when in their power, and those bloody undertakings to
destroy the lawful Magistrate). How is it possible for us to think that
Conscience, and a fear of God is is the only Principle of those Dissenters? for
if that was the great rule of their actions, they would walk by it in those
other things wherein there is no occasion of scruple: and therefore it is to be
concluded, that though it is possible for some good souls to be deceived, yet
the far greater part are first blinded and manacled by their own lusts, and so
are led captive by deceivers.

SECT. 5. The Consequences and Effects of Dissentions, as to Religion and the
Church.
NOw since the Causes of Dissentions in Religion are in themselves so wicked,
how can we but fear that their consequences will be full of horror? for, what
can these spawn but misery and destruction? By them the truth of Christianity
is dishonored, for the reason our Savior gives of his Prayer for Unity among
his Disciples was, Joh. 17.21.
that the world should believe that his Father had sent him; i.e. that he came
from God, and therefore what he said was true; therefore the dissentions which
should happen among them, would give a color of unbelief to the world, and
they would be apt to conclude, that God was no way the Author of that which was
full of strife. The Apostle tells the Corinthians, that the disorders which
were among them would persuade Unbelievers to say they were mad, 1 Cor. 14.23.
The Contentions in the first ages of the Church were the sport of the Gentile
Theaters, and every unhallowed scorner made the strifes of Christians the
subject of his mirth.

They also obstruct men in the embracing the Faith, as was showed above, and
therefore Celsus upon this account did reproach the Christians, as if Origin.
con. Cells. lib. 3. (...), etc.
they envied the world, the acknowledging the Truth, because they no sooner
increased their number, but their Dissentions were also multiplied. Thus they
hinder the Propagation of the Gospel, and forbid those that otherwise would
come into the Church.

They corrupt also those that are within, and hinder the Growth of Grace, which
every member ought to promote both in himself and others; for the Apostle
having said of the Corinthians, that they were enriched in all knowledge, and
so having a plentiful portion of the Spirit, he might have expected to have
found them Spiritual, 1 Cor. 1.5.
grown up to some perfection in Christ, 1 Cor. 3.1.
yet by reason of their divisions they were still but Babes, still carnal. For
Divisions and Dissentions in Religion do hinder both the inward and the outward
means whereby Christians may grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of God, and of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. The Inward is that (...) that supply of the
Spirit which is given to every man to profit the Church withal, 1 Cor. 12.7.
And it is said Ephesians. 4.16. that From Christ the whole body fitly joined
together and compacted, by that which every joint supplies makes the Increase
of the body to the edifying of it self in love. But dissentions hinder this way
of supply, for either they break the Continuity of the body, as violent winds
tear off the branches from the trunck of the tree, which effect the Apostle
insinuates when he calls Heresies, winds of doctrine, in verse. 14. of the same
Chapter: Or else they stir up such humors of Wrath, and Malice, which like
tough obstructions in the veins, and vessels of our bodies, hinder the current
of blood and spirits: so do these hinder that supply of spiritual nourishment
that one Member should afford unto another. For all those Parts and Abilities
which God has given, with all that Time which might be employed in converting
men to Holiness, in reconciling Souls to God, in persuading men to break off
their sins by Repentance, are spent, and wasted in Bitterness, and evil
speaking one of another; in mutual Contradictions, perverse Disputings, doting
about questions, and Strife of words, in making Proselytes to the factions
rather then in turning them to God, in teaching them the Principles of the
party, rather than instructing them in the Oracles of life. Then as to the
Outward means of edification, which is the Assembling of Christians together,
(for the Apostle Heb. 10.24. having admonished the Hebrews to consider one
another to provoke unto love and good works, presently adds as a means to this,
Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together; the joining in the Worship
of God, being the most powerful conversation which can possibly beget love and
good works of one to the other). This likewise is lost by factions; for where
there are these dissentions, Altar is set up against Altar, and Congregation
against Congregation, and in stead of Provoking to love, and good works: men
are enraged to Malice, and Destructive designs against the dissenters.

For that is another sad effect of these Dissentions, they do imbrutish
mankind, make them heady, high-minded, fierce, dispisers, and contemners of
others, from doting about Questions, and strife of words comes railing, envy,
evilsurmises, and at last they come to the severest Cruelties, for such have
been practiced by the Arians, Donatists, Circumcelliones, and Papists, etc. And
how unfit are such souls for an habitation of God through the Spirit? How
incapable do they become of the Image of the Lamb, who was lowly and meek, and
whose voice was not heard in the streets? These are the mischiefs they do to
Religion, the injuries they bring upon the Church; but they stay not here.

SECT. 6. The Consequences of Dissentions as to the Civil State.
FOr they vex the State also, which being Christian, cannot be safe while the
Church is in a Tempest. The mutual contendings of the divided Parties disturb
the Public Peace, distract the People with fears; how far the malice of the
more prevalent will reach, and the several vicissitudes of Success on the
different sides hinder the common Settlement, and represent new terrors. In
Ecclesiastical Histories, we often find the great Cities of the World in flames
kindled by Dissentions in Religion, the Streets running with blood, Churches
broke open to let in some new Intruder, and Armies called to succor the
Community, and stint the rage of the contending Sects, and the Gentiles though
unconcerned which part had Truth, yet felt themselves involved in the
Contentions of both.

But the mischiefs they bring upon a State are most evident in those Injuries
they do to Princes, and Magistrates; who cannot be distressed with
Difficulties, but the whole Community under them must have sensible Miseries.
Dissentions are injurious to them, as they take away that mutual Confidence
which ought to be betwixt all the members of the State, and more especially
betwixt the Prince, and People: (without which confidence a Nation can never do
any great thing;) men do not easily and willingly trust those whom they do not
think faithful to God, and so every Schismatic looks upon his Prince that does
not profess the same Opinions with himself. Hence comes it to pass that he is
obstructed to any great design; Constantine complained that he could not wage
his War against Persia when the Heresy of Arius did so perplex his Empire. For
he might justly have seared that other effect of Dissentions, which is, that
they give Occasion to some Ambitious Spirit to gain the Affections of the more
slighted Sect, and so fit himself with a Party to endeavor at Tyranny: for
pretending their Protection, and defense of their Cause, he might drive on his
own designs for a greatness not due to him. Besides, Dissenters in Religion are
fit Instruments for an Invading Enemy to weaken the force of a Nation, by
pretending Kindness to the discontented Sects, who easily are cheated to think
Changes will prove Remedies, and vainly hope for those favors from a Foreigner
which they despair of under their Lawful King. Nay, sometimes the
discountenanced Dissenters raise an Ambition where they found none; for it is
usual with them to give immoderate praises to all of their side, especially to
any Great man, whom they have chanced to deceive; and so by swelling him to a
Pride, flatter him to attempts at Power, that he may vindicate them from their
imaginary Oppressions.

SECT. 7. What the Magistrate should do as to Dissentions.
THus having seen the Nature, Causes, and Effects of Dissentions in Religion,
that they are directly contrary to the Interest of the Gospel, that they are
derived from Lusts, and Corruptions; and at best they are the Infirmities of
men, which first give them a being, and afterward nourish them, that their
Effects are as base as their Causes, and also pregnant with misery both to
Church and State. We may now proceed to form a judgment of Toleration.

First, I conceive all will grant that Every man in his Place and Order is
bound, to remove all such things as are so dishonorable to Religion,
obstructive to true Piety, and pernicious to Church and State; for his
Obligations to his own Profession, his Interest to provide for his own Peace
and Safety, and his Love to his Country; require no less from him: and indeed
this every Sect does practice, and endeavor; for while they labor to draw all
to their own party, they plainly declare they would have no dissentions.

Then it follows, that Magistrates, Kings, and Princes, and all concerned in
the Legislative, and Juridical power of their own People; are likewise obliged
to the same endeavor. For must Kings fit still, and be the idle spectators of
injuries daily acted against the Religion they profess, be quiet in their own
Dishonor, and their peoples Misery? and must they patiently see their Cities,
and Communities rendered more unsafe than a Wilderness, and more unquiet then
herds of Beasts? shall not a Prince labor to prevent the contempt of Religion?
bind up the wounds of his divided State, stop the avenues to all ambitious
Usurpation? but this cannot be done, unless it be his Power and Right, either
to prevent these Dissentions, as much as he can, or restrain and remove them if
they do arise. And were it not Lawful for Christian Princes to do so, their
condition must be far worse by becoming Christians, than when they were
strangers to the Faith; and they would be losers as to their temporal Rights,
by falling down before Jesus Christ: which is contrary to the will of our
Savior, who has commanded his followers to give them all their Dues, their
Fear, and Honor; nay, no man either loses or gains any temporal Right by
embracing the Faith; and therefore we are not to think, that when our Lord
would have Kings, and all that are in Authority, come to the knowledge of the
truth, that they might be saved, that he intended they should forfeit their
just rights, and part with that Power that should keep their People in a due
Subjection: For by the Law of Nature, Princes have power to use all just means
to keep their people in peace, and to be Ministers for their good. But if
becoming Christians they may not use their power to restrain dissentions in
Religion, it is not possible for them to secure the peace, and preserve the
weaker from the more strong, and violent; nay, nor guard their own just Rights
from those who will attempt at Tyranny.

How also can the promise of God be accomplished, by which he assures the
Church, Isa. 49.23. That Kings shall be her nursing Fathers, and Queens her
nursing Mothers. If those who have the supreme Dominion cannot preserve it from
the greatest Pests that she is obnoxious unto, and defend her from those things
which will at last bring a Famine of the Word, by which she lives. And how can
the Christians hope for that end of their Prayers, that Kings should
acknowledge the truth, since if they have no power to restrain Schisms, they
cannot secure them in a quiet and peaceable life.

It is said by those who are afraid that Princes who differ from them, should
concern themselves in the care of Religion, that the Magistrate may do his
Office toward the propagation of Piety by his own Example, Profession, and
Munificence. But alas, however effectual the Examples of Kings, if bad, are to
the licensing of Vice, yet Experience shows how little, though good, they
prevail to an Imiation of Virtue, especially in a Corrupt Generation; for such
cannot bear even with the Virtues of Heroical Princes. Besides, the Slanders
which the several Sects raise upon a King that dissents from them, blunt all
the force of his Example, and draws even his noble Acts to occasions of
Jealousy. Moreover, it is an unusual way of Governing, in things of so great
Concernment as Religion is, only by bare examples: When Corruptions are strong
and high, vigorous Laws only can give a check unto them. Nay, the first thing
that Schismatics and Heretics are taught, is to Despise Kings, and cast of
all reverence to Princes; as those that have so much of the World, that they
have nothing of Christ. And although the personal profession of a King, may be
an encouragement to the Truth; yet it is no provision for the Peace. for the
neglected Sects will through envy increase their animosities against the
indulged party, and so lay aside that reverence which is due to the Prince, as
a Common Father, and look upon him with that indignation as is used against a
professed Enemy. As for the Munificence of Kings to the Religious they approve,
it does more enrage the Factions. Constantine's Charity to the Catholics in
Africa that communicated with Caecilianus, first heated the Schismatics to
libel against him. Had not the Liberality of our Ancient Kings raised Bishops
above scorn, and put them in such State, as kept off contempt together with
want, they might have been as quiet now as a President of a Presbytery, or a
German superintendent, notwithstanding their pretensions to sole power in
Church affairs. But now the favor of the Prince is a mark for envy, and if He
has no other Guard for his peace, his Goodness shall summon troublesome, and
envious Spirits to Mutiny and Sedition.

SECT. 8. That a Toleration is not the way to our Peace, and Settlement.
THus it being proved, that the Magistrate is obliged, and has a rightful
power to restrain Dissentions in Religion, and to hinder those destructive and
sad Consequences which necessarily flow from them, and that he cannot attain
his end either by his Example, Profession, or Munificence to what he judges to
be truth: I conceive it follows, that he must use the most proper Means of all
Government, which are good and wise Laws, and a due Execution of them when
made. What these Laws should be, is not for private and particular persons to
prescribe: (this was the itch in the late Confusions, and did increase them;)
but is to be left to those whose Province it is, whose Advancement above the
common Level gives them the best prospect of the Inconveniences, and
Necessities of the people, whose Experience in the ways of Conversation can
suggest what is most suitable; and being Ministers of God, for this very thing,
may expect his blessing for their direction. The Undertaking therefore of this
discourse is not to determine the use of Power, but to show that a Toleration
of Dissentions is not (as is pretended in several Pamphlets) the way to the
peace and happiness of this Nation: Because it cannot remove the Causes of our
Distempers, nor hinder the destructive Effects of them. For if these
Dissentious are, as it is said, the wretched causes of our want of Settlement,
and it can be proved that a Toleration of them will make them neither less in
Number, nor in their Malignity, how can it be thought that we shall be any
thing the better for a Toleration of them. I shall therefore, 1. Give some
reasons in general, that a Toleration will not remove Dissentions, nor hinder
their effects. 2dly. That a Toleration is not for the Interest of our Nation at
this time. 3dly. I shall answer the reasons which are urged for it.

SECT. 9. That a Toleration is not the way to remove our Dissentions, nor to
hinder their effects.
1. UNless it were evident, that the men who speak and write for a Toleration
do plead their own Interest, which commonly imposes upon the understanding, we
might wonder how they could ever imagine, that a Toleration were the only way
to wast Dissentions, or make them languish as to their malignancie; that we
should have more Peace by permitting the Breaches of it, and come to a
Settlement by encouraging our Distractions. If indeed it were plainly
acknowledged that all these Dissentions grew from a Spirit of Contradiction,
then perchance a Toleration might suffer them to languish in their own fury,
and wast for want of Opposition: and by leaving men to their own giddiness, let
them come to Quietness by their fall: But then this may render the Condition of
Princes despicable, who must purchase their peace by the Prostitution of their
Authority; and get Obedience by giving no Commands. But this Love of
Contradiction, although it be sufficiently employed to go a great way to the
effecting of our Dissentions, (since it is so common a maxim among the
Dissenters, that an Indifferent thing becomes unlawful by being commanded) yet
this is not publicly professed; and therefore is not urged for a Toleration.

But Conscience is most pretended to be the cause of our Dissentions, To take
of this pretense, it is not necessary, and it would be tedious, to discourse
how vain are the Pretensions of the greatest part of Dissentions to Conscience,
and how difficult it is for the Dissenters to make out their Pretensions, and
what measure of Liberty is to be afforded to them. Our subject requires no more
then to show, that a Toleration of Dissentions that pretend to Conscience will
not abate either their Number, or their Effects. For the Conscience which is
pretended to color Dissentions, is either Erroneous, or Dubious, or
Scrupulous; because in many Dissentions about the same thing, the Consciences
of one party only can be guided by true and certain Principles, all the rest
must be abused by Errors, Doubts, or Scruples. Now although it lies not in the
power of mortal men to keep the Consciences of others free from any of these.
Yet they may take of all Encouragements to Error, and so make men more Diligent
in the search of the Truth, when it will not be safe to Deceive or be Deceived.
They may also restrain men from proposing their doubts and scruples to the
trouble of weak Consciences, the disquiet of the Church, and the scandal of
those who are without. And for this they have the practice of the Apostle for
their rule, Who commands the Christians, and Churches to do all that in them
lay to hinder such things as did administer to Contentions, as by Withdrawing
from them and Rejecting them; which are the expressions of Excommunication, the
greatest punishment the Church could inflict. Thus he commands Timothy, 1 Timothy
6 4, 5.
To withdraw himself from men that doted about Questions and strifes of words,
and those men of corrupt minds, who were given to perverse Disputings. He
commands Titus, To avoid foolish Questions, and contentions, Tit. 3.9, 10.
and strivings about the Law, for they are unprofitable and vain, and to reject
a man that is an Heretic. He commands the Church of the Romans, to receive the
weak in faith, Romans 14.1.
but not to doubtful Disputations, and yet the things which were among them
disputed seem to be of greater moment, pretended as much to Conscience, as the
Dissentions among us do, and he gives this rule to every Christian, how he
ought to manage his differing opinions of things in which the Kingdom of God is
not, Have thou faith, Ib. ver. 22.
have it to thy self before God; a man was not to publish his opinions, however
persuaded in his Conscience to the hinderance of Righteousness, and Peace, and
Joy in the Holy Ghost, all which, Dissentions do certainly hinder.

This was the Apostolical course to remove Dissentions that pretend to
Conscience, which if they be tolerated must needs increase, for the Itch of
disputing, Opiniastrete, desire of victory and applause, and the increase of
Congregations, which are Infirmities that stick close to the flesh, even of
Conscientious men, will maintain if not multiply the Dissentions. And if they
are maintained, What security can there be to the Church and State, that their
effects will not be as violent and destructive: For, it is a vain speculation
to think, that men who differ upon Principles of Conscience, will not by the
some Conscience be prevailed upon to endeavor the Propagation, and enlargement
of their way, and if they do so, it must be with the depression of others, who
equally contend for the same with them, and then whatsoever Ambition, Anger, or
Revenge can find as means for it, shall be sure to put in practice on both
sides.

But if Dissentions (as has been proved) have for the most part no other
Original than Lusts both in the Authors and Followers; Can we hope that Carnal
desires will grow modest by being Tolerated, and languish under a Permission?
That men will then certainly grow good, when they may without fear of the
Magistrate be evil? And that then they will learn peace, when they have an
Indemnity for being contentions and quarrelsome? Lusts are hardly retrenched
even by severe Laws, but they will certainly grow wanton, and be more cursedly
fertile in all their wicked effects when a Law licenses them.

SECT. 10. Instances of Dissentions increased by a Toleration.
THus therefore, whatsoever the Causes of Dissentions are, it is plain that a
Toleration of them neither lessens nor softens them; but this being to be a
matter of Fact, the best judgment we can form of a thing that is to come, is to
consider how the same thing was in times past; and if we consider the Instances
of a Toleration in former Ages, we shall soon perceive what we are like to hope
for from it, if now it should be put in practice.

The first Instance shall be that Toleration of Julian the Apostate, who though
at the beginning of his Usurpation, to delude the Christians to an acquiescence
under his Empire, he did profess Christianity, and observed their Solemnities;
yet when Constantius was dead, then he openly applied himself to set up the
Idolatry of the Gentiles. And that he might do this with ease, and without fear
of the Christians, by his Edicts he gave a public liberty to all and every
S^ct of the Galilaeans, (for so he called the Christians). To what purpose
Ammianus Marcellinus, who was one of his Courtiers and Officers, and of his own
Religion tells us, for he says, Am. lib 22. Dissidentes Christianorum
antistites cum plebe discissa in palatium intromissos monebat, ut civilibus
discordiis consopitis quisque, nullo vetante, Religioni suae Serviret
intrepidus. Quod agebat ideo obstinate, ut dissensiones augente licentia, non
timeret unanimantem postea pleb^m: nullas infestas hominibus bestias, ut sunt
sibi serales plerique Christianorum, expertus.
He did this with so much the more Industry, that Toleration and License
increasing their Dissentions, he need not for the time to come fear that People
would agree together, he having had experience that no Beasts are more savage
to men, than most of the Dissenting Christians are to one another. How far he
attained his end, the murder of Georgius the Arrian at Alexandria, the Tumults
about Athanasius, and the suffering of the Orthodox there, the Insolences of
the Donatists in Africa, the commotions at Antioch, and the frequent
Apostacies, are sufficient Evidences of the mischiefs of his Toleration; yet he
when he gave it pretended Kindness and Peace; for he admonished them to lay
aside their Civil Discords, and that every one without fear or contradiction
from any, should observe his own Religion. It is no great credit for
Toleration, that this man's practice is proposed for a pattern, by the Author
of a Proposition for Peace and Happiness, Page 15.
who to abuse the Age to an inclination of Imitating him, calls him Wise, and
Brave, (though with an allay of Cursed and Apostate). Which is no great wonder,
since every Sect commends those of their own Judgment: and it appears that that
Author is not acquainted with the History of that Usurper; for if he had, he
must have censured him for a vain and lightheaded person, and must have known
that the Toleration he granted, and not his Contempt of Christians, did them
the greatest mischief.

Another Instance is that of the Donatists, the Authors of which were before
spoken of. This Schism began at the Conclusion of Diocletian's Persecution,
about the year of our Lord 306. For the space of six years after they employed
all their arts to root themselves by spreading abroad Calumnies of Caecilianus
in all the Churches of Africa, and by confirming in frequent Synods their
Sentences against him, and all that did adhere unto him. But when Constantine
began to show his greater care of Christianity, and granting several
Privileges to the several Churches, did likewise among the rest take care of
the African, and commanded Anulinus the Pro-Consul, that he should exempt the
Clergy of the Catholic Church there, of which Caecilianus had the care, from
all Public, and Civil burdens or Services: and had also in his own Letters to
Caecilianus commended unto him the dispensing of his Charity to the poor of
Africa: this honor done to him enraged the envy of the Schismatics. They
thereupon exhibit to Anulinus, a Book of Articles against Caecilianus, which
they desired might be transmitted to Constantine: and not content with that,
send some of theirs to prosecute the charge. This being matter of great trouble
to that good Emperor, he refers the cause to several Bishops, and afterward
calls a Council at Arles, in all which the Donatists were condemned, and
Caecilianus quitted. This Judgment so far provoked them, that they slight the
Sentences of the Referrees, and Council, disobey the Emperor's Command, That
they should not without his permission return to Africa, and they also
prosecute him with Detraction, as being corrupted by the Catholics. He being
justly incensed by these Indignities, commands their Churches to be taken from
them, and themselves to be banished.

Yet about four years and an half after, whether overcome by their importunate
Petitions, or being willing to apply himself wholly to the business of Arius,
he remits their banishment, but with such expressions, as shows he did abhor
them; for in his Letters that left them to their Liberty, Brevic. Coll. Di. 3.
cap. 6.
he calls them Pessimos, and Christianae pacis inimicos; i. e. Most vile men,
and Enemies of the Christian Peace; and he is said therefore to have taken off
their Banishment, Aug. Ep. 152.
and to have permitted them to their own fury, Quia jam caeperat Deus in illos
vindicare. i. e. Because God had begun to take vengeance of them. From this
time they grew more restless, and came to that height by the time of Constans
(to whose part of the Empire, Africa did belong) that as Gratus Bishop of
Carthage in his return from the Council of Sardis informed him, the Church of
Africa was in a miserable condition, by reason of the Donatists; For by their
followers the Circumcelliones, they did resist the Governors of the Provinces,
and wandering through Towns, Villages, and Fairs, pretended to be the Restorers
of Public Justice, and upon that account, they suffered none to be secure of
their Possessions, they did set slaves at liberty to injure their Masters, and
delivered Debtors from the Creditors, burning the Bonds betwixt them, and many
other acts of injustice. He therefore advised that Emperor, that though there
was little hope of reducing the Leaders of the Factions, yet if he would send
some Ambassadors thither to persuade the People to Unity, and to this end to
bestow some Charity among the poorer sort, he might possibly prevail to draw
them off, and weaken the Schismatics. Constans follows the counsel that was
given, and sends Macarius, and Paulus to disperse his Charity among the People,
and to persuade them to Unity. The Donatists fearing the effects of this
Charity, write to all their Sect, that they should not receive the money from
the Ambassadors, and stir up the Circumcelliones to assault them with force;
upon which Macarius in order to his own safety, gets some Bands and Troops for
his own Guard, who slew many of the Phanatick Invaders in their attempts, and
having mastered their boldness, the Council was gathered, called the first
Council of Carthage, which did again condemn them.

But it was not long after, that Constans was murdered, and so those Donatists
returned to their old Insolences being not (as is probable) restrained by
Constantius; because they had joined themselves to the Arrians whom he
favored. But when Julian the Apostate had gotten the Empire by Petitioning,
Aug. Ep. 48. apudeum Sola Justitia locum haberet.
and slattering that professed Enemy of Christianity, with whom (they said)
Righteousness only had place, they gained that power, whereby they drove the
Orthodox from the Churches, in those places where their number was most
prevalent, and committed many Slaughters where they could not be resisted,
violated the Virgins, that professed Chastity, Aug. Ep. 50.
put out the Eyes of some, cut off the hands, and pulled out the tongue of a
certain Bishop: burnt the houses of private men, fired the Churches, cast the
Scriptures into the flames; and committed so many crimes as made that place and
Generation miserable and infamous. The following Emperor Valentinian did
nothing to suppress them, only set forth an Edict against their Rebaptizing,
and that without any Mulct at all. His son Gratian did also forbid the same,
and Command that those places only which they had taken from the Orthodox in
the Rebellion of Firmus should be restored. These neglects of the Emperors,
either busied too much with the Cares of the declining Empire, and employed in
the Resisting the rising Tyrants, were not much different from a Toleration.
And in that time the Donatists grew to that Greatness and Security, that they
fell into Factions, the Primianistae, and Maximianistae, and being secure from
all Laws against them, they were so bold as to make Laws themselves, Aug Epist.
166.
that is one Faction of them against the other; for the Primianistae sent a
Crier to proclaim at Sinis, that Wh^soever should Communicate with Maximianus,
his house should be burnt. At this time their Number was so great, that the
Catholics in the time of Theodosius, (who made no Law against them in
Particular, but only against Heretics in General, which Law the two Sects
pleaded one against the other,) were afraid to deal with them by the Laws of
Emperors which were against them; and the Pro-Consuls being terrified by the
violence of the Circumcelliones thought it most safe to Tolerate them.

But notwithstanding all this, when Honorius the Son of Theodosius, who
succeeded him as to the Western Empire, made a severe Law against them, and
bound the Governors of the Provinces under the same penalty as was to be
inslicted on the Criminals if they did not execute it; it did so much
contribute to the Unity of the Church, that Saint Augustine in his Epist. 48.
to Vincentius an Heretic says, He could show him many, Aug. Ep. 48. O si
possem tibi ostendere, ex ipsis Circumcel^ionibus quam multos jam Catholicos
manisestos habeamus, damnantes suam pristinam vitam and miscrabitem errorem,
quo se arbitrabantur pro Ecclesia Dei facere quicquid inquieta temeritate
saciebant: qui tamen ad hanc sanitatent non perducerentur, nisi legum istarum
quae tibi displicent vinculis tanquam phrenetici ligarentur.
even of the Circumcelliones (the fieircest Zealots of the Donatists) now
become manifestly good Catholics, who did condemn their former conversation,
and miserable Error, whereby they thought all that their rash fury ad made them
do, was done for the good of the Church of God: who had never been reduced to
that Soundness of Mind, but by the Laws that were made against them. Ib. Quam
multi ex ipsis nunc nobiscum gaudentes, pristinum pondus perniciosi sui operis
accusant, and satentur nos sibi molestos esse debuisse, ne tanquam mortisero
Somno, ita morbo veternosae consuetudinis interirent.
And again, How many of them now Rejoicing with us do accuse their former
Practices, and Confess that we ought to have been thus troublesome to them,
least they had perished in the Disease of their former Conversation, as in some
deadly sleep. And in his Epist. ad Bonifacium, He says, Aug. Ep. 50. Jam vero
cum istae leges venissent in Africam, and p^aecipue illi qui quaerebant
occasionem, aut saevitiam surentium metuebant, suos verecundabantur offendere,
ad Ecclesiam continuo transierunt. Multi etiam qui sola illic a parenbus
tradita consuetudine tenebantur, qualem vero causam ipsa Haeresis haberet,
nuaquam antea cogitaverant, nunquam quaerere aut considerare voluerant, nunc
ubi caeperunt advertere, and nibil digaum in ea invenire propter quod tanta
dam^a paterentur, sine ulla difficultate Catholici facti sunt.
That when those Laws came into Africa those especially who did wait for an
occasion, but were either afraid of the Cruelty of the Phanaticks, or were
unwilling to offend their Relations, did immediately join themselves to the
Church. Many also who were joined to the Donatists by a Custom delivered to
them from their Fathers, but had yet never understood what cause there was for
that Heresy, and never intended to search and consider it; yet then when they
began to inquire into it, and found nothing in it, yet should deserve an
adherence even to suffering, they without any difficulty become Catholics. So
that after these Laws that Sect did daily decline, and the more obstinate
Remainders of them joined themselves to the Goths and Vandals that then invaded
Africa, or else were mingled among the Pelagians, an Heresy that arose about
those Times. This instance shows how Toleration and Connivance does not
diminish dissentions in Religion, and how wholesome Laws do serve to Unity.

But were we without all other instances, we cannot forget what was the issue
of Toleration in our own Nation and our own days. That Faction which designed
the ruin of our Church and State, aiming to get a party for themselves, after
they had quite overthrown all, whose Cares were to be for Discipline, did then
give Liberty to all tender Consciences. By which the Dissentions of Religion
were so far increased, that it was the wonder of all considering men, how it
was possible so few years could produce such a prodigious Catalogue of
Heresies. All these also were carried on with the usual Effects of Schism. The
Independents fastening Antichristianism to the Presbyterians. The Anabaptists
charging the Independents of some relics of theman of Sin. The Seekers damning
all for Apostates. The Antitrinitarians and Socinians daily belching out
Blasphemies against the Son, and Holy Spirit of God. The Antinomians casting
off the Law of God, and the Quakers all Light to walk by but their own. How was
every house filled with Strifes and Contentions, and even the very Foundations
of Unity and Society, which are Families, torn in pieces. In every Town almost
which was capable of two Preachers, one Presbyterian, and another Independent
were planted there; like the Roman Malefactors, condemned as it were by the
Factions, to Dispute, and Preach, and Strive one with the other for the
greatest Congregation. Hence became they the sport of Atheists and Papists. How
often did the contending Sects give Disturbance to the Authors of their
Liberty; sometimes declaring for them, and another while bewailing their
Lukewarmness; forcing the Usurpers to all their Arts, now to cajole one Sect,
and to morrow to comply with another. The Remainder of the Parliament is one
while adored, and at another time scornfully slung off. The Cruel Tyrant is now
their Idol, anon their abomination; and they who raised them were often forced
to mourn for their Imprudence in a Toleration; which being at first invented as
an Instrument for their Design was afterward the Engine of their Ruin. This
is so fresh an instance, that it is undeniable, that Toleration was in great
part, the cause of our former Miseries, and our present Disquiets.

SECT. 11. That a Toleration is not for the interest of this Nation at this
time.
THose who so earnestly press for a Toleration of Dissentions in Religion
represent unto us for the Necessity of it, the great Miseries of the Nation
which come by them, and which we acknowledge to be the most necessary
Consequences of them. But it is also as evident, that a Toleration will not be
a Remedy for them, because that has been the very cause which has hatched
them to this Number and Strength. Whoever heard of the Names of Seekers and
Quakers before the general License was granted for every one to be as mad in
Religion as he pleased. Independents were not vulgarly known, and their Name
was as Obscure to the world, as the nature of that Sect was to the Authors
themselves in their beginning; till such time as they were summoned from
America and Holland to confront Presbytery. Presbytery it self was but in
Project, and Design managed by a few private persons in the dark, Ministers of
little note. But when men were free to break their Oaths, to renounce their
Subscriptions, and cancel all the Bonds of Faith; then those who had conformed,
Preached, and contended for the established Worship, appeared with the highest
zeal for that which before they dared not to own: and hoped to get that by the
ruins of Episcopacy, which they despaired to acquire while it was standing. If
then a Toleration did open all the avenues to our Miseries, how can we hope it
will be a Way to our Happiness? And how can that be for the Interest of
England, to which it owes all her past Troubles, and present Disorders?

It is for the Interest of England as much as for any other State, to have no
Factions, nor to permit any thing that may either form or nourish them. But the
Dissentions among us are now but as so many several Factions in the State,
which I do not remember can be said, of any of the ancient Schisms and Heresies
in the Church. Some of them might be against the Persons of the Princes who did
not favor them: but I have read of none that endeavored the Change and
Alteration of the Government of the Empire. But it is so with us, The Papists
are for the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome. Some of the other Sects are for a
Commonwealth, and think Monarchy in the State inconsistent with the Parity that
is to be in the Church. Others are for the Fifth-Monarchy, and think their own
Graces a title to Dominion, under him whom they look for to come, and until he
does come. In all of them there be very many of broken Hopes that have fallen
from those Fortunes, and Power which they were Masters of in our Troubles, when
they had either some great or little Office in their Cities, Shires, or
Parishes. And now having lost them, and restrained in the Tyranny they then
acted: think that at present the safest way is to smother their Discontents
under some dissatisfaction in Religion, and that to retrive their lost Hopes
they must get a Toleration. For when their Sects are allowed, their eminency in
their parties will give them advantages to drive on their designs in the State,
and make them Considerable either to bring about, or obstruct a change.
Therefore Faction in the State being thus interwoven with Dissentions in
Religion, the Toleration of one sort is the permission of another. And we may
justly fear that they will use their Opportunities (if they get any) to our
greater Confusion. They being now enraged by their former Disappointments: they
have also seen their miscarriages, and are thereby instructed to a greater
Cunning to avoid the rocks they before split upon. It will now be done with
greater ease: the Waves are not yet quite down since our last Tempest; and
therefore the lesser Wind will soon move them: We have not had time enough to
recover our last sickness, and we may easily Relapse to our former Disease.
Most of the same men are alive still, who were the Causes of our Unhappiness;
they have the same Considences among their Parties, know all their Tempers and
Humors, and the Arts and Means of calling them together. Therefore to permit
these Factions, which is all one with a Toleration, cannot be for the Interest
of England, if Peace and Quietness, and the steady Administration of the Laws
be for the Interest of it.

It is also for the Interest of England that we have a Rightful Prince to rule
over us. Whose Just Title giving him a right to all the Affections, and
Obedience of the People, he shall need no Arts of Tyrants to keep them in Fear,
and to weaken them to a Vassalage. But Usurpers, conscious of their want of
Right, know that they have not those affections which are due to it, do
therefore endeavor to have the fears of such as cannot love them, and to that
end do all to weaken them: which nothing does so effectually as Schisms and
Factions. From the Courts of Tyrants crept those monstrous Idolatries of Dogs,
and Crocodiles; and he was no other who taught Israel to Sin in Worshipping
Calves. By the same way that these men use their power, do they also get it.
And Dissentions in Religion do facilitate the way to Usurpation. Therefore the
Commons in the Parliament, Jac. 19. give this as a reason, why the Sect of
Papists should not be connived at, Rushworth's Coll. p. 41.
because It opens too wide a gap for Popularity to any who shall draw too
great a party. And it is not out of our memory, that Cromwell got his Power by
the other sort of Sectaries. Therefore a Toleration is as much against the
Interest of England as a rightful King is for it.

To keep the people of England in their good Nature, not to have them corrupted
in their Manners, is certainly for the Interest of the Nation. This people are
free, and Openhearted, naturally full of Simplicity, devout and inclinable to
Religion: and therefore very obnoxious to Deceivers, that come under the show
of Piety. What cruelty would it be to expose such a people to the Arts of
Impostors? to suffer them to be scattered as sheep upon the Mountains, without
a shepherd? to be corrupted in their Natures, to become Barbarous, Perverse,
Jealous, Cruel, Fierce, and Proud? for into such Monsters, does Schisms and
Factions transform men; and where they find not an ill nature, they assuredly
make it. And therefore it is contrary to the Interest of England to permit that
which makes her people to be such.

SECT. 12. An Answer to the Discourse of the Religion in England, That the
Reasons upon which a Toleration is denied to the Papists, will conclude against
the other Sectaries.
HAving seen how ineffectual a Toleration is to the removal of our unhappiness,
and showed how little it is for the Interest of this Nation at this time: to
adjust this Discourse, it is fit to consider the reasons which are brought for
it.

Those which require our notice, are contained in a Discourse of the Religion
in England; the Author of which pretends to more Sobriety, than is usual in the
Writers for that way, and indeed he seems to be a man of such Parts, as
deserved a better subject than that he has undertaken. In the examination of
his Arguments, I shall proceed as becomes him who professes no love to
Dissentions: and therefore shall pass over all those things in that tract,
which do not immediately concern a Toleration of those Dissentions and
Dissenters which it pleads for, and leave the Papists to answer for themselves,
the reasons upon which a Toleration is denied unto them, viz. 1. That Popery
disposes Subjects to Rebeilion. 2. It persecutes all other Religions within
its reach. 3. Wheresoever it finds encouragement it is restless, till it bears
down all before it, or has put all in Disorder. But yet I must mind both the
Author and Reader, that the Practices upon which these Reasons are grounded,
are not peculiar to the Papists, but are common to all other Sects, as appears
in the Arrians, Donatists, and other Heriticks. And if the Papists have any
Doctrines which countenance these practices, they are to be accounted as the
issues of their Insolency in their own Greatness. Every Sect when it is in its
beginnings, is lowly, and meek; but having gotten strength so far as to lay
down Fear, they then boldly take Counsel from their Fortune, and dictate
against their contemned Inferiors, and professed Dissenters. 2dly. The Author
ought to have made it appear, that the Parties which are pleaded for, are
exempt from the guilt of that which is here charged upon the Papists.

For, 1. Is not the Disposing Subjects to Rebellion, in a great measure
effected by that Position, That it is lawful to take Arms against the King, and
that Arms may be taken by his Authority against his Person, and against those
that are Commissioned by him? Were not these the Positions and Doctrines that
were to solve the scruples of men in the last War? and were not these improved
to the Murder of a just Prince? Those that managed that War were all Dissenters
from the Religion established by Law; and there cannot (as is conceived) one
man be named among them, that was of the Church of England.

For the 2. The persecuting of all other Religions within its reach. Did not
those who took the Covenant bind themselves to it by Oath? Solemn League and
Cov. Art. 2.
viz. to extirpate Popery, and Prelacy, and Superstition, Heresy, Schism, and
whatsoever they should find contrary to sound Doctrine. And whither this
Extirpation was not a Persecution, let all Ages judge when they shall read the
History of the late times, and there find the Plunderings of Papists: the
Sequestrings, Plunderings, and Imprisonments in the nastiest Prisons, and in
holds of Ships, of those Ministers and Fellows of Colleges, that were the
Asserters of Liturgy, and the Government legally established in the Church of
England.

As for the 3d. A restlesness where it finds encouragement, till it bears down
all before it, or has put all in disorder. The late practices have plainly
declared, that this is not peculiar to the Papists. For we have seen a Party,
that from the time of Queen Elizabeth, through all discouragements, and in
despite of the Authority of Princes have still been restless; till they met
with those that thought them necessary for other Designs: and being then
encouraged, they so far labored to bear all down before them, that at last
they put all in disorder, and were themselves upon the brink of Destruction,
together with a confused Nation.

If therefore these be sufficient reasons to deny a Toleration to one Sect, it
will seem unequal if it should be granted to others that are no more innocent
of the same Crimes. So that this Author has laid down grounds, upon which
Toleration is to be denied as well to the other Sectaries, whom he pleads for,
as to the Papist.

The VIII, IX, and X. Sections of that Discourse is to show that the Reformed
Religion makes good Christians, and good Subjects; and it is the permanent
Interest of this Kingdom, that it ought to be settled in its full extent: All
which needs no Dispute, if it be understood of The English Reformation,
established by Law, which I conceive that Author intended; but if it be meant
of any Reformation, of that Reformation, he will find it a difficulty to make
others believe him: but I will give him the most Charitable construction, and
so proceed to the rest.

SECT. 13. That there is no Necessity of a Toleration, nor any Intent to
extirpate Dissenters, but only Dissentions.
IN Sect. XI. He brings his Arguments for the Necessity of Toleration, which
only can give a color to it; for Toleration is by the Confession of all, one
of those things that are not good in their own Nature. The thing he asserts is,
That the Dissenters from the present Ecclesiastical Polity, are (as he phraseth
it) Momentous in the balance of this Nation. This he proves, 1. By their
Number, They are (says he) every where spread through City, and Country, they
make no small part of all ranks, and sorts of men, etc. The use of this
Argument (you must observe) 1. Has been one of the ancient Arts of all
Dissenters. In the Conference at Carthage the Donatists would needs have the
names of all the Bishops of their Party read, before they would admit any
Conference. To this very end that they might by their number daunt the Judge of
the Cause, and their Opposites. In Queen Elizabeth's time, when the Dissenters
were but in their beginnings; yet Mr. Hooker tells us, that they published the
Musters they had made of their Party, Preface to Eccl. Pelit.
and proclaimed them to amount to I know not how many thousands. To the same
purpose is the Number boasted of at this time. But 2dly. It is less terrible
now then ever it was. For, though the Multitude of Dissenters be great, yet
their Divisions are no less, which weaken them as to any undertaking;
Jealousies, and divided Interests, which are the issues of Dissentions in
Opinions, breed confusions in the Counsels of a Multitude, and distract their
Force: and therefore this Argument has the less strength to terrify the
Governors, as was intended, or to enforce a Necessity of Toleration.

The next argument is, that the dissenting Ministers, notwithstanding all
Reproaches, Provocations, and Wishes, do appeal to God, that they dare not
conform for Conscience sake: and whatsoever their grounds of Dissent are, they
still hold out, etc. The force of this argument is, (as I take it) that there
is a necessity of a Toleration, because the Dissenting Ministers will not
conform. But if this be a motive strong enough now, it might have been then,
when the Covenant was pressed, when so many thousand Ministers, and both
Universities in effect declared, they did not dare for Conscience sake to take
it, and held it out all the time of Tyranny; and yet there was then no thoughts
of a Comprehensive Ordinance, no Toleration, nor Connivance (unless it were of
some very few, whom their Relations covered from the fury of the Imposers.)
Besides, the Number of the Non-Conformists, compared with those that do now
conform, and of those that under the Usurpers suffered for Conformity to the
Laws, are so inconsiderable, that the Testimonies of a few ought not to come in
balance with the multitude on the other side. Moreover though it should be
granted that their Dissents are from Conscience, etiher Scrupulous, Dubious, or
Erroneous; yet we cannot say their holding out is upon that account: not as
that Author says, against hopes of Indulgence, but upon hopes of it. For it is
sufficiently known, that about that time the Act of Uniformity was to be put in
practice, there was then spread abroad through the whole Nation, a report, that
the King and Council would give an Indulgence; that their friends at London had
petitioned for it, and that the surer way to obtain what they aimed at, was to
hold out from Conforming: When as indeed there was nothing petitioned for, but
only an Indulgence for some few Ministers in London, who pretended to have been
very industrious for the Kings Return, without any consideration of their Party
in the Nation. Yet this had the effect of truth for a time: for it made many
Ministers that were inclined to Conformity, to neglect the Season when they
should have done it. And by this means were the greatest part of them trapann'd
into Nonconformity: For having lost their Livings, and having so publicly
declared against the Law, the Shame of being too changeable, and the
Unprofitableness of returning made most of them hold out. Though we can name
some after they had given examples to others of slighting that Act, did
immediately by their Patrons favor in a new Presentation, gain an institution,
by subscribing to what before they declared against. and no year is without
examples of some coming in to Conformity, when they have opportunities of
getting a Benefice by it. While the others are almost every year abused to an
Obstinacy by renewed hopes of Indulgence.

The third Argument is, because the several Laws for Uniformity for regulating
Corporations, against Conventicles, for the removal of Nonconforming Ministers
from Buroughs, etc. have not advanced the esteem, acceptance, of the
Ecclesiastical State, and the acquiescence of the people in it. To this it is
answered. That these Laws have not their intended effect, is not because the
King, and the Parliament were mistaken in their Counsels: but in that those who
were entrusted with the Execution have been unfaithful in their Offices. For
it is too apparent how these Laws have not been executed to the ends for which
they were made. They have been sometimes interpreted contrary, and beside the
minds of the Lawgivers, and the intent of the Law. Many sober Justices of the
Peace having done what their Oaths, and the Law required of them, have been
discouraged in their D^ties, having all their Acts reversed by others. And when
the Laws are not executed, it is much worse than if they had never been made.
For they do more encourage the Wicked, impunity hardens in sin, and men sport
with Laws that have no hand to ma^age them, as with painted Thunderbolts. The
Righteous and Just are Ensnared by a Law that is not Executed, for doing what
that requires; and yet not finding protection by it, they are obnoxious to the
malice, and hatred of them against whom the Law is made. Nay the Lawgivers
fall into Contempt, the King and Parliament who should have the Reverence of
the People, reap nothing but scorn by their Laws which are not Executed. For
how apt are some to think, that either they have no Judgment in making such
Laws, which they care not how they are observed: or to be very Changeable and
various, apt to dislike that to morrow which is this days Sanction: or that
they have no Love to the Goodness which they command others to observe: or that
they want a Power to enforce what they enjoin? Which soever of these it is,
upon which the not executing of the Laws is imagined to follow, it exposes the
Lawgivers and those that are for them to Contempt: and they who are
contemptible cannot be safe. Now this being our Case, that though Laws have
been made for our Settlement, yet they have not been executed, it is no wonder
that there is so little advancement toward it: but on the other side it is
strange that we are not in a much worse condition. So that there can be no
pretense for a Toleration, because these Laws have done no good, since they
were not vigorously executed to that end.

In Sect. XII. he labors to show, that The Extirpation of the Dissenters is
both Difficult and Unprofitable. This might have been wholly spared, but that
it is an Artifice of the Discourse to raise Fears in the Dissenters, that they
shall be proceeded against in some violent way of Terror, and to raise
Jealousies of the King and Parliament, as if they meditated Blood and Cruelty.
Nothing of this nature can ever be charged upon the Church of England, though
provoked, and incited by the cruelties on both sides: those of the Papists, and
those of the Sectaries, which were used to extirpate all her Assertors, All
that is endeavored is to extirpate Dissentions and not Dissenters. For (1) No
man's Conscience is imposed upon: but notwithstanding the late Acts, he may
enjoy his Opinion in his own house, and with his friends, if their number
exceed not four. (2.) No man either Lay or Clergy has any Subscription
enjoined him as a condition of Communion with us. Only it is required of those
who are to be entrusted with the Ministry in the Church. That they disavow all
Obligations and Opinions to break the Peace of the Nation: and that they assent
to the Use of those things which are for the Unity of Christians in this
Kingdom among themselves. Which is no more then what the Law of Nature has
granted to every Society, which the Church has in all Ages practiced, and
which our Adversaries themselves did use; for the Presbyterians required a
subscribing their Solemn League, and the Independents had their
Church Covenant. No liberty is denied, but that of divulging Scruples, Doubts,
and Error, to the offense of the weak: they may have their persuasions to
themselves before God. Nor is the penalty so severe after the third Conviction,
as that which is inflicted on Remish Priests at their first deprehension: which
yet these men account just, and clamoured against the late King, as a Favourer
of Popery, if it were not executed upon every one of them when they were taken.
By which it is evident, that there is no intent to extirpate the Dissenters,
but the Dissentions: which is not Difficult, nor can be unprofitable. Therefore
I shall not trouble the Reader with that Author's imaginary fears of Cruelty
upon the Dissenters, since there is no necessity for the use of it, nor any
grounds for such apprehensions. And this the Discourser himself was conscious
of: for he brings it in with a Peradventure, some think their total Extirpation
to be the surest way: and then disputes against Cruelty, and rants with a
threatening of beggary in Trading, in case they should so be dealt with. Was
this done as becomes a moderate spirit, and one fit for a Comprehension? It is
too apparent that there is much of a malicious Artifice in this Section. For
besides, what has been already showed, he is not content to call his own Party
an intelligent, sober, peaceable sort of men, the Residences of the no small
part of the Nations Sobriety, Frugality and Industry, which is the guise of
Schismatics so to praise their own Party to the dishonor of others. But he
most maliciously implies that the Characters of the Prelatical are Drinking and
Swearing; For he says, many will swear and be drunk, to declare they are none
of them, i.e. of the Presbyterians and other Dissenters. Thus he has publicly
Printed what the other Ministers of the Faction do privately persuade the
People: that there are no Ministers, or others of the Church of England but
debauched persons, and men of no tolerable converse. To which slanderous
accusation we will only say, The Lord rebuke them.

The next piece of malice is that he implies (which also is a reproach of the
Government) The languishing of Trade, the fall of Rents, the scarcity of Money,
the Necessities and Difficulties of private Estates; the general Complainings,
are from the not right stating and pursuing the Nations Interest, which is as
he Imagines, Comprehension and Toleration. As if a great Plague raging for one
year in an heavier manner then ever before was known in the City, the great
Mart of all our Trading: and another year in many of the Trading Ports and
Cities of the Nation. A War for 3 years maintained against the most powerful
Trading Nations in Europe, and so consequently in the World. The great
destruction of an inestimable Treasure by thefire of London. Besides the Arts
which Phanaticks and Common-wealthsmen use to make our necessities grievous,
and our complaints more clamorous. As if (I say) all these were no way
effectual to our present Wants and Decays; but the People are still taught to
cry the Bishops, and the Clergy, are the great Causes of our present miseries.
This is like that malice the Devil raised against the Primitive Christians,
when by his Priests he instructed the common rabble of the Gentiles, that when
there was any Public Calamity, if Tiber flowed too much, or Nile too little,
then to cry out Christianos ad Leones, i. e. the Christians must be cast to the
Lions. So now the Bishops must down, and Sacrilege must repair what our Sins
and Vanities have wasted.

Another piece of malice is in the Argument which he makes for his Adversaries
to justify their supposed cruelty; But this sort of men (says he) are
Inquisitive, and therefore troublesome to Rulers: and thus having harnassed his
Enemy, he attaques him. As if the Church of England did Envy her Children
knowledge, and that her Dominion was to be founded upon their Blindness. All
the Practices and Doctrine of the Church of England declare that she has the
same wish as Moses: I Would God that all the Lord's People were Prophets, and
that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them. For she fears no disturbance from
those who are Wise, and have their senses exercised to discern Good and Evil:
all her troubles arise from the Ignorant and Half-witted. Since she proposes
the Scriptures to every Reader, She cannot be judged to be averse from those
that search it, and that are inquisitive to approve things that are excellent.
But indeed she does, as the Apostle, abhor those that are ever, learning, and
yet never come to the Knowledge of the Truth.

In Sect. XIII. he would persuade us that what he had said is no Threatening to
Rulers, nor Intimation to Rebellion; for he says, Why may not Governors be
minded by Subjects of the State of their People, as it is indeed, without any
hint or thought of Rebellion? It is true, they may, if so be they mind the
Governors themselves, and with that Submission as is due to Magistrates: if the
Subjects are not Partisans, and so mind their own Interest to the Injury of the
Public: if they be such as may be presumed to have a clear Understanding of
the Nature of the People, their Grievances, and of proper Remedies. But
miserable must the condition of Governors be, if every private person who will
have the impudence to abuse their time and patience, must be of their Council.
If they must bear with the Remonstrances of every Factious Party, and must
admit those Rules, and Arguments, of Equity, and Safety which they have
modelled for their own advantage. If this be admitted, the Thrones of Princes
are levelled with the dust, and Parliaments shall have but a precurious
Anthority, and no more then what these Demagogues will give them. For this was
plainly the practice of the late Times; by which we were reduced to Anarchy,
and then bowed down our necks to the yoke of Tyranny.

And now, Let those who (as he will have it) are not transported with Passion
judge, what it is, to tell the Discontented Party themselves (as well as
others) in Print: That they are an Intelligent, Sober sort of men, the
Residences of no small part of the Nation's frugality and Industry; that with
them Trading, Civility, and Good Conversation do cohabit, and remove; That they
are momentous in the balance of the Nation, Numerous and every where spread.
That their Ministers are Examples to them of Constancy, and Resolution. That
hitherto they have been successful against the Laws. That if any meditate their
total Extirpation, as perchance some do: yet they cannot do it without hazard
of the Public ruin, or the loss of Trade and Wealth. That the not gratifying
of them has brought a Decay already. And that their Cause is good: for it is
for their Inquiries into Religion. Let them judge I say, whether to tell this
to the People, so, that the Supreme Governor (it is probable) may have no
notice of it but in a Mutiny, nor ever see these Rules of Safety and Equity,
till they be presented on the Swords of a Popular Rout: whether this is to mind
Governors of the State of the People, or to prepare the People to mind their
own State?

But he says, Should they whom he pleads for meditate Rebellion and War, they
were abandoned of their own Reason. We say so to. Nevertheless it is no such
impossible thing, but that a People may easily be praecipitated into ways of
violence, by such Popular Discourses as these are; for the last War had not
more specious pretenses nor higher encouragements then are here represented.

And indeed they need not War, for the Author does insinuate another way more
plausible, and less hazardous: and yet as effective; for he says, There be
sullen Mutinies that make no noise, but may loosen all the Joints and Ligaments
of Policy. But it will be an hard matter to justify such a Mutiny from the
guilt of Rebellion: For that does not consist only in taking up Arms, but in a
wilful refusal of Obedience, which is the meaning of such sullen Mutinies. And
it is as contrary to the Commands of Christ, as taking the Sword. For he
commands Obedience for Conscience sake: and not only when the Magistrate is to
be feared. So that the Author while he endeavors to divert the Imputation of
one Sort of Rebellion, does yet threaten another.

SECT. 14. That to Moderate the Established Order is neither Prudent nor Safe,
nor for the Peace of the Church.
IN Sect. XIV. the Author proposes three Expedients to comprehend all
Dissenters and says, That the Settling of a Nation may be made up of an
Establishment, a Limited Toleration, a Discreet Connivence. He is not so true
to his own Discourse, and his Reputation of a Judicious person as to tell us
what he means by every one of these, and how they shall be composed; yet he is
most kind to the Establishment, as that which concerns himself and his own
party, and though he do not tell us what it is in particular, or shall be; yet
in

In Sect. XV. he tells us in General, That the Established Order should be so
broad, that by its own force it may be chief, and control all Parties. That it
be compact to promote Sound Doctrine and godly Life: and to keep out all wicked
Error and practice. And therefore must not have narrower bounds, then things
necessary to Christian Faith, and Life, and godly Order in the Church. But we
say this Establishment is not enough for a Settlement, because it does not
secure the Peace; and how can we settle but in that? To this the Author
questioneth, Why should not the great things of Christianity in the hands of
Wise Builders, be a sufficient Foundation of Church-Unity and Concord? We
answer (1) that they are not: For it is plain the Church of England and the
Presbyterians are agreed in the great things of Christianity, and yet there is
no Concord betwixt them. (2) They alone cannot be, Because there may, and does
arise Dissentions about the Persons, to whose care these great things shall be
entrusted to see them conveyed to Posterity: whether they shall be Single
Persons, or a Consistory, or each single Congregation. And men also may differ
concerning the Means of Conveying these things; the Worship of God, and the
Circumstances of it, as we see they do. Therefore to preserve Peace among her
Members; (who if they Dissent cannot be brought to Unity, but by the
Determinations and Injunctions of their Lawful Superior) the Church has need
to determine more then the great things of Christianity: and to enjoin more
then what is barely necessary to Faith and Order. We say as well as he, that
Moderation and Charity are far more excellent than glorying in Opinions,
Formalities, etc. but we say also that Charity cannot be where there is not
Peace.

The next argument is, That some parts of enjoined Uniformity are but
Indifferent, and have been long Disputed from Bishop Hooper 's time to the
present Nonconformist, and, if this be concluding, they ought therefore not to
be enjoined. To which we answer 1. that they being Indifferent, i. e. neither
Commanded, nor forbidden by God, are therefore the proper matter for the
Injunctions of the Magistrate. Since we are Obliged to the things Commanded by
God, although the Magistrate do not Command, yea though he does Contradict: and
what God has forbiden we are bound not to do, though the Magistrate leave us
to Our selves, or Command the contrary; and therefore a thing Indifferent is
the most proper subject of the power of man, therefore because it is so, it
cannot be concluded, that it ought not to be enjoined.

2. If things long Disputed, and Doubted may not be enjoined, then let them
tell us what may; for there is scarce any Truth which has not had its Heresy
contrary to it: and therefore the Church may not enjoin things necessary to
Faith and Order: which this Author in few lines before granted to her. Besides,
Would not this Argument be as well urged by the Papists; for their Cause has
been disputed even from the beginning of Luther's Reformation by several men of
great Parts and Abilities, that wanted not Pretensions to the Titles of
Learned, and Conscientious. So also may the Socinians urge that the Points we
hold against them have been Disputed almost from the beginning of the
Reformation. But yet the Author contends, it is not fit that the first should
have a Toleration, and I suppose he will be ashamed to pretend for the last.

But then he inquires, What shall a man do that doubts of the things enjoined,
seeing the Apostle says, He that doubts, is damned if he eats because he
eats not of Faith. To Doubt (we answer) does suppose Arguments on both sides,
and in such case the Common Rule is, the safest part is to be followed. Now let
all sober men judge, whether it is not safer to keep the Peace and Unity of the
Church, which is so frequently, and with so much Authority Commanded by Christ:
to be Obedient to the Higher Powers in those things which are proper matter for
their Commands, and wherein God himself has determined nothing: to Obey them
that are over us in the Lord, (all which are clear and plain Duties:) then for
a scruple or doubt of the Use of a thing that God has left to humane Liberty
(which the Magistrate has power to confine) to cause Schisms in the Church;
Factions in the State, Despise the Laws of Princes, and the Government of the
Church? As for the Text of the Apostle, He that doubts is, etc. It is an
admonition given to the Jews that were become Christians, that they should not
do that in which the Church had not interposed her Authority, by the Example of
others, which they themselves thought not lawful, or did very much doubt
whether it were so or no; for he that did go against his own persuasion, did
condemn himself in that which his practice did seem to allow. Therefore that
Text does not concern this Case at all.

The 2d. attempt is, That the Church not claiming an Infallibility, cannot
settle the Conscience by her sole Warrant, but still leaves room for doubting:
and in prescribed Forms and Rites the Conscience that does its office, will
interpose, and concern it self, etc.

I am willing to hope, that the Discourser writ this in Ignorance, and that he
is not guilty of such portentous Malice: that so he might destroy the Authority
of the Church, he did not fear to publish such an Opinion as would disturb all
Government, both in Families, and in the State: that would confound all
Society, and extirpate Feith and Justice from among the sons of men. For if,
whosoever diselaims Infallibility cannot settle, i. e. oblige (for if it does
not signify that, it signifies nothing) the Conscience: Then neither the Laws
of Kings, nor the Commands of Fathers, and Masters (who dis^^^ Infallibility)
are to be obeyed for Conscience sake, or in the Lord: but only as the power of
the Superior is able to enforce Obedience, or Punishment. No man likewise is
obliged in Conscience to perform his Vows, Promises, and Contracts: because
when he made them he was not Infallible, and being not so, he cannot settle his
own Conscience, but leaves room for doubting; and if he doubts (as he applies
the Apostles Text) he is damned, if he does perform; and therefore it will not
be safe to perform them. Thus this Mine that is wrought to blow up the Churches
Authority, will bury all Government, and Common Honesty in the ruins of it.

Such are the goodly Doctrines, whereby these men keep their Party close unto
them, and make them boggle at whatsoever the Magistrate requires from them, as
terrors to their Conscience. If the Author thinks he has secured himself from
the shame of the absurd Consequences of this Opinion, by that clause, Her sole
Warrant, he is unjust, and unfaithfully represents her Doctrine; as if she
pretended to bind the Conscience by her own Authority, which is very false.
For when We hold, That humane Laws of things not unlawful, do oblige the
Consciences of men subject to the Lawgivers. We do not refer the Obligation,
which is a necessity of Obedience, to the matter of those Laws, for that being
in its nature Indifferent, cannot be Necessary: But to those commands of God,
which enjoins us to be subject to the higher powers. To obey them that are over
us in the Lord. For those commands do of themselves, and directly enforce a
Necessity of Obedience to whatsoever humane Laws are not in themselves
unlawful, upon the penalty of God's displeasure. For the Truth of which, as it
is easy to prove, (were it not to render the Discourse too long by
interweaving Incidental Controversies) so do we appeal to the Judgment of all
sober Divines whatsoever. We have for it the Testimony of Mr. Calvin the
Founder of the Presbyterian Government, and the Greatest Ornament that ever
they had; who though he disputes against Humane Constitutions, yet meeting with
the Objection raised from that Text: We must be subject not only for Wrath but
also for Conscience sake. Answers by Distinguishing betwixt the Genus and
Species; For (says he) although the particular Laws in themselves, Call.
Institut. l. 4 c. 10. sect. 5.
do not touch the Conscience, yet are we Obliged by that General Command of God
which commends unto us the Authority of Magistrates, which is as much as we
desire, for if the Authority of Magistrates do either Directly, or Indirectly;
in General or Particular; by it self, or by virtue of Gods Command; bind the
Conscience, then must it needs be false which this Author says, that In
prescribed Forms and Rites of Religion, the Conscience that does its office
will interpose and concern it self, etc. For that Conscience which is guided by
the fear of God, will know its Office is to submit for God's Commands sake, to
what those that are over us in the Lord do carefully prescribe.

In the next place he brings in the Testimony of Woeful Experience, crying out,
No more of such Injunctions than needs must. It is true indeed, We have had
Woeful Experience of men, who to free themselves of such Injunctions; have put
the Nation into Confusion: and those who scrupled at a Surplice, made no
Difficulty to roll many Thousand Garments in Blood. And yet the Injunctions of
our Church were no more than needs must. For at the beginning of the
Reformation there were two sorts of men; Reasons of the Ceremonies before the
Common Prayer Book.
One that thought it a great matter of Conscience to depart from a place of the
least Ceremony, they were so addicted to their old Customs. Another sort were
so new fangled, that they would Innovate all things, and nothing could satisfy
them, but what was new. Whether was it not Necessary for the Church to
interpose for Peace sake, and by her Determination to put an end to those
Controversies? If it was necessary that she should interpose, she must either
fling off one of the Parties, or make a Determination that might satisfy both
sides, if Moderation would prevail: To have flung off that Party that were for
Ceremonies, had been imprudent, being the greatest Number comprehending all
those who staid at home, and did not fly in the time of Queen Mary's
Persecution; which did facilitate the return of Protestancy at Queen
Elizabeth's Reception to the Crown: It had been also the more dangerous, for it
would have made them more obnoxious to the temptations of Romish Priests, who
would have soon took the Advantage of so numerous a Discontented Party, and
wrought their Dissatisfaction to a relapse to Popery. That Party which were
against Ceremonies, though they were but small, as being but some few of those
that ^led beyond Sea, (for all were not so vain to like those things they saw
abroad, because they had no such at home) though they had likewise brought a
Dishonor to the Reformation, and an Infamy upon our Nation, by their unquiets
and troubles they caused at Frankfort: yet it had been great pity to have cast
them off, since they had suffered for Religion, and gave evidence that they had
a zeal for Piety, though in somethings not according to knowledge. Besides, it
would not have been of good report in the Churches abroad, among whom these men
had conversed, and with whom it was expedient for Ours to hold a good
Correspondence, and Brotherly Communion, although she was no more obliged to
receive all their practices, than they to receive hers. Nor was it safe in
their first beginnings to have rejected or despised any number of men, when the
Common Enemy was Numerous and Industrious. Thus it being neither Prudent nor
Safe to reject either Party, it was necessary for the Church to consult her own
Peace betwixt them. But this was not possible for her to do, without pleasing
each Party, to their Edification in some things: Which being Indifferent were
therefore in her Power either to Confirm or Condemn; and also enjoining some
things to the Common Observance of all. The Church therefore did take away the
excessive Multitude of Ceremonies, as those which were dark, that had been
abused by the superstitious blindness of the Unlearned; and such as did
administer to the Covetousness of others. This might have satisfied the
Innovators if reason could or if they, had had any desires of Peace, any
compassion for their Opposites that were subject to the same Infirmities with
themselves, though under different forms. On the other side, the Church
retained those few that were for Decency, Discipline, and apt to stir up the
dull mind of man to the remembrance of his duty to God. And this did satisfy
those which were against too great, and many Innovations. Now let any man judge
whether the Church's Injunctions at first were not necessary? The same
Necessity for them continues still. Because those that are for the Church are
as unwilling to have these Ceremonies taken away, as her Enemies are for the
removal both of them and her; And are these to be revoked by a compliance with
those that will never be satisfied? Shall the Church abandon those who in
Conscience adhered to her in the severest Persecution, to gratify those who
pretended Conscience to destroy her? Besides the imputations that have laid
upon the things enjoined, as Antichristian, Idolatrous, Superstitions, etc. the
War that was undertook to remove them; makes the Church think it her behoof to
keep them, lest Concessions in that kind, may be urged by her Adversaries for
a confession of those crimes, and taken as a color to charge her with all the
Blood that has been spilt in that quarrel: For so these very men served the
late Murdered King. Moreover, what a reproach is it for a Church, whose
Foundation is upon a Truth, to be various. And what advantage do the Popish
Priests make of our very Temptations to Inconstancy, which makes all that have
Authority contemptible; and Changes are full of danger. So that the Injunctions
are become as necessary as Prudence, Safety, and Honor can make them. It was
the importunity of Heretics that made the Primitive Church determine many
things in their seasons, which before were not matter of observation; and take
up some expressions which were not vulgarly known in the Church before. So
likewise Dissentions about things indifferent have necessitated the Church to
Injunctions; for as other Laws arise from Corruptions in manners, so Schisms in
Religion do beget Injunctions. We wish as well as you that Injunctions were
fewer, i. e. we wish you had never given occasion for them.

But that we may know what is necessary, he tells us, That the Indisputable
Truths of Faith, and the Indispensable duties of Life, are the main object of
Church Discipline. Yet he leaves us still in the dark; for what are those
Indisputable Truths? since there is scarce any Truth of Faith that has not
been disputed against; if these be the main of her charge, she has a narrow
Province; and Papists, and Socinians, and every Heretic may promise themselves
exemptions from her care. And as for Indispensable Duties, is there any one
duty more Indispensable, that is more strictly enjoined then the Unity, and the
Peace of the Church? and yet all this dispute is to deprive her of the means
that were proper for it: and because she will still take care of it, she cannot
avoid the slander in the last words of that Paragraph.

In the next place, he would have the Moderation which the Church of England
uses in her Articles of Predestination, etc. to be likewise used in the present
Orders and Ceremonies. But the case is not the same. Those points are so full
of difficulty, that they, and questions of that nature, have been matter of
Dispute in all Ages, and all Religious: therefore our Church did with prudence
take notice that there were some common Truths on both sides, which have
analogy to the Faith, and are a Foundation for Good Life; and these she is
tenacious of, and leaves the nicer speculations to the curiosity of Disputers.
But about her Orders and Ceremonies, this is the only thing to be resolved;
Whether the Church has power to enjoin an indifferent Ceremony? which sure may
be soon disputed, and determined. Besides, the Dissenters are not able to name
any one Church besides Ours, from which there was a Schism made for a Ceremony.

His last Argument against Injunctions, is, Men might more easily agree in the
use of these little things, or of some of them, were their Internal Judgments
spared, and subscriptions not enjoined. Churches and States have never thought
it safe to permit the concernments of their Peace to the Ingenuity of men, but
have secured their Quiet by strict Laws, and the Engagements of those who were
to minister in them. I have showed above that Toleration of Dissentions (that
is, a leaving men to their different opinions) has not abated, but increased
them. It has been found necessary that men should declare their Internal
Judgments to keep off their Disputes against things in practice; for if men
were left to this Itch of Wrangling and doting about Questions, the smallest
Doubts and Scruples may be blown up to the most bloody Contentions. It was
observed that the Controversies betwixt the Lutherans, Europe Spec. p. 172.
Edit. 1637.
and Calvinists were but a coal, which a wise man with a little moisture of his
mouth might soon have quenched: but at length the Ministers, with the wind of
theirs in their Disputings, have so enflamed them, that it threatens a great
ruin and calemity of both sides. So that to take off Injunctions on this
score, is neither Prudent not safe. But alas, there is no Probability, that, if
they be not enjoined, they will ever be used: they themselves have given us too
full an experience. For all the time from the King's coming home, to the time
that the Act of Uniformity was to be put in Practice, there was a suspention of
these Injunctions: yet it is sufficiently known that none of the present
Non-Conformists did in the least measure agree in the use of any these little
things (as he calls them) but Writ, Preached, and Railed against them. And
though desired by the King, to read so much of the Liturgy as themselves had no
exception against, and so could have no pretension from Conscience. Yet the
honor of their Party, and their Credit, was not to be reconciled with such a
compliance to the Condescentions of their Sovereign, they thought to bring Him
and the Parliament to lower terms, by being high in their own Resolutions. So
fresh an experiment cools us as to all the hopes this Author suggests unto us
of what they may do. When as neither he, nor they will give any assurance, that
they will do so. It is needless therefore to argue with him, what the Church
should do in case their own good nature would bring to them Conformity, since
it appears but a Chimera of his own Fancy, and it would be but sport to talk of
that which neither was, nor is, nor is like to be.

It is as vain and needless to speak to the XVIth. which enquires, Whether the
Dissenters are capable of being brought into such a Comprehension. For since
this Comprehension is to be formed by moderating the established Order; and
this Moderation is to be performed by taking away all the Injunctions that the
Church and State have made for peace sake; which abrogation cannot be proved to
be either safe or Prudent, and would be the Prostitution of the Authority of
the King and the Parliament, to the forwardness of men that will not be
satisfied, and therefore not fit to be done: to what purpose then will it be to
argue, Whether they would receive, what is dangerous to give? Besides, the
Dissenters are of several Sects, and every one of them have the same common
pretensions. For they all profess they dare not conform for Conscience sake:
They are angry if you do not believe them to be as Godly, Sober, Civil, as they
themselves say they are: They boast of their Number, and that Trading and
Commerce will either Languish or Flourish as they are used: and yet for all
this, this very Author gives over all other Sects, but only the Presbyterians:
for he says, Be it supposed that some among them seem not reducible to Public
Order; but another sort there are, whose Principles are fit for Government, i.
e. Presbyterians. Thus all this noise for comprehension is but for one only
Sect that has no other pretensions to the kindeness of the State, but what are
common to all, and therefore in equity should be no more considered than the
others. Nay but, says the Discourser, they are of chiefest moment, their
Principles are fit for Government, the stability whereof has been experimented
in those Countries, where they have had the concurrence of the Civil Powers.
But yet this cannot satisfy us; for no experiment has yet ever been in the
World, of Presbytery permitted, and encouraged where there was a Protestant
Episcopacy, (as this comprehension supposes.) For where Episcopacy is
established by the Ancient and Fundamental Laws of a Nation, there Presbytery
is no other but a Sect; and being so, will, as (the Author says of) Popery,
and as every Sect; and as we have had a late experiment of this very
Presbytery, be restless till it bear all down before it, or has put all into
Disorder.

It is also not for the credit of Presbytery, which the Author adds, that Their
way never yet obtained in England, nor were they favored with the Magistrates
vigorous Aid, etc. For if those that brought it to the light, encouraged it,
bound themselves, and all they could either persuade or terrify, to it by a
Solemn League and Covenant. If they who for this plundered, Sequestered, and
Undid many thousand Families in the Nation, (for the Covenant was to Establish
this Presbytery) were yet afterward Sick of it, and gave it no more, nay, not
so much countenance as they did to the other Sects, whom this Author says, are
not reducible to public Order: it is a strong presumption that they found the
principels of Presbytery no more fit for Government than the Principles of any
other Sects. So that it is to be conclued, that in the Judgment of the first
Admirers and Friends of Presbytery, it is no more capable of being brought into
a Comprehension than any other Sect. For as they made use of it to undermine
Episcopacy, so they hissed for all other Sects to affront, reproach, and baffle
Presbytery.

But notwithstanding all this, the Author, though he waves the Asserting of
their Discipline, yet he makes this inquiry, Whether the Presbyterians be of a
Judgment and Temper that makes them capable of the Magistrates Paternal Care
and conduct to such a stated order as will comport with this Church and
Kingdom? This in plain English for the Original is a Dialect of Canting, is,
whether Presbytery is to be established together with Episcopacy? or, Whether
Ministers that are of the Presbyterian persuasion, are equally, and together
with the Ministers of the Church of England to be admitted to all the Benefits
and Offices in it? In this question we are for the Negative, upon these
reasons. 1. Because the Principles of Presbyterian Persuasion do not admit any
Stability, but may be drawn out to patronize the wildest Sects that are, or
have been. This was long since observed by Archbishop Whitgift, and Learned
Mr. Hooker, men of great Judgment, Bishop Sanderson's Preface, Sect. 23.
and famous in their times; who did foresee, and foretell, that if ever
Puritanism, (which was the Name in those days for Presbytery) should prevail
among us, it would soon draw Anabaptism after it: and since their days we have
had a clear experience of it, that not only Anabaptism, but also Quakers, and
Seekers, grew up out of their principles. And how can we ever hope for
settlement, if such an Avenue be opened to every Sect?

2. If men that are persuaded in their Consciences, that our Ceremonies are
Idolatrous, and Superstitious, and at best but trifles, our Liturgy and
Government Popish and Antichristian, be joined with men far otherwise persuaded
in their Consciences; what a vanity is it to think we shall have peace?
especially since by their persuasions the very means of Peace, the
Determination and Injunction of a Superior is also cut off. For this Author
said before, Nothing that has not infallibility can settle the Conscience. To
think that these Differently persuaded men will content themselves with their
own Opinions, is to imagine they will all be Wise on both sides; which is not
to be dreamt of. For there will be some Pedantique, Disputative, and Passionate
Divines that will often embroyl both Parties; and we must be continually
quarreling to the sport of our Enemies, the reproach of the Gospel, and the
disquiet of our Nation.

But yet the Author is for Comprehension, a pattern of which he gives drawn by
one suspected for a Socinian; but he does not tell us, that this he will stick
to, or any other; but he says, This or the like Latitude. When he is fixed in
his measures, we may consider how to answer. That the Presbyterians are capable
of a Comprehension, he would persuade us by showing how far they agree with us
about the things in Question: All which is nothing to the purpose; for in every
Controversy there be many things wherein the Dissenters agree: but they are
never a whit the nearer peace in that wherein they differ. He does not tell us
of any advance toward Unity that they have made in their Opinions; and the
account he gives us of the debates about Ecclesiastical Affairs, do but still
speak our Distance; and therefore we have no reason to conclude, that they are
yet in a Temper capable of a Comprehension.

Sect. XVII. being deligned for an Harangue, That Acquiessence in the Widened
Establishment is the safety of Religion, can expect no answer, till we know how
Wide the Establishment is. Which this Author has no where laid down, but only
talks loosely, in general that some such thing is necessary, and negatively,
that it must be without Injunctions: Which we have showed can never be an
establishment; and therefore I shall not trouble the Reader in arguing at
random against an uncertain Notion.

The like uncertainty we are at Sect. XVIII. which mentions Toleration and
Connivence, but tells not what they are, nor their bounds, nor to what Sects he
assigns them. Being little Sollicitous, it seems, for this; having before
provided a place of rest for himself, and his Party, in the Stated Order, the
Widened Establishment, and the Comprehension. Only to commend a Toleration, he
says, The World wants not an experiment of the safety of a Toleration. But we
want an instance of the safety of Toleration in any Nation whatsoever, where
the Supreme Governor had not a Standing Army, to Circumscribe, and Confine the
heats of D^ssenters in Religion to their own breasts, and keep off the
destructive effects of Schism. So that the Experiments the world has had,
reach not home to our Case. For his Majesty graciously declines all such Power
as may give any suspicion of Terror to the Nation.

In Sect. XIX. He advises Dissenters of Narrow and Rigid Principles to
Moderation: a good undertaking, and therefore not to be contradicted by any
Party; for all may, and do, make use of the same counsel to their Opposers. But
if the Author had exemplified it in himself, he needed not to have troubled
himself, or the World, in Writing this Discourse. For that is the surest way to
an Establishment, If every Christian would be deeply sensible of the Common
Interest of Reformed Christianity, which is incomparably more valuable than
those private Opinions, which may have much of his Fancy and Affection: And in
despite of Dissatisfaction, acquiess in his Private Securi^y and Freedom, and
not reach after that Liberty that may unsettle the public Order, and undermine
the Common Safety.

His last attempt is to reconcile this Comprehensive Way to three Important
Interests, and first to that of the King, Sect. XX. In which I cannot find one
Argument to prove that this Comprehensive Way is for the Interest of the King.
And indeed it cannot: for the grand Interest of the King, as of all other
Princes, is the mutual Confidence betwixt Him and His People, which can never
be attained in establishing Dissentions among the People: for in that State he
shall then be always encumbered with the Jealousies of some one Part or other;
and then all the Blessings they have enjoyed by his Government shall be turned
to ruin him, when their Advantages do encourage. Witness the Late King,
against whom was used the Wealth, and Plenty with which His and his
Predecessors Reigns had blessed the Nation; and therefore it follows that the
greatest Interest of the King is to have no Dissentions, that so he may have
the most assured Confidence of the People.

But the Author minds not Arguments for his Position, he is more busy to show
how kind His Party have been to Monarchy, and that the unkindness which men of
their Persuasion showed to it at the beginning of the War, (when they would
have reduced it to the Royalty of a Duke of Venice) did arise from other
Causes, that lie at the bottom. That they declared against the Murder of the
late King, and acted vigorously for the Restitution of His Present Majesty. I
for my part would be glad to believe, and therefore leave others to contradict
it; and there are some in the world that do no less for this Authors Party,
then he has done for the Papists; that is, take of all their Pretensions on
this ground, to the kindness of the King. If they be friends to Monarchy, they
are not very happy, and few know of it; for there is no Prince, that we have
had since they were known, but have thought otherwise of them, and given them
such Characters as no man would have given to his Friends: When he says, that
the Anti-Puritan Interest, as occasion serves, can contest with Kings, and
pretend Conscience too; If he means this of the Church of England, he is not
able to give an Instance, and an Accusation without a Proof is but a Slander.
If he meant it of the Papist; Why does he urge it against us? for they do as
all other Sects do.

But he would not have these things repeated; for he says, Acts of Indemnity,
should be also Acts of Oblivion. I hope he would not have us lose our
Understandings, as well as our Memories of what was done. The Act did not
intend this, that bound us, not to Remember to Revenge; but yet Reason would
have us Remember to a Caution; that we come not to the same Miseries, and that
is best done by considering what is past.

In Sect. XXI. he considers this Latitude in respect to the Interest of the
Church, and Clergy. In this Consideration he first Commends the
Non-Conformists; and having showed how far they agree with us, he says, The
Ministers of this Persuasion are Godly and Learned, able, and apt to teach the
People, and no small part of the Congregations in England feel the loss of
them. We are not to wonder that he assigns so great Virtues to Ministers of his
own Persuasion: It has been the practice of old, for every Sect to be
immoderate in the praises of their own Party: Nay, it is very rare, if they do
not impale all that is praiseworthy to themselves, Tert. l. de Praescript c.
41. Nunquam facilius proficitque quam in Castris rebellium ubi ipsum esse
illic, promereri est.
so Tertullian observed of the Schismatics in his time: Proficiency in Virtue
was no where so easy as in the Congregations of those that revolted from the
Church, for to be among them was to be deserving. But let it be true concerning
some of them, as I believe it is; yet we do not take it as an evidence that
they are so, nor that they are the more so, because they scruple the
Injunctions of the Church. Besides, even Godly men may and have been through
some Infirmity, Prejudice, or Mist^k^, through want of Experience in the ways
of Converse, or through Implicity of heart being obnoxious to the arts of other
men, and so made their properties for some strange designs: Such persons, I
say, may and have been the Causes of great Disturbance to the Church. Which
men, had they kept themselves in their proper Spears, might have been thought
the Blessings of their Generation, and such as the World was not Worthy of. But
forcing the Bounds of their own private Condition, endeavoring to set up
Vnpracticable Forms of Government, or Imposing upon others; have set the World
in such disorders, that they have been deemed the Pests of their times. Sozon.
l. 8. c. 11.
Thus the Religious men that lived a devout Life in the Deserts of Egypt,
while they kept themselves in their Cells, had the admiration of all that knew
them; but when their Weakness had betrayed them to that gross Heresy of the
Anthromorphitae; and they would by a Sedition impose their Opinion upon the
Bishop of Alexandria, they were then a reproach to Christianity, and a trouble
to the World. The case of Savonarola at Florence was the like, Guicciardin
Hist. l. 3.
while he kept himself to his own duty in Preaching Repentance to the debauched
Italians, and severely taxed the Corruptions of the Church of Rome, he had a
reverence due to him; and did much good in his place. But when he did seem
ambitious of, or at least not decline, the esteem of a Prophet; and did
endeavor by the Authority he had got, to change the form of the Commonwealth,
and therein to regard more the Interest and humors of his Party than the
Public good; he met with the Public hatred, and fell as a disturber of his
People. Thus Godly men may be the Causes of the public disquiet; their
godliness makes them not Infallible, nor fit for Government. Which if they aim
at without, or against a Lawful Authority; the Church may reject them lying
under such Circumstances, and answer the Lord of the Harvest, with the
direction, one of his Chief Shepherds St. Paul has given, Mark them that Cause
Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine you have received, and avoid
them. But how will they answer the Great Shepherd, for having declined the
feeding his Sheep only for Trifles, (as they call them) i. e. things not
unlawful, yet Commanded by the Magistrate his Substitute, and the Church his
Spouse? let them think upon that dreadful Account with horror.

In the next place he charges the Bishops with more crimes then he could number
virtues for his own friends; but the best of it is, he cannot prove them. And
he was sensible that he could not, for he does not downright affirm them but as
Impotent women vent their Passions, he insinuates them by many malicious, and
implying Interrogations; as 1. Whether the Bishops and Dignified Clergy, and
those of their Persuasion can believe, that the Church of God in these Nations
is terminated in them alone? No, they do not believe it: for it is even hoped
by them that Christ has a Larger Interest in these Realms, and according to
their hope they admit those very Dissenters to the Communion of the Church. But
observe where this Author places the larger Interest in Christ, that is, in
Nonconformist Ministers, for they only are debarred from the Opportunities of
the Ministry. 2. He asks, Whether it shall be said of the English Prelacie,
that it cannot stand without the ejection of Thousands of Orthodox Pious
Ministers? Men may say what they please, if they never think of giving account
of every idle and false word, but they have no reason to say so; For the
English Prelacie is the greatest encouragement of Orthodox, and Pious
Ministers, that ever Protestancy saw: and has had the Testimonies and
Observance even to sufferings, of far more exceeding Number of Thousands, then
ever their Adversaries could be accounted. Do but compare those many thousands
that were undone by the Covenant, with those few that did not Conform; and then
it will appear but an empty boast to talk of their Number. Howsoever neither
Episcopacy, nor any Government Civil or Ecclesiastical, can stand if it do not
secure it self, by frustrating the attempts of those that Plot, and contrive
against it.

How great a slander it is to say, That Prelacy dreads Knowledge in the People,
I have showed before: and I never heard of any but this Author that had that
Maxim, No Ceremony, No Bishop. How worthy had it been for this Author to have
proved, that the Bishops did fear the Preaching of Indubitable Truths? but this
can no more be proved, than that his Party are Peaceable. The Established
Clergy refuse not their Brethren, if they will come to join in the Work of the
Lord, and give but Security that they will be Peaceable; all the Emoluments of
the Church are obvious to them. Thus I have showed how false are all these
Slanders.

After these most false Accusations of the Bishops and Clergy, he proceeds to
show how weak their State is, which he says, Is not advanced by these present
Rigors, nor more rooted in the hearts of the People. To this we answer; That it
is no wonder that a Form of Church Government should meet with many
Difficulties, in its return after the Proscription of twenty years. For in that
space, some hundred thousand Souls that were not born before, or had not before
come to the use of their Reason, must needs be tainted with a prejudice against
it, by hearing nothing almost from the Pulpits but Invectives and slanders of
it. And it is no easy thing to raze out the first Impressions that are made
upon the mind. Besides this, it was not to be expected, but that the
Restitution of that Church should vex all those whom the Ruins of it had made
rich. And that when they were to Disgorge what they had Sacrilegiously
devoured; they would also vomit out all their Choler, empty their Spleen, and
vow an eternal hatred against those that recalling their own Proprieties
reduced them to their former Wants, and confine them again to their ancient
narrow homes. Add to these all such as are Cast from their Power, broken in
their Fortunes, disappointed in their Hopes, by the return also of the Civil
Government. Which when they dare not directly oppose, they think they may with
more security oppugn by assaulting the Ecclesi^stical State, that is a prop and
support of it: who hope to Wound the King through the sides of the Church; and
are therefore more industriously and designedly malicious against her. Others
there are who provoked by some unkindnesses of particular Churchmen, rail at
all. Some that cannot get the Promotions of the Church, are angry with those
that have them. Many that like poor Ministers of the Church of England, do yet
envy those who have no necessity to crouch before them. The Spirit of
Contradiction, the Variety of Changes in the late Times; the small reverence
that People have for Governors, (contracted by being used to speak against the
Usurpers, who had no right to their Affections) have so far corrupted the
Common Conversation of this Nation; that every Party which is uppermost cannot
escape their reproaches, and hatred. And the Arts of the Sectaries to thwart,
discourage all endeavors to Uniformity; to slander all those whose Offices, or
Parts are most obstructive to them, (for there is not a man of such escapes the
dirt, they can sling) is not the least cause of the slow progress. All these
considered, it cannot seem strange to an Observing person, that Prelacy drives
but heavily. It must be a Generation or two, not seven years, that can wear out
all these Difficulties. All this does not take off from the Intrinsic Worth of
Prelacy. Whilst on the other side, Presbytery languished almost as soon as it
had a being, Erastians, and Independants baffled it in the Assembly, which was
its Cradle, and proposed it to a Public scorn. Therefore it is imprudently
done for them to upbraid us of Weakness, who themselves could not keep their
standing for above two or three years.

The Particulars by which he Remonstrates our weakness are either unavoidable:
as what remedy can there be if the Latitudinarians Indifferent men, and
Conforming Puritans do not Conform in the simplicity of Spirit as becomes the
Ministers of Christ. We can have no greater Security than the Faith of men. Or
else are common to all persuasions, as to have some among them that are a
reproach unto the whole, whose behavior may disgust other. And we can never
hope while the Church is on Earth, that it will be free from all Corruptions.
We are sure the number of such among us are far less than what the Dissenters
represent, who condemning the most unblameable, will not be very shie in
mis-reporting those that are not so strict as they should be. Therefore neither
of these sorts ought, nor can debase the Intrinsic State of Prelacy in the
minds of Wise and Good men.

As to the Question, If the Affairs of the Commonwealth should go backwards,
(I hope they do not intend to drive it that way) Can the Clergy alone be at
rest in their Honor, Power and Wealth? We answer no, and we do not desire it.
We cannot do, as the several Sects of Dissenters did, make our Addresses to
every Usurper, Congratulate every New Form of Government, Blaspheme the
Providence of God for their sakes, and pray for every one that had killed, and
taken Possession. No, we cannot do it, we must fall upon the same Scaffold
where Monarchy bleeds to death, and be buried under the ruins of the State.
You know we did so, and you may be sure it will be so again. No Party nor
Church does more strictly assert the necessity of Allegiance to Princes than
the Church of England.

He doubts of the truth of that Observation, No Bishop, No King; which the late
practices have made as evident as the day. But (he says) It is not evident,
that the present frame of Prelacy, has an Immutable Interest in the Regal Name
and Power. The Doctrines which Prelacy maintains, in opposition to Presbytery,
have so much Truth, and are so much for the Safety of Kings, that we cannot
imagine they will be so unkind to themselves as to suppress them. And the Kings
of England have seen so many reasons to hate Sacrilege, that we cannot fear
they will take away the Revenues of Bishops, and therefore we think the Prelacy
has as immutable an Interest in the Regal Power, as the Regal Power has in
them.

In the laft place, after he has said, That the Religion of any State must be
held up by its Venerable Estimation among the People, and that must be the
reality of Devotion and Sanctity, (which is a very great Truth.) He sincerely
(as he says) wishes well to the Clergy, for which we as sincerely thank him;
but then he adds these three Conditions.

1. That Bishops must not be the head of Ignorant, Lewd and Scandalous
Ministers, etc. This we think also they ought to take care of as much as they
can. But yet if such get within their Diocese, the fault may not be theirs. For
they are bound up by the Laws, and it is not with them as with the Triers, that
had as absolute a Tyranny as their Masters had over Ministers, and might reject
whom they pleased without any account. But now if Patrons present Unworthy
Persons, which have the Qualifications the Law requires, the Bishops must not
reject them. Nor can they as Committees turn a Minister out of his Living at
their Pleasures, but must give an account to the Laws.

The Second Condition is, That by their management the Sound Knowledge of God
may be increased, that Holiness and Righteousness may flourish, etc. This also
we acknowledge to be their Duty, and if they do not perform it sincerely, God
will require an exact account of them. But as to this they are much hindered by
the Obstructions which Dissentions make, and being distracted by the
perverseness of those that are without, they cannot be quiet, to look after
those that are within the Church.

But the third Condition is the main thing the Author drives at, The Settling
the Church in a due Extent. If the Extent here spoken of, be to Comprehend all
the Different Persuasions, and Contrary Opinions, this they cannot do, it is
contrary to the Duty which Bishops owe to God and Man, to permit Errors, and
embrace a Communion with Darkness. But if it be meant of an Extent and
Comprehension of Persons that have laid aside those false Persuasions, and will
now contend together with Bishops to feed the Flock of Christ, and to preserve
the Unity of it. This Bishops ought to do as their Interest, and the Interest
of the Gospel, (from which theirs cannot be separated). And this the Bishops
have done, and are ready to do. For all men know how willingly they have
Instituted those to Livings, who before had been the Enemies of their Order:
how they have invited into their Order, and the Church Preferments, those that
have preached and writ against them, and we want not any Examples that they
have been sincere in their Tender, for some have really received what was
offered; and we should have had more, had not their followers hindered them by
minding them of their own former Doctrines. And in this our Bishops testified
themselves to be of that Peaceable Temper of the Primitive Bishops. For the
Catholic Bishops Melchiades of Rome, Aug. Ep. 162.
and others of Africa offered to the Donatists, that if they would join
themselves to make up the Unity of the Church, they would give them
Communicatory Letters, although they had been Ordained by the Donatist Bishops;
and that wheresoever there were two Bishops, one of the Catholic Part, the
other of the Donatists, yet he should be first Confirmed that was first
Ordained, which soever it was: and that the other should be provided for
elsewhere, or else the survivor should succeed in the same Church. And when the
Donatists objected to the Catholics, that they coveted and took away their
Livings. St. Augustine answers, Aug. Ep. 50.
Would to God they would become Catholics, and then let them possess not only
what they call their own, but also whatsoever is ours, in Peace and Charity
with us. This is a Latitude which the Church did allow, and which the Bishops
are now ready to admit.

The third Interest which is that of the Nobility and Gentry, which in Sect.
XXII. he endeavors to reconcile to his Latitude, which he thinks they may
dislike, as that which will render the Citizens and Commonalty, and all sorts
more Knowing, and less Servile. Here the Author goes upon two mistakes. 1. That
this Latitude will make men more Knowing, which I have already showed it will
not do; for instead of building up men in the Knowledge of Christ, it will fill
them with empty notions of their Way and Party, so Tertul. de Praesc c. 42 De
verbi administratione quid dicum; cum hoc sit negotium illis non ethnicos
convertendi, sed nostros evertendi?
Tertullian observed of the Heretics of his time, What shall I say of their
Preaching, when this is their business, not to Convert Unbelievers, but to
subvert those in our Communion. 2d. Mistake is, That the Nobility and Gentry do
not like the Commonalty should be knowing. This is the same Suspicion he raised
of the Clergy, that they were afraid of the Diffusion of Knowledge; and this is
so unworthy an Humor, that I cannot think Noblemen and Gentlemen inclinable to
it. But he fays, that by being knowing they will be less Servile, and less
Obsequlous to the Wills of Great men. The Laws of England secure every man from
Servitude; the poorest Cottager is a freeborn Subject; and therefore as the
Nobility and Gentry cannot expect the slavery of Citizens and Commons: so they
cannot dislike their knowledge upon this only account, that it makes them more
free. But this Author conceals the true Cause why this Latitude should be
dreadful to the Nobility and Gentry; which is, that it will increase Factions
and Dissentions in Religion; and where they Reign there is not that Respect and
Reverence given to Persons of Honor, as is due to them. Clem Romans ^p. ad Cor.
For Clemens Romanus minding the Corinthians of the sad Effects of their
Dissentions, puts this as One, The Base rose up against the Honorable, and the
Vile against the Noble. And they may well remember how often they were
affronted and slighted by mean Persons in the times of the late Toleration. All
that the Author says upon this head, is some Politic Observations, but
nothing to the purpose.

He concludes in Sect. XXIII. With the General Security that comes by this
Latitude, in which he supposes the Common Peace may be settled in this
Comprehensive way; which he neither has, nor can prove, nor will (as he
dreams) the Necessity of Powers, and proceedings extraordinary be taken away by
it, but rather increased. For no Nation does tolerate Dissentions in Religion,
which has not a Standing Army to restrain the Effects of it, as appears in
Histories of Ancient times, and in the Practices of modern Nations: And
therefore this is it which more needs those ways and means as may trouble them
who are tender of the Lawful Rights and Liberties of English men, than the
enforcing the Laws upon Dissenters, which may be done by the Ordinary Civil
Power. We are not to be Frighted with what he says, That the Severities of
Laws against Dissenters may at length come home to them, or theirs, who are for
the Execution. For we are to do whatsoever is found necessary for the Safety of
the Church and State, and leave the future Events to the Providence of the God
of Peace. We know that the more peaceable we are at Home, the more Powerful we
shall be abroad. But we also know that Licensed Dissentions will always
persuade our Neighbors that we are Weak. It is well known, how foreign Writers
have observed Our Ruin might be easily wrought by the Puritans, who did
Dissent from the Public Establishment. They are not to be accounted Disturbers
of the State, nor of their own House, who follow the Advice of the Wisest King,
To fear God and the King, and not to meddle with these that are given to
Change: For their Calamity shall rise Suddenly.

FINIS.

