PERSECVTION Inconsistant With Christianity, Humane Society, and the Honor of
PRINCES. FROM The Testimonies of Themselves, and approved Authors, and Martyrs,
herein impartially Collected.

Whereto is added certain solid Reasons why no outward Force, nor Imposition
ought to be used in matters of Faith, etc. By those faithful Witnesses who
died under Suffering for the Testimony of Jesus: viz. Richard Hubberthorn.
Sumuel Fisher. Francis Howgill.


This being the third Edition of the said Reasons.

Now I say unto you, Refrain from these men, and let them alone; for if this
Counsel, or this Work be of men, it will come to naught; but if it be of God,
you cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found fighters against God.

Acts 5. 38, 39. Printed in the Year, 1670.

The CONTENTS
1. King Charles the Second, his Promises and Declaration for the Liberty of
tender Consciences. 2. Some Remarkable Collections out of Doctor Tayer,
Chaplain in ordinary to his late Majesty (so styled) his Book, Entitled (...),
A Discourse of the Liberty of Prophesying showing the unreasonableness of
prescribing to other Men's Faith; and the Iniquity of persecuting different
Opinions. 3. Instances out of diverse Authors, treating on the same subject; by
William Caton deceased. 4. Several Reasons rendered, why no outward Force nor
imposition ought to be used in matters of Faith and Religion, by R. H. S. F.
and F. H. 5. Several Saying collected from the Speeches and Writings of King
James, and King Charles the first.
Persecution inconsistant with Christianity, Humane Society, and the Honor of
Princes.
SECT. I.
King Charles the second, his Promises and Declarations for the Liberty of
tender Consciences.
IN the Kings Letter from Bredah, that was sent to the House of Peers, and read
in the House, May the 1st. 1660. and which Letter was ordered by the Lords in
Parliament assembled, that it should be forthwith printed and published for the
service of the House, and satisfaction of the Kingdoms; it is said in the Book
of Collections of the Kings Speeches, Page 8, and 9. And because the passion
and uncharitableness of the times have produced several Opinions in Religion,
by which men are engaged in Parties and Animosities against each other; which
when they shall hereafter unite in a freedom of Conversation, will be composed,
or better understood. We do declare a liberty to tender Consciences, and that
no man shall be disquieted or called in question for differences in Opinion in
matters of Religion, which do not disturb the Peace of the Kingdom; and that we
shall be ready to consent to such an Act of Parliament, as upon Mature
deliberation, shall be offered to us for the full granting that Indulgence.

And in the Kings Declaration, concering Ecclesiastical Affairs, which was
dated October the 25th, 1160. it is said, In a word we do again renew what we
have formerly said, in our Declaration from Bredah, for the liberty of tender
Consciences, That no man shall be disquieted, or called in question for
differences of Opinion in matters of Religion, which do not disturb the Peace
of the Kingdom; and if any have been disturbed in that kind, since our arival
here, it has not proceeded from any direction of ours. And it is said, We do
in the first place declare, Our Purpose and Resolution is, and shall be, to
promote the Power of Godliness, and to encourage the Exercise of Religion, both
in public and private. And in the same Declaration it is said, our present
Consideration and work is, To gratify the private Consciences of those who are
grieved with the use of some Ceremonies, by indulging to, and dispensing with
the omitting these Ceremonies.

In the Kings Speech to both houses of Parliament, the 8th of July, 1661. It is
to put my self in mind, as well as you, That I so often ( I think so often as I
come to you) mention to you my Declaration from Bredah; And let me put you in
mind of another Declaration, published by your selves about the same time, and
which I am persuaded made mine the more effectual; An Honest, Generous, and
Christian Declaration, signed by the most eminent Persons, who had been the
most eminent Sufferers; in which you renounced all former Animosities, and
memory of former Unkindness. And my Lords and Gentlemen, let it be in no man's
power to chargeme, or you, with the breach of our Words or Promises, which can
never be a good Ingredient to our future security.

And in the Chancellors Speech to both Houses, May the 8th, 1661. It is said,
He told you, but now (meaning the King) that he vallued himself much, upon
keeping his word, upon performing all that he promises to his People.

And also in the Kings discourse with Richard Hubberthorn, soon after he
arrived in England, he said, Well, of this you may be assured, That you shall
none of you suffer for your Opinions or Religion, so long as you live
peaceably, and you have the Word of a King for it; and I also have given forth
a Declaration to the same purpose, That none shall Wrong you, or Abuse you.

And further in the Kings Declaration, dated December. 26. 1662. wherein he
declares, first, his wonderful Restoration without the least bloodshed by the
Military Sword.

And he expresses his Clemency, or the Clemency of his Nature.

And he vindicates himself from diverse suggestions, of disaffected Persons,
particularly from that, of intending to subject Persons and Estates to revenge
or spoil, etc. and from intending to introduce a Miliary or Arbitrary way of
Government.

Also he expresses these words, as a malicious Scandal (viz.) That having made
use of such solemn Promises from Bredah, and in several Declarations since, of
ease and liberty to tender Consciences, instead of performing any part of them,
we have added streighter Fetters then ever.

And further adds, viz. We find it as artificially, as maliciously divulged
throughout the whole Kingdom, that at the same time we deny a fitting Liberty
to those other Sects of our Subjects, whose Consciences will not allow them to
conform to the Religion ectablished; We are highly indulgent to Papists, even
to such a degree of countenance as may even endanger the Protestant Religion.

These, and such like, in the said Declaration are related as venomous
Insinuations, most false and malicious Scandals, wicked and malicious
Suggestions, and the Fomenters of them, as the most dangerous Enemies of his
Crown and of the Peace and Happiness of the Nation.

And these words are further added, (viz.) It having been always a constant
profession of ours, That we do, and shall ever think our royal dignity and
greatness much more happily and securely founded on our own Clemency, and our
Subjects Loves, then in their Fears and our Power.

To give our People a Testimony of our founding all our security, rather in
their affections, then in any Military Power; the sole strength and security,
we shall ever confide in, shall be the hearts and affections of our Subjects
indeared and confirmed to us by our Gracious and Steady manner of Government,
according to the ancient known Laws of the Land, there being not any one of our
Subjects, who does more from his heart abhor (then we our selves) all sorts of
Military and Arbitrary Rule.

As concerning the non performance of our Promises; we remember well the very
words of those from Bredah, (viz.) We do declare a liberty to tender
Consciences, and that no man shall be disquieted, or called in question for
differences of Opinion in matters of Religion, which do not disturb the Peace
of the Kingdom; and that we shall be ready to consent to such an Act of
Parliament, as upon Mature deliberation shall be offered to us, for the full
granting that Indulgence. We remember well the Confirmations, we have made of
them since upon several occasions in Parliament; and as all these things are
still fresh in our memory, so are we still firm in the Resolution of performing
them to the full.

We do conceive our selves so far engaged, both in honor, and in what we owe
to the Peace of our Dominions, which we profess we can never think secure,
whilst there shall be a color left to the disaffected, to inflame the minds of
so many Multitudes, upon the scores of Consciences, with despair of ever
obtaining any effect of our Promises for their ease.

Such an Act, as in pursuance of our Promises the wisdom of our Parliament
shall think fit to offer unto us for the ease of tender Consciences.

We profess it would be grievous unto us to consent, to the putting any of our
Subjects to death for their Opinions in matter of Religion only.

Our expressing according to Christian Charity, Our dislike of Bloodshed for
Religion only.

Our Parliament is an Assembly so eminent in their Loyalty and their Zeal, for
the Peace and Prosperity of our Kingdoms -- can no ways be doubted in the
performance of all our Promises, and to the effecting all those gracious
intentions, which God knows our heart is full of, for the PLENTY, PROSPERITY,
and UNIVERSAL SATISFACTION of the NATION.

We think to give them the most important Marks of our care: First, In
punishing by severe Laws that Licentiousness and Impiety, which we find to our
great grief, has overspread the Nation.

And lastly so to improve the good consequence -- to the advancement of trade,
that all our Subject finding the advantage -- in that prime foundation of
plenty, they may all, with minds happily composed by our clemency and
indulgence (instead of taking up thoughts of deserting their professions) apply
themselves comfortably, and with redoubled industry to their several vocations,
etc.

Also in the Votes and Advice of the House of Commons, Febr. 5. 1662. Upon
reading the Kings Declaration and Speech, are these words, (viz.) And our
hearts are further enlarged in these returns of Thanksgiving when we consider
your Majesty's most Princely, and Heroic professions of relying upon the
affections of your People, AND ABHORING ALL SORTS OF MILITARY AND ARBITRARY
RULE, etc.

SECT. II.
Here follows some remarkable Observations, collected out of a Book, entitled,
(...), A Discourse of the Liberty of Prophesying; showing the unreasonableness
of prescribing to other men's Faith, and the Iniquity of persecuting different
Opinions; by Ier. Tailor D. D. (so styled) Chaplin in Ordinary to his late
Majesty.
IN his Epistle Dedicatory are these words: viz. As contrary as Cruelty is to
Mercy, as Tyranny to Charity; so is War and Bloodshed to the Meekness and
Gentleness of Christian Religion.

And further speaks, to dispute men into Mercies, Compliances and Tollerations
mutual; and further adds.

I designed a Discourse to this purpose, with as much greediness, as if I had
thought it possible with my Arguments to have persuaded the rough and hard
handed Soldiers to have disbanded presently; for I had often thought of the
Prophecy, that in the Gospel, our Swords should be turned into Plow-shares,
and our Spears into Pruning Hooks.

I thought it my duty to plead for Peace and Charity, and Forgiveness, and
Permissions mutual.

Although we must contend earnestly for the Faith, yet this contention must be
with Arms fit for the Christian Warfare, the Sword of the Spirit, the Shield of
Faith, etc. but not with other Arms; for a Churchman must not be a Striker,
for the Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal, but Spiritual.

I being most of all troubled, that men should be persecuted, and afflicted,
for disagreeing in such opinions, which they cannot with sufficient grounds
obtrude upon others necessarily, because they cannot propound them infallibly.

Considerations (are to be had) to the Persons of men, and to the Laws of
Charity more then to the trimmphing in any Opinion, etc.

If the Persons be Christians in their life, and Christians in their
profession; if they acknowledge the Eternal Son of God for their Master, and
the Lord, and live in all relations as becomes Persons making such professions,
why then should I hate such Persons whom God loves, and who love God, who are
partakers of Christ, and Christ has a Title to them, who dwell in Christ, and
Christ in them, because their understandings have not been brought up like
mine, have not had the same Masters, they have not met with the same Books --
have not the same Opinions that I have, and do not determine their School
Questions to the same sense of my Sect or Interest?

And whatsoever is against the Foundation of Faith or contrary to good Life --
or distructive to humane society -- is out of the limits of my Question, and
does not pretend to compliance or tolleration.

The fault I find and seek to remedy is, That men are so dogmatical and
resolute in their Opinions, and impatient of others disagreeing in those things
wherein is no sufficient means of Union and Determination, but that men should
let Opinions and Problems not be obtruded as Actions, nor Questions in the vast
collection of the Systeme of divinity be adopted into the Family of Faith.

3. Its hard to say, that he who would not have men put to death or punished
corporally for such things, for which no humane authority is sufficient for
Cognizance, or Determination, or competent for infliction; that he persuades to
an indifferency when he refers to another Judicatory, which is competent,
sufficient, infallable, just, and highly severe -- for God alone must be Judge
of these matters, who alone is Master of our Souls, and has the Dominion over
humane understanding -- God alone is Judge of erring Persons.

I earnestly contend, that another man's Opinion shall be no Rule to mine, and
that my Opinion shall be no Snare and Prejudice to my self; that men use one
another so charitably, that no error or violence tempt men to Hypocrisy, this
very thing being one of the Arguments I used to persuade Permissions, lest
Compulsion introduce Hypocrisy, and make Sincerity troublesome, etc.

From the Dictates of holy Scripture, it is observable, that this, with its
appendant degrees, I mean, restraint of Prophesying, imposing upon other men's
understandings, being Masters of their Consciences, and lording it over their
Faith, came in with the retinue and train of Antichrist, as other abuses and
corruptions of the Church did, by reason of the iniquity of the times, and the
cooling of the first heats of Christianity, and the increase of interest, and
the abatements of Christian simplicity, when the Churches fortune grew better,
and her Sons grew worse, and some of her Fathers worst of all: For in the first
three hundred Years there was no sign of persecuting any man for his Opinion,
though at that time there were very horrid Opinions commenced -- and they who
used all means -- Christian and Spiritual, for their disimprovement and
convi^tion, thought not of using corporal force -- and therefore I (...) not
only urge their not doing it, as an Argument of the unlawfulness of such
proceeding, but their defying it, and speaking against such practices as
unreasonable, and destructive to Christianity, for so Tertullian is express,
Humani juris and naturalis potestatis uni cuique quod putaverit colere, sed nec
religionis est cogere religionem quae suscipi debet sponte non vi: its of
humane right and natural power for every one to worship what he thinks; but
neither is it the part of Religion to compel Religion, which ought to be
undertaken of its own accord.

The same is the Doctrine of Cyprian, Lactantius, Hillary, Minutius, Faelix,
Sulpitius, Severus, Chrisostom, Hierom, Austin, Damascen, Theophilact, Socrates
Scholasticus, and Bernard.

All wise Princes till they were overborn with Faction, and solicited by
peevish persons, gave Tolleration to differing Sects -- But at first there were
some heretical persons, that were so impatient, they were the men that first
entreated the Emperor to persecute the Catholics: but till four hundred years
after Christ, no Catholic persons, or very few, did provoke the secular Arm,
or implore its aid against the Heretics; save only that Arrius behaved himself
so seditiously and tumultuarily, that the Nicene Fathers procured a temporary
Decree for his relegation; but it was soon taken off, and God left to be his
Judge.

But as the Ages grew worse, so men grew more cruel and unchristian; and in the
Greek Church Atticus and Nestorius of Constantinople, Theodocius of Synoda, and
some few others, who had forgotten the mercies of their great Master, and their
own duty, grew implacable, and furious, and impatient of contradiction.

It was a bold and arrogant Speech which Nestorius made in his Sermon before
Theodotius the younger; Da mihi, O Emperator, terram ab Haereticis repugnatum
and ego tibi vicissim ca^lum dabo; disperde mecum Haereticos, and ego tecum
disperdam Pers^s; which is in English, O Emperor, give to me the Land purged
from Heretics; and I, instead thereof, will give thee Heaven: destroy me the
Heretics, and I will destroy with thee the Persians: It was as groundless, as
unwarrantable, as it was bloody and inhumane. And we see the contrary events
prove truer; for Theodosius and Valentinian were prosperous Princes, and have
the reputation of great piety; but they were so far from doing what Nestorius
had suggested, that they restrained him from his violence and immanity; and
Theodosius did highly commend B. Proclus, for his sweetness of deportment
toward erring persons, far above the cruelty of his Predecessor Atticus.

And the experience which Christendom has had in this last age, is Argument
enough* That Tolleration of differing Opinions is so far from disturbing the
public peace, or destroying the Interest of Princes, and Commonwealths, that
it does advant^ge the Public, it secures the Peace, because there is not so
much as the Pretense of Religion left to such persons to contend for, it being
already indulged to them.

When France fought against the Hugonots, the spilling of their own Blood was
Argument enough of the imprudence of that way of promoting Religion; but since
she has given permission to them, etc.

The great instance is in the differing Temper, Government, and Success which
Margaret of Parma, and the Duke of Alva had; the clemency of the first had
almost distinguished the Flame; but when she was removed, D. Alva succeeded,
and managed the matter of Religion with Fire and Sword, he made the Flame so
great, that his Religion, and his Prince too, had both been almost turned out
of the Country; Pelli^e medio sapientiam quoties vi res agitur, said Ennius,
[Wisdom is driven out, when the matter is acted by force.]

[And therefore the best of men, and most glorious of Princes, were always
ready to give Tolleration.]

Esebeus in his second Book of the life of Constantine, reports these words of
the Emperor, Parem cum fidelibus ij qui errant pacis, and quiet is fruitionem
gaudentes accipiant: ipsa si quidem communicationis and societatis restitutio
ad rectam etiam veritatis viam perducere potest; nemo cuiquam molestis sit,
quisque quod animo destinat hoc etiam faciat; Let them which err with joy
receive the like fruition of Peace and quietness with the faithful, since the
restoring of communication and society may bring them into the right Way of
Truth: Let none give molestation to any; let every one do as he determines in
his mind.

And indeed there is great reason for Princes to give Tolleration to
disagreeing persons, whose Opinions cannot by fair means be altered; for if the
persons be confident, they will serve God according to their persuasions; and
if they be publicly prohibited, they will privately convene, and then all
those inconveniences, and mischiefs, which are Arguments against the permission
of Conventicles, are Arguments for the public permissions of differing
Religions, etc. -- they being restrained, and made miserable, indears the
discontented persons mutual, and makes more hearty and dangerous
confederations.

King James in his Letters to the States of the United Provinces, dated Mar. 6.
1613. thus wrote -- Ita ut prohibeatis Ministros vestros ne eas disputationes in
suggestum aut ad plebem feran^s, ac districte imperetis ut pacem colant se in
vicem tolerando in ista opinionum ac sententiarum discrepantia -- So that you
may sorbid your Ministers, that they bring not those Disputations into the
Pulpit, or to the People, and strickly command, that they embrace peace among
themselves, by Tollerating in that difference of Opinions, and Judgments.

The Counsel like in the divisions of Germany, at the first Reformation, was
thought reasonable by the Emperor Ferdinand, and his excellent Son Maximilian;
for they had observed, That Violence did exasperate, was unblest, unsuccesfull,
and unreasonable; and therefore they made Decrees of Tolleration.

And the Duke of Savoy repenting of his War, undertaken for Religion against
the Peidmontans, promised them Toleration; and was as good as his word -- As
much is done by the nobility of Polonia: so that the best Princes and the best
Bishops gave Toleration and Impunities (but it is known, that the first
Persecution of disagreeing Persons was by the Arrians, by Circumcellians, and
Donatists, and from them they of the Church took Example, etc.) And among the
Greeks it became a public and authorized practice, till the question of Images
grew hot and high; for then the Worshippers of Images, having taken their
example from the Empress Irene, who put her sons eyes out for making an Edict
against Images, began to be as cruel, as they were deceived, especially, being
encouraged by the Pope of Rome, who then blew the Coals to some purpose.

I may upon this occasion give account of this affair in the Church of Rome. It
is remarkable that till the time of Justinian the Emperor, A. D. 525. the
Catholics and Novatians had Churches indifferently permitted even in Rome it
self, but the Bishops of Rome, whose interest was much concerned in it, spoke
much against it, and labored the eradication of the Novatians; and at last
when they got power into their hands they served them accordingly; but it is
observed by Socrates that when the first persecution was made against them at
Rome by Pope Innocent the first, at the same instant the Goths invaded Itally,
and became Lords of all, it being just in God, etc.

And I have heard it observed as a blessing upon S. Austin (who was so merciful
to erring Persons) as the greatest part of his life -- to tolerate them, and
never to endure that they should be given over to the secular power to be
killed) that the very night the Vandals set down before his City of Hippo, to
besiege it, he died, and went to God; being taken from the miseries to come.

But in the Church of Rome, the Popes were the first Preachers of Force and
Violence in matters of Opinion, and that so zealously that Pope Vigilius
suffered himself to be imprisoned, and handled roughly by the Emperor
Justinian, rather then he would consent to the restitution and peace of certain
disagreeing persons, etc.

The first that preached that Doctrine was Dominick, the Founder of the begging
Order of Friars: The Friars Preachers, in memory of which the Inquisition is
entrusted only to the Friars of his order; and if there be any force in Dreams,
or truth in Legends, etc. -- This very thing might be signified by his mothers
Dream, who the night before Dominick was born, dreamed she was brought to bed
of a huge Dog, with a Firebrand in his mouth; sure enough however his
Disciples expound the Dream, it was a better sign that he should prove a Rabid,
furious incendiary then any thing else, what ever he might be in the other
parts of his life; in this Doctrine he was not much better, as appears in his
deportment toward the Abligences, against whom he so preached -- Adeo quidem
ut centum hereticorum millia ab octo millibus catholicorum fusa and interfecta
fuisse probiantur, says one of him, and of those who were taken one hundred
and eighty were burned to death, because they would not abjure their Doctrine;
this was the the first Example of putting erring Persons to death, that I find
in the Romish Church.

By this time I hope it will not be thought unreasonable to say, He that
teaches mercy to erring Persons teaches indifferency in Religion, unless so
many Fathers, and so many Churches, and the best of Emperors, and all the World
(till they were abused by Tyranny, Popery and faction) did teach indifferency:
For

I have shown that Christianity does not puni^h corporally persons erring
Spiritually, but indeed Popery does.

The Donatists, and Circumcelians, and Arrians, and Itaciani, they of old did
in the middle Ages; the Patrons of Images did, and the Papists at this day do,
and have done ever since they were taught it by their St Dominick.

Let all Errors be as much, and as zealously suppressed as may be, but let it be
done by such means as are proper instruments of their suppression, by Preaching
and Disputation, by Charity and Sweetness, by Holiness of Life, Assiduity of
Exhortation, by the Word of God, and Prayer.

For these ways are most natural, most prudent, most peaceable and effectual,
only let not men be hasty, in calling every disliked Opinion by the name of
Heresy; and when they have resolved that they will call it so, let them use
the erring person like a Brother, not beat him like a Dog, or convince him with
a Gibbit, or vex him out of his understanding or persuasion.

Thus far Ier. Tailor; these Passages being truly collected out of his Epistle,
where are many more to the same purpose; to which the Reader is referred for
further satisfaction, if he desire it: And further in his Sixteenth Section,
for the lawfulness of Princes giving Tolleration to several Religions, he has
these Passages.

For it may be safe in diversity of persuasions; and it is also a part of
Christian Religion, that the Liberty of men's Consciences should be preserved in
all things, where God has not set a limit --

That the Soul of man should be free, and acknowledge no Master but Jesus
Christ.

That matters Spiritual should not be restrained by punishments corporal.

That the same meekness and Charity should be preserved in the promotion of
Christianity, that gave it foundation, and increment, and firmness in its first
publication.

And that Persons should not more certainly be condemned then their Opinions
confuted.

And lastly, That the Infirmities of men, and difficulties of things, should be
both put in balance, to make abatement in the diffinitive sentence against
men's persons.

As Christian Princes must look to the interest of their Government; so
especially must they consider the interests of Christianity, and not call every
redargution, or modesty, discovery of an established Error, by the name of the
disturbance of the Peace; For,

It is very likely that the peevishness, and impatience of contradiction in the
Governors may break the peace.

Let them but remember the Gentleness of Christianity; the Liberty of
Consciences which ought to be preserved; and let them do justice to the
persons, whoever they are that are peevish; provided no man's person be
overborn with prejudice: For

If it be necessary for all men to subscribe to the present established
Religion; by the same reason, at another time, a man may be bound to subscribe
to the contradictory, and so to all Religions in the World. Uncharitableness is
much prevented when no person is on either side engaged upon revenge, or
troubled with disgrace, or vexed with punishments, by any decretory sentence
against him: It was the saying of a wise Statesman, (I mean Thuanus) Haeretici
qui pace data factionibus scinduntur, persecutione uniuntur contra. Remp.If you
persecute Heretics, or Discrepants, they unite themselves as to a common
defense if you permit them, they divide themselves upon private interest, and
the rather, if this interest was an ingredient of the Opinion.

SECT. III.
Instances out of diverse Authors treating on the same Subject, by William
Caton, deceased.
CHrisostomus said, It is not the manner of the Children of God to persecute
others to death about their Religion; but it has been, and is their condition
to be put to death themselves for the Testimony of of the Truth. Moreover,
(said he) the shedding of Blood about Religion, is an evident token of
Antichrist, Relig. Vris. page 192.

Haywardus said, That the best Writers of that time did agree in one opinion,
and with Tertulliano, Lactantio, Cassidoro, and Josephus, etc. That People must
inform men to embrace Religion with Reason, and not compel them by violence. I
have for long season determined, said one of the Kings of France, to reform the
Church, which without Peace (said he) I cannot do, and it is impossible to
reform, or convert people by violence.

I am King, as a Shepherd, (said he) and will not shed the Blood of my Sheep;
but will gather them through the mildness and goodness of a King, and not
through the power of Tyranny: And I will give them that are of the reformed
Religion right Liberty to live and dwell free, without being examined,
perplexed, molested, or compelled to any thing contrary to their Consciences;
for they shall have the free exercise of their Religion, etc. vide Chron. Vande
Vnderg 2. deel. page 1514.



Luther said, That the Hypocrites Church was to be known by its Manners, whose
Image and Sign was Esau, yet she boasted of God, and would be accounted his
Church, but lived wholly according to the World. Further, (said he) the true
Church is not defended by a Fleshly Arm, which wicked Bishops especially use,
and cry unto. Thesau. page 622.

Calvin said, That the Apostle gave to understand, That to exercise authority
over ones Faith, was in no wise just, nor tolerable: (yea said he) It is
Tyanny in the Church; for FAITH ought to be free from all Subjection of men.

When several of the Priests in the low Countries requested of the Prince and
States, that they would introduce Ordinances and Discipline, according to their
Opinions; but the Prince, and the States, rejected their requests, esteeming
them prejudicial both to Religion and Policy; when they observed the diverse
Opinions that were among the People, concluding, It was the best way to
preserve unity among the People, to give Liberty to all, and to Compel none,
Anno 1608. Edict. Fol. 27.

Areneus affirmed, That all forcing of Conscience, though it was but a
forbiding of the Exercise, which is esteemed by one or another, to be necessary
to Salvation, is in no wise right nor fitting: He also affirmed, That through
diversities of Religions the Kingdom should not be brought into any disturbance.

The Ancient Reformed Protestants termed that forcing of Conscience, when they
were constrained to leave off the exercise of their Religion, saying, Car nous
privant de nostre Religion on nous tiendroit en une continuele mors corporelle
and spirituelle (that is) For to deprive us of our Religion, is to keep us in a
perpetual corporal and spiritual death; adding thereunto, How that they would
rather be put to death then be bereaved of the exercise of their Religion, etc.
And also they testified, how that the Religion which was defended with Cruelty,
was not grounded upon the Word of God.

Lactantius said, If you will with blood, with evil, and with torments, defend
the Worship, it shall not thereby be defended but polluted, Lib. 5. Chap. 20.

Constantius the Emperor said, That it was enough that he preserved the unity
of the FAITH, that he might be excusable before the Judgment Seat of God; and
that he would leave every one to his own understanding, according to the
account he will give before the Judgment Seat of Christ: Hereto may we stir up
People ( said he) not compel them, beseech them to come into the unity of the
Christians; but to do VIOLENCE to them, we will not in no wise. Sabast. Frank.
Cron. Fol. 127.

Augustinus Said, Some disturbed the Peace of the Church while they went about
to root out the TARES before the time; and through this Error of Blindness
(said he) are they themselves separated, so much the more from being united
unto Christ.

Retnaldus testified, That he who with Imprisoning and Persecuting seeks to
spread the Gospel, and greaseth his Hands with Blood, shall much rather be
looked upon for a wild Hunter, then a Preacher, or a Defender of the Christian
Religion.

The State of Holland testified, Dat waer vervolginghen Zijn datter daer al in
roere is, maer waer geen en sijn al sijdor verscheijden Religion dat dare all
saelren stilder sijn so oelr in onse ijden is bevon den: that is, Where there
was Persecution, there was all in disstraction, but where there was none
(though there were several Religions) there all things were the quieter, as
has been evident in our days, said they, Vide Vrede Handel Van. Col. Fol. 53.

Calvin Said, That those that are set over us must be obeyed, if that the
Command of God be not thereby disobeyed; but if they lead us from obedience to
God, and presumptiously strive against the Lord, then must they not be
regarded, said he, to the end that God with his Authority may retain the
pre-eminence.

A Book written in French, by N. M. Anno 1576. has this Sentence in it
Those Princes that have ruled by Gentleness and Clemency, added to justice;
and have exercised Moderation and Meekness toward their Subjects, always
greatly Prospered, and Reigned long.

But on the contrary, those Princes that have been Cruel, Unjust, Perfidious,
and Oppressors of their Subjects, have soon fallen, they and their Estate into
danger, or total ruin.

Veritus said, Seeing Christ is a LAMB, whom you profess to be your Head and
Captain, then it behooves you to be Sheep, and to use the same WEAPONS, which
he made use of; for he will not be a Shepherd of Wolves, and wild Beasts, but
only of SHEEP; wherefore if you lose the Nature of Sheep (said he) and be
changed into Wolves, and wild Beasts, and use fleshly Weapons, then will you
exclude your selves out of his Calling; and forsake his Banner, and then will
he not be your Captain.

Stephanus King of Poland said, It belongs not to me to reform the
Conscience, I have always gladly given that over to God, which belongs to
him, and so shall I do now; and also for the future, I will suffer the WEEDS to
grow until the time of Harvest; for I know that the number of Believers are but
small, therefore, said he, when some were proceeding in persecution, Ego sum
Rex Populorum non Conscientiarum, that is, I am the King of the People, not of
their Consciences: he also affirmed, That Religion was not to be planted with
FIRE and SWORD, Chron. Van. de Rel. Vrijh. 2. deel.

Tindal said, The New Testament of Christ suffered no Law of Compelling, but
alone of Persuading, and Exhorting, Fox. Acts and Mon. page 1338.

The Prince of Orange testified, Anno 1579. That it was impossible that the
Land should be kept in Peace except there was a free Tolleration in the
Exercise of Religion.

Where have thou ever read in thy days (said Menno) in the Writing of the
Apostles, that Christ or the Apostles ever cried out to the Magistrates, for
their Power, against them that would not hear their Doctrine, nor obey their
Words? I know certainly, said he, that where the Magistrate shall Banish with
the SWORD, there is not the right Knowledge, spiritual Word, nor Church of
Christ, it is Invocare Brachium Seculare.

It is not Christian like, but Tyrannical, said D. Philipson, to Banish and
Persecute People about FAITH and Religion, and they that so do are certainly of
the Pharisaical Generation, who resisted the Holy Ghost.

Er^smus sad, That though they take our Moneys and Goods, they cannot therefore
hurt our Salvation; they afflict us much with Prisons, but they do not thereby
separate us from God, In de Krijdges wrede, Fol. 63.

Lucernus said, He that comandeth any thing, wherewith he binds the
Conscience, this is an Antichrist, Inde Benuse disp. Fol. 71.

It was Luther's Opinion, That those that stirred up the Princes to persecute
abut Religion, they raised the Uproar, Thesaur. page 679.

REASONS FOR Liberty of Conscience.
SECT. IV.
Several Reasons rendered, why no outward Force, nor Imposition, ought to be
used in Matters of Faith and Religion, by R. H. S. F. and F. H.
LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE ought to be allowed in the days of the Gospel, in the
free Exercise of it to Godward (without Compulsion) in all things relating to
His Worship, for these REASONS following.

1. Because the General and Universal Royal-Law of Christ commands it, Matthew.
7. 12. All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so
to them: for this is the Law and Prophets -- That which every man would have,
and receive from another, he ought by Christ's RVLE to give and allow it to
another. But every man is willing to have the LIBERTY of his OWN CONSCIENCE,
therefore ought to ALLOW it to another.

2. Because no man can persuade the Conscience of another, either what God is,
or how he should be worshipped, but by the Spirit, which God has given to
instruct man in the Ways of Truth.

3. Because, all Obedience or Service that is obtained by force, is for fear of
Wrath, and not from Love, nor for Conscience sake; and therefore will but
continue so long as that fear or force abides upon them.

4. Because, that by forcing, no man can make a Hypocrite to be a true
Believer; but on the contrary, many may be made Hypocrites.

5. Because, that in all forced Impositions upon men's Consciences, there is
something of the wrath of man exercised, which works not the Righteousness of
God, but rather begets enmity in the heart one toward another.

6. Because, that by forcing any thing upon men's Consciences, as to matters of
Faith and Worship, many are hardened in their hearts against the things
imposed; when as otherwise, through Love and gentle Instructions their hearts
might be persuaded to willing obedience.

7. Because, that Persecution for Conscience contradicts Christ's Charge,
Matthew. 13. who bids that the Tares (or false Worshippers) be suffered to grow
together in the Field (or World) till the Harvest (or End of the World.)

8. Because, Force is contrary to the end for which it is pretended to be used
(viz.) The preservation and safety of the Wheat, which End is not answered by
Persecution, because the Wheat is in danger to be plucked up thereby, as Christ
says.

9. Because to Force is inconsistant with the belief of the Jews Conversion
(and other false Worshippers) which is prayed for by the public Teachers, and
cannot be attained, if Persecution for Conscience be prosecuted.

10. Because they that impose upon men's Consciences, exercise Dominion over
men's Faith, which the Apostles denied, saying, They had not Dominion over any
man's Faith.

11. Because, Imposition upon men's Consciences necessitates them to sin, in
yielding a Conformity contrary to their own Faith; for whatsoever is not of a
man's own Faith, is sin.

12. Because, that Imposition and Force wrestles with flesh and blood, and
carnal Weapons, which are contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, who said, Our
Weapons are not Carnal, but Spiritual, and Mighty through God; and we wrestle
not with Flesh, and Blood.

13. Because, there is but One Judge, Lawgiver, and King in and over the
Conscience, as the Saints have testified in the Scriptures of Truth; and
whosoever would intrude, so as to be Judge and Lawgiver over the Conscience,
intrencheth upon the Perogative of Christ, Isa. 33. 22. James 4. 12.

14. Because, it is prophesied in Isa. 11, The Woolf shall dwell with the Lamb,
and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and there shall be no Destroyer in
all the Holy Mountain: And therefore no Imposition upon men's Consciences.

15. Because, to impose upon men's Consciences for differences in Faith, is
contrary to the Advice of the Apostle, who directs People to wait upon God to
be satisfied, and not to the Magistrates, or others, to be forced; who says,
Whereunto we have attained, let us walk; and wherein any man is otherwise
minded, God shall reveal, even that unto him.

16. Because, to force men's Consciences, and to lay Yoaks upon them, is to make
void the Bloodshed and Sufferings of Christ, who sits upon the Throne of the
Conscience, and gives liberty there; and commands us to stand fast in that
liberty, and not to be entangled through the Impositions of men, or Yoke of
bondage, Gal. 5. 6.

17. Because, in all Nations the different Professions and Persuasions of
Religion, are either Friends or Enemies to the Governors; if Friends then
obliged by that bond; if Enemies then Christ's Command is to take place, who
says, Love your Enemies, which if observed, Persecution for Conscience will be
avoided.

18. Because Toleration of different Persuasions in Religion was allowed in the
Jewish State, as not inconsistant with their Safety, and that in things
contrary each to other, as the Sadduces, Pharisees, Esaeans, Herodians, with
others.

19. Because, the true Religion cannot be preached up by force of ARMS, and
the primitive Christians detested that Form of Proceedings.

20. Because, no man has such power (by outward compulsion) over the Souls and
Consciences of other men, as to lay a necessity on them to believe that which
they do not believe, or not to believe what they do believe; true Faith being
the Gift of God.

21. Because, If the Magistrate imposes upon the Conscience, he must either do
it as a Magistrate, or as a Christian. Not as a Magistrate, for then Heathens
(being Magistrates) have the same power to impose; and so, by Revolutions, and
Conquests, may come to give Laws to Christians, and compel them to Idolatry. 2.
Not as Christians, for that contradicts Christ's saying, The Kings of the
Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, but it shall not be so among you, for all
ye are Brethren.

22. Because* by the same Rule and Reason that the Magistrates of one Nation
ought to impose upon, and persecute for Conscience, the Magistrates in all
other Nations ought to do the same, and so the greatest part of Mankind may
come to be destroyed, there being more that Dissent, than are at Unity in
Matters of Faith and Religion.

23. Because the strength of Truth, and its Conquest over Falsity and Deceit is
best discovered by letting both have their Liberty, from outward Compulsion;
For no doubt, had outward Force been less used, the prevalency of Truth had
been more manifest, and that wise Saying, truly experienced in the World, viz.
That which is of God will stand, and that which is not, will come to nothing.

24. Because, the Disciples of Christ are rebuked by him for desiring the
Destruction of those that were contrary to him, and would not receive Him;
which zeal is sharply reproved in his Saying, They knew not what Spirit they
were of.

25. Because, to impose upon men's Consciences, and to destroy their Persons for
difference in Religion, is contrary to the end of Christ's coming, who says,
He came not to Destroy men's Lives but to save them.

26. Because* People of diverse Religions in one Nation, if not tolerated, must
some of them be destroyed or removed, by banishment? If destroyed, the
Constancy and Patience of the Sufferers for their Faith, moving Pity and
Commiseration, makes men more ready to own, then to reject their Faith; and so
rather multiplies, than lessens the number of its Professors; if banished, this
renders the Banished as so many Enemies abroad, ready upon all occasions to
disturb the Peace and Tranquillity of their own native Country. There is
therefore in order to the outward welfare of all Nations, a kind of necessity
for a Tolleration in them of all Religions.

27. Because, to impose upon men's Consciences begets a hatred against the
Imposers in those who are imposed upon, and forced thereby to violate their
Consciences toward God, in matters of Worship.

28. Because, men are commanded to be subject to the Powers that are, for
Conscience sake, and therefore such Powers ought not to persecute men for
Conscience sake, being that is prescribed for the Rule of Obedience, the
Scriptures saying, Be ye subject not only for Wrath, but for Conscience sake.

SECT. 5.
Several Sayings collected from the Speeches, and Writings of King James, and
King Charles the First.
WE find it asserted by King James in his Speech to the Parliament, in the year
1609. who said, That it is a pure Rule in Divinity, That God never loves to
plant his Church with VIOLENCE and BLOOD; and furthermore said, It was usually
the condition of Christians to be PERSECUTED, but not to PERSECUTE.

And we find the same things in substance asserted again, by his Son Charles
the First, in his Book known by the Name of (...), Printed for R. Ro^ston, as
follows.

Page 67. In his Prayer to God, he said, Thou see how much Cruelty among
Christians is acted, under the color of Religion; as if we could not be
Christians, unless we crucify one another.

Page 28. Make them at length seriously to consider, that nothing violent and
injurious can be religious.

Page 70. Nor is it so proper to hew out religious Reformations by the Sword,
as to pollish them by fair and equal Disputations, among those that are most
concerned in the Differences, whom, not Force, but Reason ought to convince.

Sure in Matters of Religion, those Truths gain most upon men's Judgments and
Consciences, which are least urged with Secular Violence, which weakens Truth
with Prejudices.

Page 115. It being an Office, not only of Humanity, rather to use Reason then
Force, but also of Christianity to seek Peace, and ensue it.

Page 91, 92. In point of true conscientious tenderness, I have often declared,
how little I desire my Laws and Scepter should entrench on Gods Sovereignty,
which is the only King of men's Consciences.

Page 123. Nor do I desire any man should be further subjuect unto me, then all
of us may be subject unto God.

Concerning Oaths.
Page 76. The injoyning of Oaths, upon People, must needs in things doubtful
be Dangerous, as in things unlawful Damnable.

Some words of Advice from CHARLES the First, to the then Prince of Wales, now
King of England, etc.
Page 165. My Counsel and Charge to you is, That you seriously consider the
former real or objected Miscariages, which might occasion my Troubles, that you
may avoid them, etc.

Beware of Exasperating any Factions, by the Crosness and Asperity of some men's
Passions, Humors, and private Opinions, employed by you, grounded only upon
differences in lesser matters, which are but the Skirts and Suburbs of
Religion, wherein a Charitable Connivance, and Christian Tolleration, often
Dissipates their strength, when rougher Opposition Fortifies, and puts the
despised and oppressed party into such Combinations, as may most enable them to
get a full revenge on those they count their Persecutors, who are commonly
assisted by that vulgar commisseration, which attends all that are said to
suffer under the notion of Religion.

Page 166. Take heed that outward Circumstances and Formalities of Religion
devour not all.

Page 164. Your Prerogative is best showed and exercised in remitting, rather
then exacting the rigor of the Laws, there being nothing worse then Legal
Tyranny.

To these Sayings we add more, as Collected out of the same Book in duodecimo.
IN his Prayer, page 1. O never suffer me for any reason of State to go against
the Reason of Conscience, which is highly to fight against thee, the God of
Reason, and Judge of our Consciences.

P. 121. Break in sunder, Oh Lord, all violent Confederations to do wickedly
and injuriously.

Page 136. Thou, Oh Lord, shall destroy them that speak Lies; the Lord will
abhor both the Blood-thirsty and Deceitful men.

Page 164. Church Affairs should be managed neither with Tyranny, Parity, nor
Popularity -- neither people oppressed.

Page 168. He declares his willingness for fair satisfaction unto all, and
against Covetousness, and Superstition.

Page 171. Oh thou that art the God of Reason and Peace, soften our hearts --
and persuade us to accept of Peace with thy self, and both to secure and
preserve Peace among our selves, as men and Christians -- Condemn us not to our
passions, which are destructive both of our selves and others; Clear up our
Understandings to see thy Truth, both in Reason as men, and in Religion as
Christians.

Page 180. Stir up all Parties Pious Ambitions to overcome each other with
Reason, Moderation, and such Self-denial as becomes, etc.

Page 200. O thou Sovereign of our Souls, the only Commander of our Consciences.

And further, in his Advice to the Prince of Wales now KING, etc.
Page 234. The best Government and highest Soveraignity you can attain unto,
is, To be subject to God, that the Scepter of his Word, and Spirit may rule in
your heart.

Page 239. He pleads for better Arguments for Convincement, then Tumults,
Armies, and Prisons.

Page 241. Always keep up sollid Piety, and those Fundamental Truths, which
mend both hearts and lives of men with impartial Favor and Justice.

Page 242. My Charge and Counsel to you is, that as you need no palliations for
any design, so that you studdy really to exceed in true and constant
Demonstrations of Goodness, Piety and Virtue (toward the people) even all
these men that make the greatest noise and ostentations of Religion, so you
shall neither fear any detection, (as they do who have but the Mask of
Goodness) nor shall you frustrate the just Expectations of your people.

Page 243. Use all Princely Arts and Clemency to heal the Wounds, that the
Smart of the Cure may not equal the Anguish of the hurt.

Page 244* As your quality sets you beyond any Duel with any Subject, so the
nobleness of your mind must raise you above the meditating any revenge, or
executing your Anger upon the many.

Page 248. Keep you to true Principles of Piety, Virtue, and Honor; you shall
never want a Kingdom.

In his Meditations on Death; page 346 It is indeed a sad fate for any man to
have his Enemies to be Accuser, Parties and Judge.

Some few Errors and Defects having escaped the Press, the Reader may Correct.
Page 9. Line 26. for Actions, read Axioms. p. 11. l. 19. for repugnatum, read
repurgatam. l. 20. for Persus, read Persas. p. 12. l. 9. for distinguished,
read extinguished. p. 13. l. 12. for counsel like, read like counsel.

THE END.

