TO THE Upright in Heart, And FAITHFUL PEOPLE of GOD: BEING AN EPISTLE WRITTEN
IN BARBADO'S The 3d. of the 9th. Month, 1662.

By JOHN PERROT.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662.

TO THE Upright in Heart, And FAITHFUL PEOPLE of GOD:
PEace in God be multiplied to the whole Flock in the Fold of our Lord Jesus,
whom I dearly salute in the uncessant flowing Love of Life, being both full and
free to the tenderest, lowest and poorest of the living Heritage of the living
God, yea, to all, not respecting the Person of any, but greatly prizing the
Life of all.

Ah! my dear Brethren and Sisters, I am often filled with a pure remembrance of
you, glorifying God in your behalfs, in that you are what the God of Love and
Peace has made you in himself; and also, am frequently prostrated before the
Lord in the Spirit of Supplication and Prayer in your behalfs, That as God has
made you to live, so that your Life may be continued in him; and as he has
cast his Love upon you, and given his Peace unto you, so you may live in Love
and Peace with all men, even as much as in you it may lie, that it may appear,
that you are the Children of the God of Peace, by keeping your Consciences
clean and pure, according to the Word of Truth and Righteousness, in all your
hearts and souls, that so your Joy may abound and continue with you, through
the holy Ghost's living and abiding in you, ever acted in obedience to it,
according to all its stirrings and motions in your pure minds.

And my Father's beloved Lambs, I have a few words unto you, which you may
(diverse of you) at the immediate hearing them, witness unto, or in the fullness
of appointed time in the Father, be by Him made like-minded in the self-same
thing and matter.

Hear ye therefore the sound of the Spirit's voice in me, and let it enter into
the balance of the Sanctuary in you, that all may know its full weight in the
more full and clear manifestation of the day, and ascension of the brightness
of the Sun in his glory, which has already blessedly shined into our hearts,
and given us to see somewhat of himself; having received in himself a far more
amiable Beauty, Resplendency and Glory yet undiscovered, but has promised
shall be revealed in many souls, and therefore we may rest in a living hope,
and in our hope believe and obey the voice of his Life in us.

This in brief is the matter of Advice which I have to communicate unto you.
Take heed of judging the tender Conscience of any man, lest you should do the
thing which displeases the mind of God: For the Conscience is that seat which
his Glorious Majesty will rule and reign in, even to the end of all
Generations; and whosoever would have a predominancy there, him will the Lord
humble in his time, and make such mortal flesh to know that He is God, and is
not tied to any thing of man, but can and will appear as he wills, when,
where, how, and in whom he will; and who shall say unto him, I will resist thy
Will, and not be confounded by the Infinite and Everlasting Power of his Will?

And, that not any Rashness nor Uncharitableness may inhabit in the heart of
any toward his Brother or Friend, Neighbor or Enemy, consider all ye Plants
that are already risen up in the Seed, and are growing in the increase of God,
that in the increase of Love you may abound in the glory of the most glorious
Life of your God. I say, let your cogitations be a little exercised, in the
consideration of Christ, being the slain Lamb by the power of death, (before
the Covenant with Abraham, and reviving of the Law in and by Moses) and yet his
spilt Blood had a little living motion in man's body of death, and strove to
work through it before Moses, which was one Dispensation of the Power and
Doctrine of God, and therefore may not be judged by man, neither the
Dispensation in man, nor man in the Dispensation.

Again, consider, That Christ was in the Law, as being the sum of the Law in
the day that Moses dispensed it to Israel, yet Israel knew not Christ in the
Law, but feared God therein, and so far they were not judged, but justified of
him; which may still teach, instruct, and edify us in his own Charity, that we
never go out of it to judge any.

Again, consider, That Christ was the Preachings of the Prophets and Life of
their Prophecies, which the Tribes of Jacob's house had not a Witness of, was
wrought in themselves; nor was he so perfectly seen by the Prophets, as to be
born in their flesh; yet walked they in the fear of their God, and were not
condemned, but justified of their God: Which may teach us all the Charity of
our God in every case of judging another man's Conscience to God-wards.

Again, consider, That Christ was manifest in the flesh, born of the blessed
Virgin Mary, and was believed on by Disciples, before the revelation of his
Life in the Spirit, and in that state they were not condemned but instructed,
until the flesh vanished, and Spirit more gloriously appeared, revealing unto
man, what he should be in all manner of life, both toward God and toward man:
Which may teach us all, that wherein we see any that are in a Dispensation
which is of God, whilst yet the Conscience that is of God sees none other thing
to be favorable and tender, not imposing the sentence of Reprobation on them
because they are not where we are, but rather instruct them by Life or Doctrine
of the Spirit in us, or Precept or President of the holy men of God of old, as
the Spirit of Charity leads us thereunto; the which Charity being the
Original and first Life, is likewise the last Dispensation of Glory, in which
all Glories and Fullness are concealed, and which ends all other Dispensations
of Thunders, Earthquakes, Cursings and Smitings; but notwithstanding also that,
it is the last and utmost, and as well the Determiner of all other
Dispensations; and though a sweet proportion thereof is already revealed, yet
there is so much thereof to be further revealed, that my Faith is such
concerning the Fullness thereof that I am waiting for the same, as for another
Dispensation to break forth in a greater power than yet has appeared; and
therefore, I say, if my service is passing over, in one certain labor or
travel, to see another rise in the greater Glory that is waited for, I believe
I can and shall rejoice, glorifying God in beholding that which my soul longs
to see brought forth by the Instruments of his own choice, whosoever they may
be in the whole Earth; for I see this, that God is not bound unto flesh, nor
limited to the son of man, and every man has his service for an hour of the
day until another comes. So perfect Patience, and perfect Content, gives
perfect Peace in all such conditions. And after the foregoing considerations,
concerning Judgment, out of what it should, and in what it ought to be toward
every tender Conscience, I have yet to speak forth a word of experience, as one
which through sufferings, and great sufferings, have attained to the experience
of it; which because I have waded through two Seas of oppressive afflictions,
and traveled through two Lands of Tribulations, I may be a little lissened
unto by some of the little ones, which are willing and faithful Followers of
the Lamb whithersoever he goes, who through sufferings overcomes all things;
Wherefore to such I say,

I have seen three Brethren of the house and tribes of Israel, of three
Judgments concerning one case, and very frequently six of their Families, three
of them of one Judgment, and three of them of another Judgment touching one
case; and because of the oppositness of their Judgments (both held in a certain
strong zeal) have had hard thoughts one of another; and then I have seen a
seventh soul that righteously said, that neither of their Judgments were found
in God's Eternal Word; and then the said seventh soul uttered words in the
Spirit's Life, saying, I see an even plain path between those two, in which is
written, (viz.) Patience, Humility, Moderation, and Charity, can judge the case
in equity; and the seventh soul also saw the infirmities of the other six in
their hard thoughts of the three against three, yet had that charity to pity
them because of infirmity; so that that soul could not therefore judge and
condemn any of them for the cause that their beings were (really of God) in
several Dispensations, for which there was a Zeal more in the passionate part,
than the pure temperate Love; so that though the simple sentence of the case by
each of them might be true in themselves, according to the Dispensations that
they were in, whereby they sinned not, but suffered by the inordinate, or
somewhat incomposed Zeal, not being so fully in the Love which gives the
soundest knowledge, yet as the case stood in another soul, in another
Dispensation, that was weightier, and absolutely true in God the Discoverer of
the Good, neither of both the other Judgments could reach unto it righteously
to justify or condemn it, and therefore in such cases I am taught, fear, lest
I should err in seeking to wrest other men's Consciences.

I might also stand forth in an enquiry, saying, What is it of God that may
appear new, fresh, and living in man? but that Enemies to God, which cannot
comprehend it, will give sundry Verdicts concerning it; or, that many Children,
being some weak in themselves, others biased by some certain other men's
Opinions, others tinctured with some secret drops of prejudice in the more
internal part, but also in the like case, will judge amiss concerning it, and
as different and diverse, as the others which knew not God; by which (through
sufferings) I am taught the fear of God, not to exalt my self as King or Lord
in another man's Conscience, but do leave that to God, as his Throne and proper
seat to rule in.

And this also makes my Soul tender toward all tender Consciences, because I
see a Life in God which (I am sure) is unspeakably beyond that which in me is
already wrought by God, and yet I call this good where I am, being what I am
made by the pure, everlasting Power of God: and whosoever is in such a Life as
is mentioned to be beyond me, I would not that he should judge and condemn me
being in the place (though but a low place) where the Lord of his Love and
Mercy has put me, and therefore would not willingly do that to any one, which
I would not another should do unto me.

Now, dear Children, mine eye is looking forwards; for the spurs of Affliction
have been stuck in my sides, and the goad of Persecution has sorely pricked
me; in all which I rejoice in the consolation of God, because through all, I
have been and am daily taught; though thereby I cannot justify any in evil,
but bless and praise my God for suffering it all to work for my good; insomuch
that I can say, he has begun his work of Charity in my Soul, having also given
me to see, that yesterday I did the thing in righteousness, in which I was then
justified of him, which I should be ashamed (before him) to do the like to day;
and I am persuaded that I do do this day those things in truth, purity, and
righteousness, that to morrow I may be also ashamed to do; and therefore I am
taught in Faith to mind only the immediate Justification of the immediate day,
and let all the old things vanish and pass away; and so carry the sense of each
days justification in my heart, that Satan may never dart in unbelief and
distrust, or infuse reasonings, which may beget certain suspicions and
doubtings; and so always (as I have said) am desirous to look forward, never
limiting God's Power, but willing that it should work whatsoever pleases him
in my Soul, that he may be ever known to be the Sovereign, and I the poor
Subject, waiting for his Will, in his strength to do it, in which I desire ye
all may be like minded with me, that peace and precious joy in the Holy Ghost
may exceedingly abound in and among you.

And now as a man of sorrows, and one that has been largely acquainted with
grief every way, I cannot but signify to the Mourners in Israel, and Sorrowers
in Sion, that in all your griefs for the Lord and his Kingdoms sake, I am
willing to be ever found with you, weeping with them that weep, hungering with
them that hunger, bruised with them that are bruised, and crushed with those
poor, whose faces are ground between the hard Milstones, and can gladly bear of
your burdens that you may be a little eased by the little help which my
weakness in God's strength, can assist you with; for Oh, Oh! my tender Soul is
even full, and desires to be more filled with the tender Spirit of Compassion
and Sympathy, and therefore remembering the Poor, I am Spiritually become a
Prayer; and having thought of the Grieved, I am become a Groan; and considering
the states of the heavily Oppressed, I am a Petition to the God of pities, that
they all may be consolated in that Power that has made them live to suffer,
that through the sufferings of the Lamb, they may be all perfected in the
glorious Life of the Lamb, that the day may follow and come to pass of the
flying swiftly away of all the sighs and sorrows which did deject and oppress
them, but shall no more return to discomfort them, but leave a full joy behind
them in this respect, That their poor Souls were counted worthy in the Lamb's
Life, to travel such a Pilgrimage, that in the end they might inherit so
pleasant a Possession.

Dearly Saluting all Prisoners and Freemen in the Cause of the Free Gospel of
our Lord Jesus; this may import to you all, That as concerning Truth in this
Island, it is prosperous, many now are become lisseners to it, and its favor
is good amongst most; and touching the Faithful Friends of it, their Obedience
keeps them in Love and Peace together, which I trust also will yet much more
increase and abound among all: And now surely I can say the blessings of God
are on Barbados, beholding that abundance of simple and single Love which I
see, feel, and enjoy in the hearts of the simple, one toward another, which is
a great refreshment unto me after many weary days, in that I can also say his
own right hand brought me hither in blessing, and put me among precious Plants
of Peace, that we might eat of the Grapes of Gladness, and ripe Clusters of Joy
in the Mansions of our Fathers Mercies together; and here I find not the former
need of a Shield and Buckler in my Friends house, for the sharp Weapons of War
are not handled within our joint Habitations, but are reserved for service
against the Armies of Aliens; and yet also I can say, that God is making the
point of each man's Spear, the Arrow in each man's Quiver, and Sword at each man's
side, Love to Enemies, which kills the Enmity, and raises Life in Simplicity,
to the honor of him, whose blessed Work it is, who in all his Works is worthy
of Glory and everlasting Praise, even for ever and ever, Amen.

In whose Love I live, Your refreshed Brother, J. P.

THE END.

