A NARATIVE of some of the SUFFERINGS of J. P. in the CITY of ROME

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and mouth near Aldersgate, 1661.

A Narative of some of the Sufferings of J. P. in the City of Rome.
It is moved in my Soul to leave a remembrance unto all Generations of my
succeeding Seed, of the mercies of God unto me in the days of my Captivity and
sore distress in the City of Rome, that they all which may live in the feeling
of the Power of the Spirit of Salvation, may taste of the secret streams of the
thanksgiving and praises of my poor soul yielded and offered unto my Maker, my
compassionate God and my King, and in their true sense of the same rejoice also
in the spirit of praise, which lives without end, Amen.

WHen I was cast into Prison, because I loved the Souls of mine enemies; when I
was separated like Joseph from all my Brethren, and oppressed in a strange
Land; when I was left like a poor silly Dove without a mate; when I was
despightfully, ignominiously and approbriously contemned, scorned and mocked of
all men, both Priests and People that came to view me in my misery; when I was
extremely abased in all things which bore the show of helps unto me; When I was
held in Irons until one of my limbs failed me; When I was diverse times
cruelly tortured and tormented in my weak fleshly body; When I was tempted with
Wine and with Women, and with meats, much, little, and none, with riches and
honor, and with all delights and pleasures that ever my heart might desire;
When I was threated with gally-slavery, with tortures on the soales of my feet,
with death by fire, and also subtly by poison; When I was thus and
unspeakably more proved by flatteries, threats and tortures, to turn from the
Lord my God unto a Graven Image; when the hunters night and day hunted me like
a forsaken Partridge in the barren Grounds, and like an alone Quail in the
stubble fields; when I was as a Wren in a bush of Thorns, and the Eagles
watched to tear me; when Wolves howled to prey upon me by night, and Lions
most terribly roared to destroy me day after day; when the Seas raged on every
side, and floods of the deeps heaped themselves like immovable Mountains upon
my back; when the wrath of Hell gaped as a gulf to swallow me in her belly of
envy; when nets of Iron were spread about my habitation, and snares of steel
set compassing my dwelling; when Serpents creeped over my body, and frogs
danced on my face, when Scorpions ran over my head, and Dragons spat fire in my
face, when the Spirits of infernal places encamped about me, and sirrounded me
with their dreadful flames; when they pierced me as with Spears in my side,
and that I daily felt their malice like the pains of arrows stuck fast in my
heart; when they strove to slay me with vexation, and to murder me with the
torments of oppression; when they spued out their vennome night and day in
vileness of words against me, with bitterness of cursing in their mouths, and
abominable oaths and blasphemies against the Righteous God of my Salvation;
when they rejoiced and took pleasure to oppress my righteous soul with oaths,
and sought to vex me with numberless lies; when by their numberless unheard of
wickednesses they labored to make me languish in sorrow and perish in extreme
misery; when their Spirits came upon me in the night season, and often almost
strangled me to death in my sleep; Then had I dreadful Visions by day, and most
terrible dreams by night; then was my soul in a Sea of sorrows, and in an
immence Ocean of miseries; then was my bread Affliction and my drink extreme
Tribulation; then did I water my Couch with my tears, and sowed them as seed on
the ground; For then the Mountains did press me down with their weights, and
rocks did even crush me to pieces; then did I make sobbs as an ease to my soul,
and sustained my self with the grievousness of groans; then were sighings as a
spouse in my bed, and tears as my solace with her; And oh then did I cry unto
my God and poured out my complaints before him; I wrestled with his Angel night
and day, and cast the Rivers of my bleedings on his Altar; And then he showed
me the sorrows of his Seed in the Earth, and the oppression of his righteous
life by all the Nations thereof; And though I could but discern the least part
thereof, yet it was infinitely more then my sufferings; and then he made me put
my neck to the yoke thereof, and my back to its heavy burdens, so that pangs
were added to my pains, and mourning multiplied to my miseries, which made me
roar for the revelation of mercies, dropping my tears under the Cherubim
wings of his eternal compassions, and stood before him in the nakedness of my
innocence, and in the simplicity of patience and content; for he stripped me as
bare as I was born, and then his righteous eye saw that I murmered not against
him in all my Tribulations, but called all things good from his hand, and gave
thanks to him for all my sufferings, as I did for my daily bread.

So it came to pass in his time that he remembered me his bruised Babe, and had
compassion on me his wounded worm, and moved in his jealousy for me, whose
righteous and pitiful Soul could not always bear the grief of my sorrows,
without streching out his hand to help me, because he saw that without him, I
was as a helpless Lamb among Lions; And therefore he passed in a secret dread
through Hell, and brake the bars of her gates, he cut a path through the Clouds
of her blackness, and divided a way through her burnings; he scattered
Mountains like dust with a whirlewind, and dispersed Hills like the chaff of
the summer thresshing floor; he made the raging seas as smooth as oil, and the
blustering storms as the gentle Northwind; he clave the craggy Rocks assunder,
and made an easy path through the drowning deeps; for that he had pity on my
broken heart, and most lamentable bleeding soul, knowing that I sought not
Riches nor Honor, but the Remission of the sins and the Salvation of the poor
Souls of mine enemies; nay, I desired not any thing in Heaven or Earth, besides
the glory and praise of his eternal holy Name, and knew the Innocence of my
simple Soul which cannot touch a worm to destroy it, and saw the openness of
my heart of love, which can lay down my life for the very vilest of all my
oppressors; wherefore he smote on the brazen earth, and tore down the bulwarks
of her strength, and then he lifted up my head above the deeps, and set my feet
upon the Tower of his strength, and made my meekness as the Arrows of his
quiver, and my patience as Spears of the battle, and sent my Shafts among
Armies, and dispersed their camps as smoke; and hosts that were as strong as
steel he made become as towe before the breath of my mouth; who formed my
nostrils as a bellows, and my mouth as a flaming Furnace; So he gave me the
Standerd of the battle, and put the Ensign of victory in my hand, who instead
of fear gave me wonderful courage, and instead of weakness, strength and
valor, and took pleasure to visit me with mercies and with comfortable
promises of Life; Yea in the time of my sore distress at midnight he appeared
at my Prison window in a flame of Fire, which my fleshly eyes beheld, and then
he smote upon the Iron bars thereof, which my fleshly ears did hear; So then I
remembered him (in the spirit) that he was my God, and that he watched over me
in the days of my affliction; moreover when my foes did oppress me, He roared
with Thunders in the City, which made the houses and their foundations to
tremble as a leaf, and made mine enemies to cry with fear, and then as I was
laid down in my Prison, with mine eye on the chain of my leg, he cast in a
bar of fire, in manner and bigness of a Jovelin, which smote upon the end
thereof which was fastened to a Ring in the Wall, by which he showed me his
might, and the wonderfulness of his glorious Power, and by the same did seal
unto me his Covenant; for he swore unto me by his life that he would break my
bonds assunder, and gave me Testimony upon Testimony of his faithfulness; And
in the days of my misery he humbled himself as if he were lower then the Son
of man, and came down and spoke to me as a man does speak with his friend, and
so took delight to break my heart assunder, that he might bind me up in his
bosom of pleasure; He diverse times plainly told me saying, fear not worm
Jacob, for I am thy God, no Enchantment shall ever prevail against thee, no
weapon formed against thee shall prosper; Besides he carried me through deep
places where he discovered unto me many wonders, yea, and showed me things too
wonderful for me; Ah the glory, the glory, the mavelous glory of his
wonderful works my weakness can never declare, neither can I utter the
proportion of his ravishing joys whereof he made me to drink at the Fountain
in abundance.

And when he had proved me by manifold ways, much more then any mortal man
could imagine, and seeing that in my sorrows I forsook him not, but grew nearer
and nearer into him, and in my joys I swelled not above him, but more and more
feared and trembled that I might live always humble beneath him, and his
tender pitties taking upon him the soreness of the sufferings of my poor
earthly Tabernacle; at last through the way that he had broken, through the
hard places reached me with the bowels of his servants, and with the prophecyes
of many of his people, who spoke in the one Spirit unto me the very things
which he covenanted unto me in the time of my extreme misery, which was as a
sevenfold Seal in my soul, confirming his Testimonies unto me; and then he
raised up his little babe my dear Brother Thomas Heart to set his tender soul
nearer unto my sufferings, and made him take my burdens on his back, and the
yoke of my Tribulation on his neck, and made him sup of my sore sorrows and
drink of the bleedings of my grief; and in the eternal bowels of his loving
kindness and mercies, made him attend me with constant consolations and with
renewed comforts of his life; yea he made him unto me as the compassions of a
Father to his Child, and as the bowels of a Mother to her babe, who took it as
the delight of his heart to send swiftly unto me the refreshing streams of my
Brethren and Sisters brooks; Ah he was as daily bread to my hunger, and as the
best wine to my thirst; yea the most high God made him as the dews of Heaven on
mylocks, and as the drops of the clouds on my skirts, who over took me with a
Sea of his love, and swallowed me in the deeps of his affection, so that he was
a joy to me in my tedious bonds, and gladness unto me whilst I was grieved of
mine enemies, and still he counted the most of his love too little, and the
weight of his affection as a thing too light in the balance, whose bowels did
break me assunder, and the flames of his love melted me into many streams.
Moreover the everlasting mercies of my God did stir up the bowels of other two
of his tender babes, named in the tent, Jane Stokes and Charles Baylie to come
to visit me whilst I was as forsaken of all men, who in the uprightness of
their hearts and perfect faith in my God of wonders, came traveling through
land toward me, bruised in their righteous souls in abstinence and fasting, in
weakness and sore pains, yet spared not their bodies to the utmost, but in the
faith persevered in their pilgrimage until they arrived to Rome, where C. B.
offered his life to ransom me, and both of them entered into captivity for the
love which they bore to my life; and Charles wore the irons of my bonds in
fastings and sore sufferings, which melted my heart like wax, and made me drop
down the tears of mine eyes, which precious visitations of my Fathers eternal
love manifested unto me in tender compassions through the yerning bowels of
these his beloved babes must never be forgotten of me, but remembered of me in a
soul abounding with thansgiving and spirit of praise of the most high; yea for
these and all his unspeakable favors I will laud, praise, honor, renown and
magnify his holy Name and power for ever and ever, Amen: For his mercies are
over all his works, and his compassions are without bounds or measure; and in
the belly of a continual broken heart desire I to dwell, where I may evermore
honor my God with my tears; for oh, oh, I am overcome, I am overcome of his
infinite mercies toward me.

And this I leave for posterities and generations following, that my seeds seed
and its seeding seed may know the love wherewith my God has loved me, both in
himself and in the bowels of these his babes, yea let the record of it be had
in Israel unto the end of days and time to the glory of the God of my
salvation, and and let the day of the birth of these innocent Lambs be had in
memory of blessing in the hearts of Sions Seed for ever, whom the Lord God of
my life made like so many long lines of his unsearchable loving kindness which
reached me in the deeps of my biter calamities, and in the lamentable days of
my languishings. Oh blessed, blessed, blessed, praised and magnified be the God
of my salvation, even for ever and ever, Amen.

Written in Rome Prison of Madmen. JOHN.

The third of the sixth Month, 1661.
From the Common Goal in Burkdou in France, about thirty leagues from Dover,
where I am a sufferer for speaking the Word of the Lord to two Priests, saying,
All Idols, all Idolatries and all Idol Priests must perish.
DEarly beloved, as the streams of an endless Fountain this goes through me,
which causes my banks to over flow plentifully with the pleasant and
delightful fruits of love, which gently streams and flows toward thee my
Sister and my Brother; but as thou art my elder in my Fathers house, in the
time of the exercise of thy strength did freely minister to my weakness,
which can never be forgotten by me, though I am at present, and have several
times (since I saw thy face) been shut up in strong prisons, yet it has not
nor cannot blot out the remembrance of thee from me; For I can truly say in the
fear of my Father, thou art as an engraven Adamant within my heart, and though
through the natural I may speak this, it is because I feel thee in the eternal,
I feel thee in the immortal, I feel thee in the unchangable, which was before
the changable was, or shadows of turning were; my heart is exceeding full in me
toward thee, unexpressable, undeclarable does my measure flow toward thee;
Therefore feel, feel me, and there only where I may be felt receive me, and as
thou do feel me, so let me be received and accepted in thy tender bosom.

And now it is in my heart to show thee in brief something of the service I have
had since I saw thy face, though it was not a little desired by me when I
returned from G.F. but I being drawn in my life toward London, and my former
service lay much before me, I choosed the Seas, and it was so with me, that I
was much pressed in my spirit to pass away; And when I came to London I found
in my life I might have stayed some time longer there then I did, but fearing
least it might be an offense to any, I took my leave of Friends and passed away
toward Dover, and it being wholly in my heart to do the will of my God
whatsoever I suffered, and after I had some service for the Lord in Dover,
which was well accepted of him, I took also my leave of friends at Dover and
imbarqued my self for Calis, yet at that very instant I felt something in my
life against going at that time; yet for my aforesaid reason I passed away, and
after my arrival at Calis the Lord would not permit me to go forward, but by a
mightly power was constrained to return back to Dover; It was also showed me
something of a woman going with me, to which I was constrained to consent, and
returned to Dover, though it was in great cross, yet the power of the Almighty
was with me, and I had not liberty to leave that Town; and after about a month
waiting, there came a dear servant of the most high God, whose name according
to the world is Jane Stokes, who was commanded of the Lord for to go to the
place where John Perrot was, and immediately so soon as she arrived in the
meeting in Dover, I was showed that she was to go over the Seas before I spoke
one word to her; and suddenly after, I was like a man released out of Prison
and had perfect freedom to pass away, which accordingly I did; and in relation
to this Voyage I shall tell thee how it was with me before I returned into
England the first time, For the Lord did show it me before I came to Paris the
first time, Therefore I writ it in my letter to thee, which I left with Anthony
Holder, saying that I am given up if to Rome; So the same day my dear companion
came, I passed away and set forwards toward Paris as aforesaid, it being the
same way we were both showed we should pass before we saw one another faces;
and arriving at Paris I was drawn in my life to the Protestants meeting which I
formerly told thee of, but there was much enmity against me, so that I had not
the service I might have had at that time; but we being both drawn in our lives
to pass away onwards of our Journey toward Rome, we soon set forwards in the
good will of the Lord, whose presence was wonderfully with us; for truly as the
dews distills morning by morning upon the tender grass, so did blessing and
mercy distill upon our tender souls, so that we were kept over all fears, as we
kept in the fear of our God, and as in his dread we walked, our enemies were
dreaded before us, for we passed through the Nation of France without any
molestation or trouble, and coming to Marcellis (from whence I sent thee a
Letter,) we embarked for Ginova, not having oppertunity for Legorn, as I did
purpose; and after some 15 days to and fro with sore storms we arrived safe to
our Port, and from thence we took our Journey by Land to Legorn, the Lord
preserving us through many mountains and dangerous places, and arriving at
Legorn, we had not of moneys the value of an English penny left to buy us a
little bread; But the Lord had not left us, but was near us in the time of
need, and ordered it so that we wanted not a piece of bread; For though it was
near night when we arrived, we met with a dear friend called William Ward,
master of a Vessel, who received us with gladness of heart, he having other two
friends with him who were also Seamen, and after we had stayed some time with
them, and being refreshed one in another, we took our leaves, taking courage as
Paul did in his voyage to Rome, after he had seen the Brethren; and arriving
safe at Rome we were drawn in our lives directly to the place where the dearly
beloved J. P. was, and coming to the Prison door, I enquired for him, and
having answer of his being there, I desired for to speak with him, but it would
not be permitted us; So it was said in me write unto him, which I did, the
which he answered us in the fullness of love, which refreshed us after our weary
steps; For our souls were refreshed one in another, though one another faces
we had never seen to the outward, and then we being kept in a holy fear not to
do nor act one way nor other, but as we were moved of the Lord, least we should
add to his bonds, I say being thus kept we were delivered out of the snare of
the fowler, who secretly lay in wait to betray our innocence; And after a
little time the Lord showed me I should go to the inquisition, which I did, and
enquired for the Inquisitor as I was showed of the Lord I should do; And when I
spoke to him, I told him I was come from England for to see my Brother I. P. to
which he answered, I should see him, and appointed me to come to a certain
place called Minerva, and there says he, I will procure you liberty of the
Cardinals to see him; he had me also to the Inquisition office, where he asked
many questions of me concerning our Religion, to which I answered in the
simplicity of my heart in the fear of the Lord; and at the appointed time I
came to the place aforesaid, and there I was showed what further I should do,
which was to tender my body for my Brother, and so from that time I hardly
missed opportunity to speak to them as often as they met, for their manner was
thus to meet twice a week, the one time at Minerva, and the other time at
Monte-Cavallo where the Popes own dwelling is, where I also did the like, more
then once, which stirred them up against me, in great emnity; And truly I was
persuaded both by Jews and others, to save our selves, their emnity grew so
much against us, at last they would not suffer us to give in a paper at the
door to our dear Brother, after some time passed; and after that the Lord
required me to go to the Jews Synagogue, where I had been several times before,
and declared glad tidings to them from the mouth of the Lord; and after that I
had been but a little time amongst them, the word of the Lord came to me
saying, thou shall be taken at Minerva, and whereas it is commonly reported in
this place, that John Luffe starved himself to death, thou shall fast for a
Testimony against them, for it was so they had often cast his death upon me,
saying he fasted 19 days, and the 20th day he died, which thing grieved me many
times; And it came to pass according to the word of Lord, I was taken 19 days
after at the said place where the Lord told me I should, and from thence I was
carried to the Inquisition, where I was shut up close, and after I had been
there 3 days, the Lord said to me Thou must go to the Pazzarella which was the
Prison or Hospital of mad men, where our dear Brother was prisoner; and it was
also said unto me, thou shall also speak to the Pope; And at the 17 days end,
I was led from the Inquisition toward the other Prison, and by the way I met
the Pope carried in great pomp, as it was the good will of the Lord that I
should speak unto him, men could not prevent it, for I met him toward the foot
of a bridge, where I was something nigh him, and when he came against me, the
people being on their knees on each side of him, I cried to him with a loud
voice in the Italian tongue To do the thing that was Just, and to release the
^^nocent, and whilst I was speaking, the man which me had not power to take me
away until I had (...) and then he had me to prison where my ende^ Brother
was, where I fasted about 20 days as a wi^^^ against that bloody Generation;
For in my fast^ Lord showed me what they had done with John (...) that true and
faithful servant of his, for he shewe^ they had destroyed him. Now in the time
of my ^ing, it could not be perceived by any outward app^^^ance that I did
fast, as many of themselves did cor^ that I looked better then when I did eat,
and tru^^ cannot say that my flesh did decay at all, I (...) strengthened often
times by the good word of (...) Lord which he spoke through his faithful
suffer^^ Lambs to me, in the time that we had liberty to w^ one to the other;
my dear Sister being brought (...) the Inquisition, where she was retained from
the (...) I was brought from thence, and from thence (...) brought to the same
Prison where we were; and s^ after my fast the Lord by an out-streched arm
wrou^^ our deliverance, being condemned to perpetual ^ly-slavery, if ever we
returned again unto Rome.

CHARLES BAYLY^

My Soul praise thou the Lord in all his mavelous g^^^ works, yea magnify
thou the Name of thy God, (...) holding the powerful works of his own right
hand, (...) partaking of his everlasting compassions, love and (...) measurable
mercies; Ah blessed, blessed, blessed, prai^^ magnified and honored be the
Name of the Lord the (...) high God, even for ever and ever Amen.

JOHN.

THE END.

