AN ADVERTISEMENT Concerning the Province of EAST-NEW-JERSEY IN AMERICA.
Published for the Information of such as are desirous to be concerned therein,
or to transport themselves thereto.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by John Reid, Anno DOM. 1685.

AN ADVERTISEMENT Concerning the Province of EAST-NEW-JERSEY IN AMERICA.
THE certain and undoubted account of the Province of East-New-Jersey, has
been so authentically verified, now for two years past, by the testimony of
persons of unquestionable Credit, who have written from thence; As also by the
Verbal account of severals, who having been many Months upon the place, have
since returned: that it seems strange there should be any further need, to
inculcate the verity or certainty of it. And yet to this day, for all the
clamors that have been raised, all unanimosly agree, even those Letters,
whereupon the late noise has been built, in asserting the healthfulness,
pleasantness, and fertilty of the Country; its advantageous Situation for
Trade, and plenty and safety of excellent Herbors, and Inletts, so that no Ship
was ever known, through the uneasiness or disadvantage of the Coast, to be
thrown away, nor yet the People to melt away, by decease incident and customary
in the Country: (which those who Industriously seek to spread reports to the
disadvantage of this Province, dare not affirm, in favors of that interest,
they seek to set up by decrying it without being convict of manifest falsehood,)
also all the reports agrees in the plenty of Cattle and Corn, and Fruits of all
kinds, already there, and of Fish and Fowl of all sorts.

But the ground of all these clamors are founded upon some expressions of a
letter written by John Campbel, to the Lord Secretary, Lundin, which because
they have been industriously represented, many degrees worse then really they
are, are here verbatim insert.

New-Perth, 9th. of October, 1684. My Lord,
WE came here on Friday the last of September and found but bad Quarters, there
being but four Houses built upon the Proprietors account (which are not worthy
to be called houses) they are but little, with one Chimney in every one of
them, having but two low Rooms, and garrets above, and scarce will hold out
Snow or Drift, and they are possessed by others that are here: There are four
Houses considerable, building upon particular men's accounts, that will be
finished this Winter, one of them is for the Governor, which Munivarde possessed
as it was, and calls it the Earl of Perths-house: The present Governour-Depute
lives at Elizabeth-town, he came here to us on Wednesday last, and took very
great pains to accommodate us all; and Lockharts Ship arrived the next day,
which made us very throng; the Governour-Depute after he had settled us, went
alongs and showed us the Townbounds, that we might choice out our
Town-interest, which falls to be very little, for the Town being always
computed to be 1500. Acres, it proves to be after survey, but a 1000. of this;
1000. there is laid out for high ways, and public uses, 200. Acres, so there
remains to be divided for 24. Proprieters, but 800. Acres, of which 800. there
is for every Proprieter within the Town 4. Acres for building on; so that I
have taken up for your Lordship, having the half of a Propriety in your own
hand, including what your Lo: has disponed to Gauin Drummond and me, 2 Acres,
which your Lo: is oblidged by Act of Council here, to build upon within a
twelve month, else the first that desires to build after the year is run out
(for the better advancing of the Town, the Governor gives them what is left
unbuilt;) but I got him to delay giving of your Lo: to any body, till I have
your Lo: return whither you resolve to build in the Town on not? If your Lo: do
build, 300. lib. will be the least that your Lo: can allow to build sueh houses
as are here building; There is about 33. Acres to fall to every Proprieter
within the Town, of which John Reid possesses near the half of the Scots
Proprieters share, and has your Servants and Stock on it: When I begin to talk
of calling them to an account of the Stock sent over, they say, It cannot be
done till the 4. years is out. John Reid has a considerable dale of land under
Corn, and a stock of Cowes and Horse; John Hanton has the other share in
another place of the Country, whom I have not yet seen. I show the
Governour-depute here your Lo: Commission to me, and Instructions, and desired
he would lay out a convenient place near a River, for a House and Plantation
for your Lo: But by all that I find, there is no such thing to be had, for all
sucb places are already planted, and taken up; and by all appearance had not
the Governour-depute purchased a tract of land a little before we came from the
Natives, there had not been enough to settle those who came in this two Ships.
There is a place called Chinkaroray, which by the Governors letter is
appointed to be preserved for the Proprieters; and when the Depute Governor
had surveyed it, and compted what was of it, there would not fall 3. Acres to
every Proprieters share, there being so much of it laid out already; So that
as yet I can see no convenient place for your Lo. Munivarde and I with some
others, are going toward the Hills on Monday, to see that land last purchased,
which is computed to be about 15000. Acres, which Munivarde says he will have
wholly to himself, and 1000. more if it please him, if not, he will immediately
return home, or to Mariland, where be had very good offers of good Land. I do
not find no place as I hear of, that is good untaken up within 5. or 6. miles
of a portable River; I have not as yet the Governor Deputes final resolution
as to your Lo: Plantation; But I will get him to give your Lo: an account of
things as they are himself, which he cannot do at the present, he being so
taken up with the People that is here. My Lord, as to what I have seen of the
product of this Country, there is very good Grain, such as Indian-corn, to a
great increase, English-wheat, and Oats, and no question Barley and Pease will
grow, which they are now going to try; There is abundance of good Cattle, Horse
and Swine, and some Sheep; they will labor the ground twenty years without any
dunging; there are many good Meadows upon the Rivers; there is abundance of
Deir, Turkiefowles, Quails, and Partridges; Some of our People has killed of
them here very near the Town, and Water-fowles in all Creiks and Rivers. My
Lord, this is all I have to trouble your Lo: with at present; But, if your Lo:
please to build in your share of the Town, you would send your Commands by the
first occasion, with Provision for that end. The Servants that are useful here,
are Carpenters and Brick-layers and Makers, for they may make Brick where they
found their houses, this is all from

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and oblidged Servant, John Campbel.


Now to satisfy all reasonable People, who does not use these expressions,
upon a private design, to advance their own interest, and support their
desperate adventures elsewhere, and to prejudge others: Let it be considered,
that first, Those persons had not been above eight days in the Country, when
they wrote these Letters, wearied, toiled, and freated, with a tedious Journey
about 200. miles overland, from Mary land, where they had been put in by stress
at Sea; that their information proceeded from the Old-Planters, who besides
their emnitie to our Contrymen, and unwillingness they should come in upon
them; do all that they can to discourage those at their first coming, and to
undervalue the Interest of the Proprietors, because they are behind in above
1000. lib. English, of quitt-Rents, would willingly shun the punctual payment
in time coming, which they see they are not like to do; and are called in
question for several large Tracts of Land, they have had in possession, (tho
not improved by them, all agreeing they are a lasie People) and have no true
tittle too. And we have certain information from others, who were many Months
upon the place, that they used the same Discouragements to them, upon their
first arivale: But they in a short time discovered their falsehood; and
fraudulent design in it, as appears in this very case, by Letters written a
Month and more, after the date of these, to wit, the middle and end of
December, whereas these are in the beginning of November, several abstracts of
which Letters when returned from the Countries where they were directed, to the
Parties concerned, may be hereafter published. As to that which John Campbel
says, He hears that there is hardly any good Land untaken up, within 5. or 6.
miles of a portable River; his Information has proved so for false, that David
Mudie of Montrose, in his letter to his Wife, of the 12th of December, a month
after, Declares, he had got 500 Acres, which was his full proportion of the
first Division, upon a Navigable part of the South River; where (he says)
David Violent has got the like quantity, though each of them had but a 20th.
part of a Propriety; and that to this place, they can in a Boat go from
New-Perth in two hours and a half, and return in the like time. This
sufficiently proves that assertion not to be true; That there is no part
untaken up within 5. or 6. miles of a Portable River; Besides, that it is
unquestionably known, that without Sandy-hook, by the Sea to the Southward of a
place called Neversniks, there is about 30. miles where there is not yet one
Family settled; And there is also a Navigable Bay, called, Barnagate, and the
some of that Seaside be Pin-tree-land, which is the worst sort; though good
for the ranging of Cattle: Yet about Barnagate, where there is also a River,
there is as good Land as in all those parts of America, and already cleared of
the Indian encumbrance, enough to aceommodate hundreds of Families; Besides,
that there are several. Tracts of Land, untaken up upon Hakinsake, Pissaik, and
Raritin Rivers; And there is a large Tract of excellent land upon
Milstoun-River, which runs into Raritin, and upon many other Revers and Crieks
which were tedious here to mention, that is altogether untaken up.

New though some have not spared, to call this Design a Cheat, upon this
account, yet that Imputation is so manifastlie false, that the Mapp of Jersey
has been patent above these two years, whereupon the obvious Navigable places
within the Baye, the seven several Towns. stands, and who ever either did or
had thought to engage in the Affair, not only might but were invited to observe
it, so far were those Concerned from seeking to conceal it, that they pressed
it as an encouragement, that people should not land in a wilderness, or remot
from Neighbor hood, but in a Country tollerablie well inhabited, where they
could be accommodated with necessaries, till they could raise it out of their
own Industry, which all, even these Letters yields may be done; and with far
easier labor, than here in a years time: Also, These concerned recommended the
Province upon that account, because, besides the conveniencie abovementioned,
for the land they want in these places, (as being taken up by the Old-Planters,
before their Purchase) they have a valuable consideration for it, there being a
List to be produced, sent over from that Country in September-last, of the
names of the Planters, the number of Acres they possess, and what they pay,
which amounts to about 300. lib. Sterling of yearly Rent; though at that time
this List was sent, the Rental of all was not completed; so that those who
found upon this as a Cheat, newly discovered by these Letters in the Affairs of
Jersey, manifest their malice, or at least their ignorance.

But next, they grossly be-speak their ignorance, that look they have no
convenient Land, if not upon a Navigable River. For what Country can be
supposed to ly all thus? Must not the Riches and Export of the Country arise
from the Improvement of Corn and Cattle in an Inland Country? And as this is
clearly proved, by the great Inland Countries of France, and England; to come
nearer home, What Fool will say; That no part of Scotland is Valuable, but what
is within five or six miles of a Navigable River? What should become then of
the greatest part of all the three Loutheans, of the Sheriffdom of Berwick, of
all Clidsdale above Glasgow, and the whole middle part of Fife, where yet the
pleasantest Seats in Scotland are. And its to be observed, that even where
there is not Navigable Rivers in East-Jersey, there are more Brooks and
pleasant running Streams, like those here; then in any of the Neighboring
Collonies. And as it is not to be denied, but the advantage of Navigation is
great, to any Country, so it is most certain, that there is no Province
belonging to the English, upon all the continent of America, that is better
furnished with good Harbors, and Navigable Rivers, and Creiks then East-Jersey
is, for its quantity; And however any have labored to represent the pennary of
Land, yet David Mudie in his Letter of the 12th of December, does say, The
Province is a third larger then ever it was represented in Scotland.

The next Objection is, As to the Indian purchase, it was a matter never
concealed by the Proprietors, that an a knowledgement was to be given to the
Indian Natives, upon the taking up of every Tract of Land, so that in the
Instructions, that they have been patent these two years, among other Papers at
Andrew Hamiltouns, it is positively insert: As also, in the first of the
Printed Papers; and whereas it was the defign of the Proprietors, as appears by
the foresaid Instructions given in to the Deputy Governor in September, 1683.
to clear as much of the Country as he could from the Indian encumbrance; He
wrote hack, That was not a right measure, for the Indians were still offering
the lard, and it was better only to take it up as there came People; But that
if the fourth part of the People of Scotland should come, they should not want
Land upon that account, for he could still procure it in time. And therefore,
John Campbel saving, if 15000. Acres had not been lately purchased from the
Indians, there had not been enough-to accommodate those that came in the last
two Ships; Which being write but five daves after his Arrival there, shows he
was not yet acquainted with the Method of that Country.

And yet by Munivards Letter it is obvious, how east that Indidian Encumbrance
is, since he write, He was to have 20. miles squar, for less than 250. lib
sterling, which yet is above three hundred thousand Acres, so that the
consequence of that purchase, need not frighten any; Yet Munitard has been
ignorant in that fancy, since no Subject of the King of England, dare purchase
any within the bounds of any Patent granted by him, but by allowance of the
Government derived from him: And as to Munivards Complants, of his Bargain, and
that he was told by the Deputy Governor, he knew not yet where his Land lay,
(which yet might be truly said, in an interest undivided, as all the Land is,
till it be distinctly taken up) the true mystery of that is known, by Letters
of a month latter date, from Credible Persons, that he refused to take up
land, for Reasons not proper here to insert.

This with the Letters and Testimonies before mentioned, do sufficiently
evidence how little ground there is for those reports that have been spread
abroad, and tho in particular many scurulous reports, have past upon Robert
Barclay upon this occasion, yet none durst ever challange him to his face, as
having done injustice in this matter, and to show how false they are, let it be
considered, that tho he might have put a considerable sum of money in his
pocket by selling of part of his own Propreity, yet he never did it, but only
procured from others in England, Sharers to such as desired, out of Zeal to
advance the Interest of his Country men, that though there has been half a
Propriety bought since this clamor was raised, and that he might have so
disposed of the half of his own, and yet have reserved as great an Interest as
any Scots-Man has; he choised rather to procure it from England, which shows,
he neither sought his own advantadge, nor yet has no Diffidence of the value
of the Province, notwithstanding of those clamours; And for the other wild
reports, that have been industriously spread upon him as to that matter, they
being but a Mass of envy and malice, which of themselves evanish, as such which
every Body is ashamed to own, they are not worth the taking notice unto.

Here Follows the Testimony of some Persons that were many Months in the
Province, with an abstract of some Letters write by Persons that are lately
gone Over.
WHereas we understand, that there are some Letters come from East-Jersey of
late, from some Persons that are lately gone over there; wherein they give an
ill Character of the Country, as if there were not in it land to accommodate
those, who have purchased Interests there, although this without doubt may
startle those that have not been in the Country, and do not know the present
state of it; yet to us it seems not strange, for had we given ear to the
Reports of many persons, who have been long Inhabitants there, we should have
write no less our selves: but we soon perceived their design in it, who being
unwilling that others should come in among them, and share of their Advantages,
and especially our Country People, of whom they were most jealous, because
they saw that they took a right way to improve their Interests there, did what
they could to discourage us, telling us, that all the best land was taken up,
and many other stories to dissuade us from settling our selves, or advising any
of our Friends and Country People to come and settle there; But after we had
been a while in the Country, and had occasion to see the Land, and other
Conveniences of it, we found there was no regard to be had to these reports,
and saw it was out of mere prejudice they endeavored to discourage us, because
they perceived that the Scots Proprietors of the Country were in good earnest;
and as they had begun to send over People, and make setlements upon their
Lands, so they would proceed, and examine all other affairs in the Country,
which was very unwelcome to those Planters; not only by reason of the
invalidity, and unjustness of the Titles, whereby many of them claimed so great
tracts of Land, as they pretended was already taken up, but because such of
them as had good and sufficient Rights, to some parcells of land, were run so
far in the arrears of their Quit-rents, that it would pinch them to pay all
they were owing to the Proprietors, and they saw if the Proprietors proceeded
in sending over People, and otherwise improving their Interests, they must
either pay or part with some of their lands, which they were loath to do to
any, and especially to Scots People, and so they thought that if they could but
discourage those that came first over, it would hinder others from coming, and
make the Proprietors careless of their Interests.

We doubt not but these persons who have been allarumed with these reports at
their first arrival, will (if they be not altogether careless of their own, or
the Interests of their Friends there, and take for granted every thing that the
Old-Planters say, without further inspection into the Country) write in
another strain, for we know there is yet abundance of good land to be taken up;
the Country being large, and but a skirt of it as yet inhabited. It is from
the place called Little-Egg-Harbour, to the extent of the bounds of it upon
Hudsons River, reckoned 120. miles at least, and from thence over to Delavare
River, it is affirmed by them that have traveled it, to be above 100. miles,
and besides Hudsons River, there are several other brave Rivers, upon which
there is land yet to take up, as the Rariton, Pissaick, and Hackinsack Rivers;
And also the South-River, and Milston River, and many other Creiks and Rivers,
upon all which there is good land to be taken up, and abundance of Meadow, and
although some of the land, upon the mouth and a little upwards, upon some of
these Rivers be taken up, yet we know that the land above, which is yet untaken
up, though it be not altogether so convenient for Trading, so as to have Ships
come to it; it has other conveniences exceeding that below: For the land is
better, and it is generally observed in these Countries, that the farther up
the better the land is; and as the Soil is better, so also the Air is
wholesomer, and the Country far more pleasant, and not troubled with
Musketaes, which breeds in the salt Meadows, upon the mouths of the Rivers,
where the Salt Water Ebbs and Flows. And for these Reasons we would as soon
choice to settle above upon the Rivers as below; For though ships of burden
cannot come up very far in the Rivers, yet Boats and Cannoes may, which are
sufficient to carry too and fro, such things as are needful, for those that
desire to live a Country life, and do not follow Trading or Merchandising,
(Towns and Cities being only fit for such.) And indeed the Country People
themselves begin to be desirous to go backwards into the Country and settle;
And we believe, that if they had not settled suddenly at their first coming,
before they were well acquainted with, and had viewed all the Country, they
had most of them gone further up; for we know some of them that have sold their
Plantations below, and gone backwards and settled new ones; and such as have
lived any while in the Country, upon Trades or Merchandising, before they
settled Plantations, have gone and settled backwards; as particularly, the
Merchants of New York, who have many of them settled Plantations on the Rariton
River, and choised to go far above those that first settled; and their
Plantations though they be far later, yet are of much more value than those
that are below. There is a tract of Land upon Milston River, which lies far
above any that is as yet taken up, that was pitched upon by a person well known
and experienced in these Countries, upon which he intended to setle a
considerable Town, and ingadged many Families in New England to come and settle
there, and had sold them land, who being better dequainted with the state of
things in America, then any here in Scotland can be, would not left their own
Coasts in New England, and gone there and planted backwards, if it had been
inconvenient or disadvantagious: But this person they engaged with not taking
the right way to effectuate his design, was forced much against his will to
desist; The Governor of the Province refusing him the land upon any terms,
which so vexed the People in New England, that he had treated with, and sold a
part of the land to, that he durst not be seen in their Country for a
considerable time afterward.

And besides these Rivers, there are many pleasant Brooks and Rivolets, all
over the Country, that run into the greater Rivers, upon which many curious
Plantations may be settled; So that although many thousands were going over, we
know there is Land enough to accommodate them, there being Countries as yet in
a manner untaken up; and particularly, from Shrewsberry to Little-Egg-Harbor,
which is a large Country, altogether as yet untaken up; and toward the
South-west-part of it, an excellent Bay or Inlet of the Sea, called Barnagate,
wherein runs a River; This place we have heard commended by many to be the best
place for Fisherie upon that Coast, and that the Land about it is good and
convenient, appears by the desire of several of the Country People, who to our
knowledge, offered to make purchase of land there. It was envyed by the
Governor of a Neighboring Province, who could he obtained liberty, would
have planted it with People from his own Country; So this place being
altogether untaken up, may well accommodate many People, especially those that
desire to be upon a Navigable River, or Bay, it being a place where Vessels may
come in.

It seems among other things, these Persons writes, That there is not Land
purchased of the Indians, Its true the whole Country is not purchased from
them, but there is as much purchased as is needful at present, and more then
will be settled in haste. For when we came away, the Deputy Governor was
treating for above sixty thousand Acres, the greatest part of which was
finally agreed for, and the rest very near agreed upon; Seventeen thousand
Acres of it lies betwixt Rava River, and the Rariton River, five thousand
Acres lying betwixt two Creiks, the one called Chcesquaks, and the other
Chingaroras, which are the Indian names, and thirty two thousand Acres lying
betwixt that Chingaroras upwards in the Country, and the lands of Midleton and
Shrewsberry, and eight thousand Acres lying upon the Rariton River, and several
other Parcels in other places, in all which places there is abundance of good
land, which is altogether untaken up, unless what may be taken up of it by
these Persous that are lately gone over, and are arrived since our coming away,
so that certainly very many people must go over, before this can be all settled,
and to Purchase more of the Indians, until this or the greatest part of it, be
settled, were not prudence, for whereas now the Indians, part with their land,
for a small matter, they would if People seemed too earnest to purchase all in
a sudden, augment their price.

These things being considered, we know not what reason of discouradgement
there is, to binder any from engadging in that Country; And indeed we are
sorry, that any thing shauld appear, to stop our Country People, that are
inclinable to go and settle there, for we are sure, that if they knew, and
understood the nature of the Country, and how easily a man may procure a
plentiful Livelihood, for his family in those parts, they would not account
those that have rashly written these discouradging Letters their Friends.

And because we are informed, that it is reported in some places, that we have
given an ill. report of the Country: We do hereby, Declare it to be false, for
as it truly deserves, we have always commended it, and encouradged such, as
we have have found inclinable to go thither, as is well known to those among
whom we have conversed since our return from thence, and as may appear, be
several Letters we write to our Friends while we were in that Country; wherein
we always acknowledged that the Countrer did deserve, that good Commendation
which it generally got, and this has been confirmed by many Letters from
several Persons, that are arrived there, since our coming away, who have not
been sor ash, and unadvised in their Censures, as these others have been.

This we thought fit to give forth, for the satisfaction of such, as are
desirous to be informed of the Countrcy, from those who have been Inbabitants
for a time therein, and have been Eye and Ear Witnesses, to the State and
Affairs thereof, testifying under our hands, what we have here written to be
true, we remain well-wishers to all our Country People.

David Barclay. Althur Forbes.

At Aberdeen the 5th day of March, 1685.
David Mudies Letter to his Wife.
New-Perth the 12. December, 1684. My heart,
I Hope this shall find you and your Children in Good bealth, and I wish in as
much satisfaction as I and our Children are here, far beyond my expectation,
and others my well-wishers, who are with you, my last to you was upon my
arrival here, dated the Eth of November, and at that time I could give you but
a small account of my judgment anent it, it would take a great deal of time to
inform you of every thing, as it truclie is; But to be short, I have traveled
through a part of it, and it is far larger than ever I heard it reported in
Scotland: I dare say, above a third more ground, and there is abundance of
brave Rivers through it all, better then ever I did see in any place, brave
Meadows along all the River sides, good lands above the Meadow ground,
ahoundance of Fresh water Brooks, and Springs, plenty of Fishes in all the
Rivers, in the Summer time, and that very good Fishes such as they preserve for
Victual in the Winter, and in very few days they use to take more then they
make use of in Winter; as for wild Meat there is of all sorts, Cows, Sheep and
Oxen as large as in England, and abundantly cheap, considering there goodness;
Corns and all Sorts of Fruit in great abundance, and no liss then they are
called in Scotland. Money within this three years is become pretty plentiful,
Servants dear and searce: I have taken up sex Acres of Land in Newperth, which
pleases me exceeding well, in regard it is good Land, and fit for building of a
City, and Persons of Good Fortune are come from New York, and other places in
the Country, and are very busy building, and I am begun to build a house, and
have near dug the ground, which is very hard, it being under a great part of
it Oker, which is hard to digg, and the least deepness is eight foot, I have my
two Wrights Squaring of Timber for it, and I resolve to have it a good handsome
Horse, six Rooms off a floor, with a Study, two stories high above the Sellers,
and the Garret above; And I doubt not if the Frost bid away, but I shall have
the Sellers finished, and the gests laia above it, against the latter end of
this Month; for the land that lies to the house, I resolve to fence in two
Acres-of it for an Orchard, and an Yeard, and to have that done before the
middle of February, and to have it planted with fruit trees; for I find a man
in three years will have more Fruit in such an Orchard then he knows how to
make use of.

And about the middle of February, according as the Weather is, I resolve to go
out where I have taken up my Land, which is upon a River, called the South
River, which is an exceeding pleasant River, and place, there goes only with
me there Mr. David Violent. I can go from New-Perth to it in a Boat, in two
hours and a half, let the wind blow as it will, and come back again in as much
time; I wish I had as many Servants here as I could make use of. Any man that
is frugal, and has 300. lib. Sterling in Stock, to come over here, and bring
over 7. or 8. good Servants with him, I could assure him in 3. years time be
should make a stock better then 1000. if not 1500. lib. if he bestow his money
right in Scotland, and take advice to bring all things here which is necessary
for him to have in this Country. I am uncertain of the time I will be at Home,
but I resolve you shall come over with me again, and ye will both think and say,
when ye see the Country, that ye wish it had been done twenty years ago. I
thought it not fit to trouble my friends and relations, since I could not write
short Letters to them, but any of them that defires to know the condition of
this Country, ye may show them this Letter, since there is no secreet in it,
you will find by William Burnets Letter, that he desires some of his Sons to
come over, and John Geddis writs for some of his Brethren; the which Letters
cause deliver them carefully, and get an answer that if they be to come over,
ye may speak for their passage timely; he tells some of them are good Wrights;
which is all at present, but keep a good heart to your self, and take care of
your Children, and I hope to see you with more Comfort then we parted, and I am
your ever loving Husband while I breath,

David Mudie.

James Johnstons Letter to his Brother John Johnston Drougest in Edinburgh.
East-Jersey the 12th. of December, 1684. Loving Brother,
I Have taken up a part of my Land, 9. miles from Amboy, and 4. miles from
Piscatway, and as far from the nearest part of Rariton, on a Brook-side, where
there are exceeding great plains without any. Timber, there is excellent
Gunning for Dear and Turkies, of which there is great plenty, and easily shot.
But I resolve to see a place called Bernagate, which is 60. or 70. miles from
this, on the Souther most place of the Province, where there is a good River
and Harbor, the best Fishing and Gunning in any place in America 30. or 40.
miles from any Plantation. The Indians here are nothing to be feared, the Place
being as peaceable as any where else; I had occasion to travel through
Long Island, and Stalen Island, and for many miles found as many towns and
plantations in the way, as in any so much Land in Louthean; there are no Bears
nor Ravinous Beasts but Wolves, which are nothing to be feared, neither are the
Country People afraid to be among them all night, in so much as I often times
going wrong, and lying out all night and hearing there yells about me, and
telling that I was afraid of them, the Country People laughed at it; neither
are the Snakes any thing to be noticed, for nothing can come near them, but
they give warning with the rattling of their tail, so that People may either
kill them, or go by them as they please. Oxen are so well taught that they go
sometimes in a Plough, or Cart, without Horse, or without a Gade-man; Horses
and Cattle are as cheap as in Scotland, considering their goodness and the
difference of the Money; All sorts of Scots goods sells well here, ye will be
advised with the next Occasion, what goods sells best in this place. I have
great reason to thank GOD, that I am in a place which abundantly answers any
thing I expected; The Air is healthful, and the Soil fruitful; the Indian Corn
yields commonly 2 or 3 hundred fold, Oats 20. fold, as I am informed; the
Indian Corn is an excellent grain, I have eat it and likes it very well in
Pottage and Bread; there are several reasonable good towns in this Province,
most of them has more then eighty Families there is no poor persons here, but
all are half idle in respect of what they work with you. Flax twice heckled,
sold at 9 d. per pound. Wool is very cheap, only work is dear; the Liquor we
most use is Sider; we have great store of Fruir. In many places untaken up
there are many plains and not a tree; I have never since last parting had any
sickness to keep me from one Dyct, for which I render thanks to GOD. The
Indians here make it their trade to kill Venison, and sell it to us; for a small
matter I will have my Family served with Flesh all Winter; one of their
Sashiams, (which is their King) came to the Governor when I came first here,
desiring he might be suffered to trade among si us, and not to be beat out of
our houses, when they were drunk, but only that we might bind them, and permit
them to cut timber, and some such things; At new-Berth, we have a good
Stationers Shop of Books the land is no where difflcult to clear, albeit trees
be 100. foot long and 3. or 4. foot over; I would heartily with and persuade
any to come over that intends to live well, plentifully and pleasantly: Neither
is there any Tradesman or Servant that could come wrong to this place, and I
could wish my best friends no better but in the same place with me; the old
Inhabitants are a most careless and infrugall People, there profession are most
part Protestants, few Quakers, some Anabaptists, it is most desired there may
be some Ministers sent us over, they would have considerable Benefices, and
good Estates; and since it would be a matter of great Piety, I hope ye will be
isntrumental to advise some over to us the place is abundantly healthful, as
any else; there are a great difference betwixt the people here, who are Strong
and Vigorous, and the people more Southerly in Mariland; we have great store of
Venison which is sometimes as fat as Pork one good Buck is sold at 5. shil. and
by the Indians at 2. shil. Oats are sold at 18. pence the Bushel; all sorts of
Fish is here exceeding plentiful, the poorest Persons eats no Meat that is
Salt, except Pork, in Summer, they live much on Milk. I would no more value the
Sea coming through if I had occasion, then ye would riding of of 20. miles; let
me be remembered to all friends, to Patrick Fortune who most carefully dissuaded
me from this Voyage, which I do not repent, but would as carefully persuade
others, who study there own good, what I most earnestly desire of you, for the
encouragment of this Plantation, is, you would be Instrumental to send us over
some Ministers, who I dare engadge shall afterward ever be thankful, and I
oblidge to be your ever affectionate Brother,

James Johnston.

Amboy, or new Perth in America, 9. of November, 1684. Dear Brother,
HAving accidentally met with the Bearer, had not time to give you any
particular account of this Country, only assure you, that it is beyond (not
only) all our expectations, but all that ever you have heard spoken of it, we
(praised be GOD) all of us arrived safely without the loss of any one
Passenger; scarcely any of them was ever sick, only we had much troubles coming
from Mariland by land, our Skipper having for his own advantadge put in first
at the Capes of Virginia; but we have had a brave Prospect of the Country, and
all the way as well as in this place where now we are, we found plenty of Corn
and all Kinds of Fruit, with Fish, Venision and wild Fowls, in such abundance,
that a Deer may be had for 2 shilling Country money, and Turkies for 6. pence;
which will be at least as big any 2. Turkies in Scotland, and are really
Turkies, only blacker then tame Turkies that you have seen; I shall give you
full satisfaction with the next occasion, pray you fail not to writ to me, when
you meet with any, otherwise you disoblidge him who is ever yours,

D. Mckgregor.
Write to his Brother Munivard, in Scotland.



Patrick Falkconers Letter to Maurice Trent.
Elizabeth-Town in East-Jersey, the 28th. of October, 1684. Sir,
MY last was dated the 22. Current, from Philadelphia, at which time I could
give you but a small account of the Country; and as yet its but a small
account, I can give by reason that I have had but a little time here as yet; I
have traveled on Foot more then a 100. miles in East and West Jersey, and
Pensilvania; I have also Traveled in Maryland, I cannot but say it is a good
Country, but its possessed with a Debauched, Idle, Lasie People, all that they
Labor for is only as much Bread as serves them for one Season, and als much
Tobacco as may furnish them with Clothes, I believe it is the worst improwed
Country in the World, for the Indian wheat is that they trust to, and if that
fail them they may expect to starve. I find Pensilvanie and the two Jerseyes
are the places which set themselves out most for Planting of Corn; As for the
Jersies I need not insist in commending of them, for David Barclay and Arthur
Forbes who had a longer stay here than I have had, will give you a more full
account; for I intend to write no more than I am able to make good. I may say,
that it is a pleasant Country, I did never see more pleasant Meadows, and
Grass, than I have seen in both the Jersies, I have seen plains of good Hay
consisting of about 50. Acres of ground, hardly one Tree to be seen upon the
whole spot. And there are several places so, I can say, its a well watered
Country, and good waters, and if they were desirous, they might have very good
Quarrie here both for Stone of any sort, and Limestone likewise, but so long
as Timber is so plenty, they will not be at the pains, to seek after Stone;
there are some houses in the Country, built with stone but very few. Having
fallen in here, the end of the year, I cannot be capable to give an account
what may be the product of the Country, but I hear that all sorts of Grain
has very good Increase, I see the Country abounds with Apples, Quinches,
Peatches, Walnuts, and Chasnuts, and Strawberries in great abundance,
wild-Wine-Grapes are plentiful, wild-Fowl of all sorts, a great number of
Deer, Turckie-Fowls-wild, in great abundance and very bigg, I have seen these
things in great plenty: I hope ye will excuse me, becanse I am not capable to
give an ampler account of the Country, for I have not been two days in one
place, I will tell you this is a good Country, for men who resolves to be
Laborious; any who comes here they must resolve to work hard for the first two
or three years, till they get a little Ground cleared, for this must be looked
on as a woody-Countrey, tho I must confess the Woods are not so thick as people
expects; and there are several places in the Country where there is little or
no Wood; People are generally curious to have there Land near Navigable Rivers,
but when they are better acquaint, they will find that the farther back the
better is the Land, there are abundance of Fish and Oysters here, this is not
a Country for idle people, but such as will be at pains, they need not doubt
but to get Bread here in plenty, so I wish it be the Lords will that we may
have a happy meeting again, his will be done, I wish you may be protected by
the Lord, this from

Your affectionate Friend, and humble Servant, Patrick Falconer.

Abstract of a Letter write by Peter Watson (who went over a Servant with David
Barclay, in the year 1683.) to John Watson Messenger in Selkirk
New-Perth, the 20th of August, 1684. Cusing,
I Could never write to you before now, because I was never rightly settled, and
am not yet fully settled, but I am from among the rest of the Servants, one
James-Reid and I and our Families are together, set out to a Farm on Amboy, we
are to have some Land laid out to us, and we are Stocked with two Mares, four
Cowes, two Sows, two Oxen; my Wife and I and the Child Richard are very well in
health, and has been so ever since we came out of Scotland: Now as for this
Country, it is a very good Country, indeed poor men such as my self, may live
better here then in Scotland if they will but work, a man can have Corn and
Cattle or any other Goods for his work and he can sell these goods to some
hands for money, it is not for a man that has a Family to come bound four
years, but young men, who have no trouble, they will do better to come and
serve four years here then to serve in Scotland, for they are not so hard
wrought as in Scotland, and when the four years are out, they can gain
abundance to work to other men; or if they desire to setle upon Land of their
own, they can have it reasonably Cheap, the bardest work that is here, it
clearing of the Ground, and felling of Trees, and the like; the first year is
the worst, till they be accustomed with the work of the Country. my Neighbor
and I did clear from the middle of February till the undst of May. five Acres
of Land, and have is planted (...) ^^dian Corn, and Indian Beans, and Tobacco
for our own smoking; a man who lives here (...) where to buy anything, here be
can have Corn and Catile, and every thing that it (...) man's use, if he be
Industrious, only the thing that is dearest here, is Clothing, for there are
but few Sheep in this country, but there are store of all other Beasts, such
as Horse, and Cows, and Hoggs, there is here good Fishing, good hunting of
Deer, and other kind of wild Beasts; The Country is very healthie as I have
seen yet, it is cold (...) the Winter like unto Scotland; But fra once the
Summer breaks up, it is hotter then it is in Scotland; There are here very good
Religious People, they go under the name of Independants, but are most like to
the Prsibyterians, only they will not receive every one to their Society; we
have great need of Good. and Faithful Ministers; And I wish to GOD, that there
would come some over here, they can live as well, and have as much as in
Scotland, and more than many gets; we have none within all this Province of
East-Jersey, except one who is Preacher in New-wark; there were one or two
Preachers more in the Province, but they are dead; And now the people they meet
together every Sabbath day, and Reads and Prays, and sings Psalms in their
Meeting Houses, this Country is very well setiled with People, most part of
the first Settlers came out of New England, very kind and loving people, kinder
than in Scotland or England, As for the Indian Natives, they are not trouble
some any way to any of us, if we do them no harm, but are a very kind and
loving people; the men does nothing but hunts, and the women they plant Corn,
and works at home; they come and trades among the Christians with Skins or
Venison, or Corn, or Pork; and in the Summer time, they and their Wives come
down the Rivers, in their Cannoas, which they make themselves of a piece of a
great tree, like a little Beat, and there they Fish and take oysters. This
Country is a very pleasant Country with Rivers and Creiks to fish in; only it
is full of Wood, such as Oak and Walnut-tree, Chesnnt, Poplar, and Cedar; The
only thing we want here is good People; I wish that all the poor Friends I or
my Wife has were here: As for my Brother, if he have a mind to come. Brother
if you have but as much in the World as would transport you hither and your
family. I would desire you earnestly to come, and bring my Sister with you; if
you have as much as will transpor't you, sell all and come, tho you bad not a
penny after your passage were paid, you need not fear if you have a mind to
work; I was as little brought up with work as an^ wan, yet blessed be GOD, I
can work now as my Neighbors, and lives very contentedly with my Wife better
than ever we did in Scotland; show my Mother Law that my Wife and I would be
very well pleased, if she would come over, there are as old Women as she comes
here out of old England; there was one came along with us elder than she, if
she will come; she shall live with her Daughter and me, as easy, and as well
as ever she did live in Scotland; and I do know that was well enough my Wife
and I are well at present, as you could wish, GOD be blessed; I can say no
more, but my love to my Brother, and his Wife, and all Friends,

I rest your loving Cusin, Peter Watson.

A Letter write by John Campbel, to John Dobie.
New-Perth, 8th of November, 1684. B. John,
I Wrote a line from Philadelphia to you, as we were coming hither, your Cusin
James Dobbie the beater is in such haste, that I cannot write what I would say;
but in short, we are come more to a good wholesome Country, in which with
little industry a man may have a comfortable life, there is good Wheat and
Oats growing here, and Indian Corn, which our Servants likes very well; There
is Fish and Fowl abundance, of Cows and Horse, they labor with Horse and Oxen;
There is Deer through all the Country, and Turkies which some of our (...) has
killed a part of already; there is Pererages and Quails very rife, that (...)
Wife yesterday morning saw about 20. of them walking before the door like
Chikens. I shall say no more till I see farther, for I am with others going to
the Country on Monday to see for the Country lotts, for I have taken up the
Towns already, and cut down the trees of two Acres of ground with six men in
three days. My service to all Friends, I am

Your most assured Friend, John Campbel.

POSTSCRIPT.
BY all these Letters, and many more that could be produced, if need were, it
sufficiently appears how little ground there is for these clamours, that have
been raised against this Province; And though no reasonable man can suppose
that there is a Country in the World that will please the humors of all sorts
of people; yet it is to be observed, that albeit several hundreds of people are
gone to this Province, within these three years from Scotland and England, the
reports of them all agree in the main, and lands in the commendation of the
Country.

Now if any should suspect that these Letters are any ways altered, because
some of them are not entirely insert, there being in them other business that
relates not to the Country; And in others of them, a large account of their
Sea-voyage, which were needless here to insert; It is desired, that all who
would be further satisfied by these Letters, may repair to Andrew Hamiltons at
the sign of the Ship, in Edinburgh, where the original of some of them lies,
and such of them as are not there, may be found with the persons to whom they
were directed.

There is a good Ship freighted by Mr. Robert Plackwood Merchant in Edinburgh,
and David Parclay, which is to be at Leith sometime in June next, and is to
call at Montrose and Aberdeen, and thence to sail to the Town of Perth in
East-Jersey; So if there be any persons that are desirous to transport
themselves thither, let them repair to Mr. Robert Plaickwood. Andrew Hemilton,
or David Falkoner in Edinburgh; In Aberdeen to Andrew Calloway Merchan^t; In
she Mearns to David Barclay of Ury, In Aberdeen Shire; to Robert ^urnet of
Lethent^, or Robert Gordon of C^uny, where such as are willing to pay their own
passage, by giving timely notice, may have assurance of good accommodation in
the said Ship; And such as are willing to engadge as Tennents, or Servants,
wheth^^ (...). Husbandmen, or others. let them repair to any of the foresaids
person^ who will engadge with them, upon easy and reasonable terms.

In page 2^^ the date of J. Campbels letter, read November for October; And in
the first line of the letter, read October for September, which error was
occasioned by the Transcriber.

FINIS.

