The Petition of the WIDOWS, in and about London and Westminster for a Redress
of their Grievances.
By the same Solicitor that drew up the Petition for the Ladies.
LAst Week a Petition subscribed by the unmarried Ladies came before you, and
what reception it found your selves know best. It Is true we wondered to find an
Army of Maids, from whom the World usually expects modesty and silence, so
emboldened on the sudden as to petition for Husbands, and that in the face of
the World. Widows indeed who lie under no such Restrictions, are allowed in all
Countries to speak for themselves; and it is but reasonable we should, for few
besides will submit to the Trouble. It Is our Privilege to be obstreperous when
we are not heard; and there is one of our Predecessors upon Record in the New
Testament, who by Virtue of her everlasting Clack, forced an old musty
Gentleman of the long Robe at last to grant her Request.

Now Heaven be praised, we are not unacquainted with Mankind, which the Maids,
we suppose, will not pretend to; and therefore may appeal to them without
infringing the Rules of Decency: We have seen them in their best and weakest
Intervals. We know what Weapons they carry about them, and how often they can
discharge in an Engagement. We have in our times had very severe Conflicts with
them, and sometimes they were uppermost, and then they fell on like Thunder and
Lightning; but for all that your Petitioners obliged them soon to quit the
Field, and leave part of their Ammunition behind them. Give us leave, good
Gentlemen, to talk of these our Combats; for we always fought upon the square,
and therefore have no reason to be ashamed of a recital. As we hinted to you
before, we have been concerned in several fierce Engagements, and the Men
played their Sharps against us when we could only produce Flats on our side;
and, besides, they drew their heavy Canon upon us, while we were forced to lie
by and receive their shot. After all, though we were so disadvantageously set
upon, and the Blood shed that happened in these Occasions was always on our
part; yet when the Fortune of the Battle began to change, and declare herself
in favor of us, we never treated them otherwise than Christians; we never
nailed up their Canon when we had it in our possession, so to render it
unserviceable for the future, but gave them time to recover breath again, and
furnish themselves with a new Train of Artillery: Is not this a generous and
honorable way of treating an Enemy? In short (the Devil take that Word short,
for your Petitioners mortally hate it) But in fine, we have been intimate with
the Men, and the Men have been no less intimate with us; but what is the chief
Errand that sent us here, we have every Woman of us buried her respective Man.

Not that we value our selves upon that score, for God forbid we should; but
Widows will speak the Truth let the consequence be what it will, and should you
make ten thousand Acts to oblige us to hold our Tongues, it would signify just
nothing, we should break them all in a moment, and that with as much Alacrity
as the Vintners in Town daily break the Adultery-Act. Well then we have all of
us buried her respective Man, which we mention not, Heaven knows our Hearts,
out of Odentation, but with due Grief and Sorrow. We know a Man's value too
well not to regret the loss of so serviceable a Creature. We had all of us good
able Husbands, at least we'll say so now they are gone; and though perhaps we
had some reason to complain of them when they were alive, yet we forgive them
all their Faults and Infirmities, for that single good natured Act of dying,
and leaving us once more to our selves.

The foolish People of Athens after they had lost a good King, would have no
more of the kind, forsooth, lest a bad one should succeed him. But your
Petitioners are not such a scrupulous sort of People: We that have had good
Husbands, are encouraged to try once more, out of hopes of meeting the same
Saccess; and we that have had bad ones, are not for all that deterred from
Matrimony, but hope to mend our hands in a second Bargain. After all, should we
be deceived in our Expectations, the first may afford to undergo a little
Penance since they were so happy before; and the latter being accustomed of old
to bear Burdens, are therefore the better enabled to support themselves under
them.

The Body of your Petitioners (for after so much Preface it is high time to
come to business) consists of four several Classes; viz. the old Widows, the
young or middle aged Widows, the rich Widows, and the poor Widows, and each of
them presents you with a different Petition.

To begin then with the old Widows, (and that pre-eminence is due to them upon
the score of their Age and Experience) they humbly supplicate that you would he
pleased to take their miserable Condition into Consideration. Old People
according to the Proverb are twice Children; What wonder is it then if they
still have a hankering after Childish Playthings, and long to have their Gums
rubbed with Coral? Pray don't mistake them, good Gentlemen, they mean it in a
lawful, Matrimonial Sense, and hope you will not censure or think the worse of
them for using this Freedom. They appeal to all the World who it is that most
stand in want of warm, comfortable things, the young or the old: That it is the
greatest Charity to relieve the last, needs no formal proof, all the Hospitals
in the Kingdom speak as much; but alas in this uncharitable Age they don't
expect to meet with many Friends. Upon this Consideration they entirely submit
themselves to the Mercy of the House, not presuming to carry their Petition so
high as to request you to force people to marry them but only that you would
recommend their Case to the benevolence of those Persons, who having lived
wickedly and at large all their Lifetime, are willing to compound for their
S^ns, and do Acts of supererrogation in the (...) Scene of it. No^ are they
difficult in their choice, they will sit down content with any thin^ and
Cripples with Wooden L^gs will be che^rful^y certained if they have received no
damage in the distinguishing part.

Next to these come the rich Widows, and they earnestly beg of your Honorable
House that you would make it Felony without Benefit of the Clergy, for any one
to make Court to them before the mournful Twelfth month is expired. They are so
perpetually pe^tered with S^^tors of all Comple^ions, that they dan neither
eat, nor sleep, nor pray for them. A new ^av^ur^e ^as no^ more (...) Servants
in a morning at (...) (...) (...) o^ the Pay-Office a greater crowd of surly,
grumbling Seamen than they have. Nay, some of their passionate Admirers have
had the Impudence to accost them upon this Chapter as they have been following
their Husband's Corpse to the Grave, in the very height of their Sorrow, and in
the midst of the Funeral-Pomp* If you think it too severe to make it Felony in
Persons so offending, they desire you to commute the Punishment, and oblige
every Person trespassing after that manner to marry some poor Widow as fancy
inclines him; Which is all the Favor that the poor Widows beg at your hands.

And now comes up the main Body of the young and middle aged Widows, who as
they are by far the most numerous, especially since the Wars have made such
havoc among the Husbands; so they crave leave to lay their Petitions at your
feet. But before they do that, they think it convenient to remove all those
popular Slanders and Objections, which ill natured People have been long
accustomed to level against Widows in general; and because their Adversaries
shall have no reason to complain that their Arguments are mangled, they will
urge them as home as either themselves or their best Advocates could do it for
them.

It Is in the first place pretended that Widows want several of those
Recommendations that set off the Sex, and particularly a Maiden head, without
which no Wife they say can be acceptable; that they are still trumping up
Stories of their former Husbands, purposely to confront their new ones, and so
excessively talkative that nothing but Deafness is an Antidote against the
Noise; that marrying a Widow is like splitting upon a Rock where others have
been ship-wracked before. After this they run the Metaphor into Long-Lane,
Second-hand Gloves, Clothes of another's wearing, and the Lord knows what
impertinent Stuff: But we shall answer them all in order.

To begin then with the loss of a Maidenhead, about which they make so horrid a
Clamor, we could tell them sad Stories of several of their Betters that on the
Wedding-night have fansied they have dug up this same Chimerical Treasure,
though it was stolen many Months before; nay, we have a hundred and more of our
Company here, that if occasion were, could attest this upon their own personal
knowledge. So certain it is that the nicest Critics among the Men may be as
easily imposed upon in this Affair, as your pretenders to Antiquity in
counterfeit Medals. But if no Woman can please them without this imaginary
Wealth (and indeed it is no more, for most People take it upon Trust) we see no
reason why a young Widow may not be as capable of obliging them as the best
Virgin in the World. It Is but using a few Astringents before, and, at the
critical Minute, crying out, Fie, Sir, pray, Sir, will you split me up? will
you murder me alive? Can you take any pleasure in what is so painful to
another? And the Sparks are satisfied they have made a real Sacrifice, though
in Truth no more Blood was shed in the Encounter, than we see upon the Stage
when one Actor kills another. If this is their dear Diversion (and by the bye
it is a sure sign of their ill Nature that they cannot be pleased but at the
expense of the Party, whom they pretend to love so dearly) rather than lose
them, we promise them to howl, and sigh, and roar every Night in the Year, as
heartily as an Ox, when he is led to the Slaughterhouse, and so entertain them
still with the Ceremony, at least, of their dearly beloved Maidenhead.

In the next place why should we not be permitted to refresh the Memory of a
dull lazy husband with the noble performances of his Predecessors. The men in
K. Charles the Second's Reign took the liberty to talk of the Glorious
Conquests of our former fighting Monarchs, and yet for all that thought
themselves as good Subjects as any in the kingdom. If the reproof is just where
a God's name lies the harm, and surely the Wife must be allowed to be the best
judge of that affair. Oh no, say they, it is not the Horse but the Man that best
knows whether he ride^ easy, Content: But does not the Horse likewise know
whether his Rider carries true Horseman's weight, and whether he sits even in
the Saddle. If not, why would Bucephalus suffer himself to be backed by none
but Alexander the Great?

But then we are excessive talkative. So are they, and so are most of our Sex,
but especially the longing Maids, and under correction, if it is a Sin we are
of opinion it sits better upon us than upon them. This is not all, Marrying a
Widow is like spliting upon a Rock where others have been Shipwrack'd. Well, we
are glad however it is like something. But since one simily is b^st drove out by
another. Why not, like drinking in a room where some honest Gentleman has made
merry before. Since nothing will go down with these Squamish Creatures in the
Matrimonial way but a spick and span new Virgin, we wonder why they don't keep
up the frolic in every thing else; why as often as they drink they don't call
still for a Virgin Glass; why they don't every Meal call for a Virgin Plate;
why they don't still pull out a Virgin Snuff Box, lie in Virgin Sheets, talk
Politics in a Virgin Coffee-House, and pursue their dearly beloved variety to
the end of the Chapter. Lastly, their indignation rises at the thoughts of
Long-lane, and all Second-hand things whatever. If the Sparks are resolved to
he true to their Argument, we are well satisfied they must even say good night
to all thinking and writing and talking: For at present they Think at
Second-hand, and Write and Talk at Second-hand, and this objection, as terrible
as it looks, is a thread bare weather-beaten Second-hand Objection with a
witness.

A late Monarch of happy Memory, who was inferior to none but Solomon in
Natural Philosophy, and chiefly in what relates to our Sex, was often heard to
say, that getting of a Maiden Head was a drudgery fit for none but Porters, We
save all that labor and pains, for there needs no great trouble to enter a
City when a Breach is once made in the Walls, and our Husbands have that
satisfaction as to see their ground ploughed up ready to their hands. To
conclude all, a Widow is a tried Gun, and carries the Tower Mark upon her; now
who knows but a Maid may split in the proving.

Having thus justified the State of Widowhood against all the objections that
are used to be made against it, we have nothing more to add, but that you would be
pleased to give your consent to the three following Articles.

First, That all Persons who are not of known parts and abilities, may not only
be rendered incapable of marrying Maids or such as are reputed Maids, but
confined to the choice of Widows only. This we request not so much for our own
advantage, as for the ease of the Men; for you know several people can make a
shift to keep the King's high way, that are not able to leap a Ditch or break
open a Quickset.

Secondly, That all Persons resolving to marry before the age of twenty one, if
they have made no Natural Experiments before that time, shall be likewise
obliged to take a Widow, as they do Pilots in difficult or unknown places. It Is
an ancient but well grounded complaint, that where two Maiden Heads meet they
produce nothing but mere Butter Prints, addle-pated Fops, and dull senseless
sleepy Boobies. Now if you pass this into an Act, in all probability it will
contribute much to the improving of our present degenerate Race, and certainly
if ever we wanted solid heads, it is at this conjuncture.

Thirdly, and Lastly, That all Widows during their Widow-hood may be excused
from the Taxes, for is it not hard, good Gentlemen, to pay four Shillings in
the Pound for empty Houses. We hope you will consider farther of these our
reasonable Supplications.

And your Petitioners as in Duty, etc

FINIS.
London, Printed for the Use of the Wide -- -- -- o's, 1693.


