THE OBLIGATION Resulting from the OATH of SUPREMACY, To Assist and Defend the
Pre-eminence or Prerogative OF THE Dispensative Power BELONGING To the KING,
his Heirs and Successors. In the asserting of that Power various Historical
Passages occurring in the Usurpation after the Year 1641. are occasionally
mentioned; And an Account is given at large of the Progress of the Power of
Dispensing as to Acts of Parliament about Religion since the Reformation; and
of diverse Judgments of Parliaments declaring their Approbation of the Exercise
of such Power, and particularly in what concerns the Punishment of Disability,
or Incapacity.

Princes are Supreme over Persons, not over Things.

This is the Supreme Power of Princes which we teach, that they be Gods
Ministers in their own Dominions, bearing the Sword, and freely to permit and
publicly to Defend that which God commands in Faith and good Manners, etc.

Princes may Command the Bodies of all their Subjects in time both of War and
Peace, etc.

Out of all Question where Princes may by God's Law Command, all Men must obey
them, etc.

The Prince may discharge the Servant, but no Man can discharge the Subject.

The Word of God teaches you to obey Princes; the words of men cannot loose
you.

BISHOP BILSON of the SUPREMACY. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring at the Harrow
at Chancery Lane End in Fleetstreet, William Crook at the Green Dragon without
Temple Bar, and William Rogers at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleet Street, 1687.

To the Right Honorable JOHN Earl of MELFORT, Viscount of Forth, Lord Drummond
of Rickartone, etc. His Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Kingdom
of Scotland, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council in both
Kingdoms of England and Scotland, etc.
MY LORD,
AS the Historian has told us of Ireland, that long ago while the Arts and
Sciences were generally banished from the Christian World they were enthroned
in Ireland, and that Men were sent thither from other Parts of Christendom to
be improved in Learning; so I have elsewhere observed that in some late
Conjunctures (and particularly during the turbid Interval of the Exclusion) men
might well be sent to Scotland to learn Loyalty.

And I having taken occasion in the first Part of this Discourse to show my
self a just honourer of that Country, and (as I may say) somewhat like a
Benefactor to it by sending thither the notices of some passed great
Transactions that might possibly there give more light and life to the Moral
Offices of Natural Allegiance or Obedience, did hold my self obliged in Common
Justice to address this Part of my Work to your Lordship. For as your Station
here qualifies you beyond other Subjects to receive what Tribute is offered to
your Country, so your handing it thither will necessarily make it there the
more acceptable.

And when I consider with what an incomparable Tenderness for the Monarchy and
its Rights so many of the Statutes of Scotland since the Year 1660. have been
adorned, I am apt to think that any matter of Presidents or Records by me
recovered out of the Sea of time where they lay so long useless and neglected,
and now happening to be serviceable to those Moral Offices beforementioned,
would by the so many in that Kingdom devoted to consummate Obedience and
Loyalty, be more valued then if I could have imported into that Realm another
such Treasure as that which lay so long buried in the Ocean near the Bahama
Islands, and that whoever Contributed to your Loyal Country any Substantial
Notions that might enrich it in the discharge of the Duties of the born and
sworn Allegiance, would be esteemed there as some way sharing in the honor of
Arauna, in giving like a King to a King.

Long may your great Master live happy in the Enjoyment of the faithful
Services of so vigilant a Minister as your Lordship, who by the universality of
your Knowledge accompanied with universal Charity for all Mankind, have
appeared to be born, as I may say, for the time of his most glorious Reign, the
time chosen by Heaven for Mercies Triumph on Earth.

Nothing vulgar was to be expected from a Person of your Lordship's
extraordinary intellectual and moral Endowments, and in whom the Loyalty and
other Virtues of your many noble Ancestors have (as it were) lived extraduce.
And the World would be unjust to you if it acknowledged not its great
Expectation answered by your greater Performances, and particularly by your
having been so eminently Ministerial in the Easing both the Cares of your
Prince, and of all his Subjects too by the Figure you have made in promoting
the Ease of his People's Consciences, and in further ennobling and endearing
the Name of DRUMMOND by your Lordship's Prosecuting that by the Bravery of
Action, which the HISTORIAN of that your Name did by Words, when he transmitted
to Posterity the most Christian and Statesmanlike Speech of Liberty of
Conscience, I know extant, and as spoke by a Roman Catholic Councellor in
Scotland to King James the Fifth.

I most humbly kiss your Lordship's Hands, and am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obedient Servant, P. P.

THE OBLIGATION Resulting from the Oath of Supremacy. To Assist and Defend the
Pre-eminence or Prerogative OF THE Dispensative Power, Belonging to the KING,
his Heirs, and Successors, etc.
PART I:
A. IN this Kingdom of England, so naturally of old addicted to Religion and
vehemence in it, as to give a Bishop of Rome cause to complain, he had more
trouble given him by Applications from England about it, then from all the
World beside; and afterward to make Geneva wonder at the Sabbatarians here
exceeding the Jewish strictness; and to cause Barclay in his Eupho^mio to say
of the English, Nec quicquam in numinis cultu modicum possunt, and that our
several Sects thought unos se Coelestium rerum participes, exortes coeteros
omnes esse: did you ever observe, hear or read of the style of Tenderness of
Conscience so much used as in the year 41. and sometime afterward?


B. I have not. From the Date of King Charles the First's Declaration to all
His loving Subjects about that time, wherein he speaks of his Care for
Exemption of Tender Consciences, till the Date of King Charles the Second's
Declaration from Breda, wherein the Liberty of Tender Consciences is Provided
for, the clause of easing Tender Consciences ran through the Messages,
Addresses, and Answers that passed between King and Parliament almost as much
as the Clause of proponentibus legatis did run through the Council of Trent.


A. But were not their Consciences extremely erroneous who thought themselves
bound then to advance Religion by War?


B. A^, and by a Civil War (as you might have added) against a Prince of the
tenderest Conscience imaginable: for that Character he had from an Archbishop
in his Speech in the Parliament of 40 who said, Our Sovereign is, I will not
say above other Princes, but above all Christian men that ever I knew or heard
of, a man of most upright, dainty, and scrupulous Conscience, and afraid to
look upon some Actions, which other Princes abroad do usually swallow? and he
might have added, a Prince the real Tenderness of who^e Conscience had so often
favored the nominal tenderness of others, who instead of being Tenderhearted
Christians, were Stiff-necked Jews; and who might justly apprehend that it was
only duritia cordis, instead of Tenderness of Conscience he dispensed with, and
as when God dispensed with the Jews in Polygamy.

For since Tenderness of Conscience does necessarily render a man abstemious
from things lawful, and to be of a gentle submissive temper not only to his
Equals, but Inferiors, and to be merciful even to brute Creatures, and not only
averse from suing any one about Penal Laws, but ready to remit somewhat of his
Right rather then to go to Law with a Stranger, and much less with ones Father;
the Pater Patrioe seeing any men outraging the Laws, and the quiet of the
whole Realm by that wild brutish thing called War, (for ferinum quiddam bellum
est) might well judge them utterly devoid of all Tenderness of Conscience. I
shall therefore frankly tell you, that no doubt but their Consciences were
extremely erroneous, or rather sea^ed.

Our great Writer of Conscience, Bishop Sanderson in his Sermon on Romans 14. 13.
discussing the Causes from which men's doubtfulness of mind may spring, and
saying that sometimes it proceeds from Tenderness of Conscience, which yet is
indeed a very blessed and a gracious thing, does very well add, but yet (as
tender things may sooner miscarry) very obnoxious through Satan's diligence and
subtlety to be wrought upon to dangerous inconveniences.

And if we Consider that a Civil War cannot be lawful on both Sides, however a
foreign one may, we may well account that any deluded melancholy People who
were tempted to raise a Civil War out of a blind Zeal for Religion, and to
assault the Thirteenth of the Romans out of the Apocalypse, had hard Spleens
instead of tender Consciences, and that they have soft Heads instead of tender
Hearts, who try to make Religion a gainer by War.

But indeed the Project of planting Religion and Propagating the Church by War,
that is described to be Status humanoe Societatis dissolutoe, and that so
presently opens to all men's view the horrid Scene of Contempta Religio, Rapta
profana, Sacra profanata, is so vain, that the old Proverbial Impiety of such
who did castra sequi how victorious soever, has naturally helped to make
Conquering Nations embrace the very Religion of the Conquered; a thing
exemplified in the Conquests of the Danes and Sa^ns in England, of the Goths
in Italy and France, and Spain, and of the Moors in Spain, and in the Turks
having overcome the Saracens, embracing the Saracens Religion.

And the Vanity of Reforming the World by War, that Profound and Conscientious
Statesman Cardinal D'Ossat in his Third Book, 86th Letter and to Villeroy, A.
1597. has well taught us, and where he mentions how he urged to the Pope the
reasonableness of Harry the 4th's, so religiously observing the great Edict of
Pacification, and that the many Wars made again and again by Heretics, served
for nothing but in many places to abolish the Catholic Religion, and in a
manner all Ecclesiastical Discipline, Justice, and Order, and to introduce
Atheism with the Sequel of all sorts of Sacrileges, Parricides, Rapes, Treasons
and Cruelties, and other sorts of wickedness, etc. and afterward that on the
making War, all the Malcontents, all People indebted and ne^ssitous, all
Debauchees, and Vagabonds, all Thieves and other Criminals, whose Lives were
become forfeited to the Law, of what Religion or Opinion soever they were, were
wont to join with the Hugonots, and did more harm to the Church, and Religion,
and good manners in one day of War, then they could in a hundred days of Peace.

Thus ^e who ^its in the Heavens had them here in derision, while they in
effect thus presumed to transprose Scripture, and to say Glory to God in the
highest, and on Earth War, and ill will toward men; and while according to
that Saying in Archbishop L^d's famous Star-Chamber-Speech, viz. No Nation
has ever appeared more jealous of Religion then the People of England have
ever been, they were under such Transports of misguided Zeal, as to adore that
their jealousy, and to offer Sacrifices to it with as much Contempt of Heaven
and Cruelty to Mankind, as ever were offered to the image of Jealousy referred
to by Ezekiel; and to which the tenderest of their Relations were not thought
too costly Victims: and to which their truly Tender-Conscienced King, who like
Moses with Tenderness carried them in his Bosom as a Nursing-Father bears
the sucking Child, and who sometimes out of Tenderness to several of his
Complaining Children Sacrificed the rigor of his Penal Laws, and to whom they
should have been subject for that Tender thing Conscience sake, was himself at
last Sacrificed.

How did that Pious Prince sometimes in relation to his Heterodox Protestant
Subjects imitate the Father of the Prodigal, who when his Son was yet afar off,
ran to meet him, fell on his neck and kissed him, a thing acknowledged by an
Eminent learned Divine, Mr. John Ley in his Book called Defensive Doubts, Hopes
and Reasons, Printed in the year 1641. and where in p. 123. urging the Bishops
to procure the Revocation of a late Canon of the Church, and having said
wherein if they appear and prevail, they need not fear any disparagement to
their Prudence by withdrawing that they have decreed, since the wisest
Statesmen and greatest Governors have used many times to comply so far with
popular Dispositions, as to vary their own Acts with relation to their liking,
as the Pilot does his Soils to comply with the wind, he adds, And you cannot
have a more authentic Example both to induce you to this, and to defend you in
it from all Imputations, then that of our Sacred Sovereign, who rather then he
would give any Color of Complaint for aggrievances to his People, was pleased
to DISPENSE with the five Articles of PERTH's Assembly, and to discharge all
Persons from urging the Practice thereof upon any either Laick or
Ecclesiastical Person whatsoever, and to free all his Subjects from all
Censures and Pains whether Ecclesiastical or Secular, for not urging,
practicing, and obeying any of them, tho they were es^ablish'd both by a
General Assembly, and by Act of Parliament. King Charles his large Declaration
of the ^umults in Scotland, p 370. and p. 389. And for his OWN Acts (for these
Articles of Perth were propounded and ratified in the Reign of his Royal
Father) he imposed the Service Book, the Book of Canons, and high Commission
upon his Subjects in Scotland, and upon their humble Supplication, was content
graciously to grant a Discharge from them: passing his Princely Promise that he
would neither then nor afterward press the Practice of them, nor any thing of
that nature, but in such a fair and legal way, as should satisfy all his
loving Subjects. The Duplys of the Divines of Aberdene, p. 54. and p. 130, 131.
Whereupon Mr. Ley thus goes on, viz. Wherein Wise men who judge of
Consultations and Acts by their probable Effects, and not unexpected Events,
cannot but highly commend His Majesty's Mildness and Clemency: which we doubt
not would condescend to your Requests for a removal of this great aggrievance
if you would please to interpose your Mediations to so acceptable a purpose,
and upon our humble suit, which in all submissive manner we tender to your
Lordship (and by you to the rest of your Reverend Order) we hope you will do
so, since we have it upon his word (His Royal Majesty's word, which neither in
Duty nor Discretion we may distrust) that the Prelates were their greatest
Friends (i. e. of his Scottish Subjects) their Councels were always Councels of
Peace, and their Solicitations vehement and earnest for granting those
unexpected Favors which we were pleased to bestow upon our People. The King's
large Declaration, p. 420

Thus then the Royal Dispensation with the five Articles of Perth was at the
Intercession of the Bishops, though they knew the same Established by Act of
Parliament, graciously afforded to his Scottish Subjects.

Those Articles of Perth related to various Religionary Matters, viz The
introducing of Private Baptism, Communicating of the Sick, Episcopal
Confirmation, Kneeling at the Communion, and the observing such ancient
Festivals as belonged immediately to Christ: and of which Doctor Heylin in his
History of the Presbyterians having spoken says, That the King's indulging the
Scots in Dispensing with the Penal Laws about them, was an Invitation to the
Irish Papists to endeavor by armed force to Compass the King's Dispensation.

But how tenderly the Consciences of the Roman Catholics in Ireland were in the
Reign of the Royal Martyr THEN Protected under the Wing of the Dispensative
Power, contrary to what the Dr. observed, any one may see who will Consult my
Lord Primate Bramhal's Replication to the Bishop of Chalcedon, where he says,
That the Earl of Strafford Lord Lieutenant of Ireland did commit much to my
hands the Political Regiment of that Church for the space of Eight years. In
all that time let him name but one Roman Catholic that suffered either Death or
Imprisonment, or so much as a pecuniary Mulct of Twelve Pence for his Religion
upon any Penal Statute, if he can, as I am sure he cannot, etc.

And such was the acquiescence of the Populace, and of the three Estates in the
Penal Laws there against the Roman Catholics being thus dead or asleep, that
in the Printed Articles of Impeachment against the then Lord Chancellor of
Ireland, and that Lord Primate th^n Bishop of Derry, and others of His
Majesty's Public Ministers of State exhibited by the Commons to the Lords in
the year 1640. there is not a syllable of Complaint against those Laws being
so dispensed with by Connivence.

Nor yet in the Printed Schedule of Grievances of that Kingdom voted in the
House of Lords there to be transmitted to the Committee of the same House, then
attending in England to pursue Redresses for the same, is there any
representation of such Indulgence being any Gravamen, nor yet of the great
Figure the Irish Papists then made in the Government, the Majority of the
Parliament, and of the Judges and Lawyers then being such.

And pursuant to that Prince's Indulgence offered to the tender Consciences of
his Subjects in the year 41. he was graciously pleased in the Treaty at
Uxbridg^ to order his Commissioners who were such renowned Confessors of the
Church of England, to make the first Royal offer there that freedom be left to
all Persons of what Opinion soever in Matters of Ceremony, and that all the
Penalties of LAWS and Customs be SUSPENDED.

And the truth is, since the Christian Religion did in its first settlement so
rationally provide for its Propagation in the World, and its bespeaking the
favor of Princes by its enjoining Subjection and Obedience to their Laws, not
only for Wrath, but Conscience sake; and since that Principle of humane Laws
binding the Conscience (which was so often and so publicly avowed by that
Prince and Archbishop Laud, and Bishop Sanderson and the Divines of the Church
of England in General) is the surest guard to Princes Thrones and their
Tribunals; and that therefore it is the Interest of the Prince and People. to be
more watchful in preserving that Principle then all the Jewels of the Crown, or
Walls of the Kingdom: that Prince did therefore necessarily take Care to
preserve and to perpetuate in some of his tender-Conscienced Subjects, a
continued Tenderness for his Laws by his lawful Dispensative Power (as
particularly in the Case of his Scottish Subjects) in taking off the Obligation
of Obedience, and of Conforming themselves to the Established Laws; for such
Dispensation intrinsecally notes the taking off such Obligation from the
Persons dispensed with. And it is indeed a Solecism for any one to ask
Indulgence from a Prince who owns the Law of the Land, binding him in
Conscience; if he does not think such Prince persuaded that his Power of
granting it is a part of that LAW.

He was not ignorant of his Father's Aversion against the Penal Laws in
general, and on which Account my Lord Bacon celebrating him, says, As for
Penal Laws which lie as snares upon the Subjects, and which were as a Nemo
scit to King Henry 7. it yields a Revenue which will scarce pay for the
Parchment of the King's Records at Westminster. And religionary Penal Laws
requiring the greatest tenderness, as he found when he came to the Government,
that the two most famous Puritan Divines, Mr. Hildersham and Mr. Dod, Men of
great Probity and Learning, had often been in his Father's time Pursuant to the
Act for Uniformity disabled from Preaching, and been re-inabled to it by
particular Indulgence (and as likewise Fuller tells us in his Church History,
that Bishop Williams when he was Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England,
procured a License from King James under the Great Seal for Mr. Cotton the
famous Independent to Preach notwithstanding his Nonconformity) so he in the
same manner that his Royal Father did, held the Reins of the Law loose in his
hands as to those two other Non-Conformists beforementioned.

The History of Mr. Hildersham's Life, mentions that he was silenced in June,
A* 1590, and restored again in January, A. 1591. Again he was deprived and
silenced, April 24 A. 1605. for refusal of Subscription and Conformity, and
after some time again restored: and was again Silenced in November, A. 1611. by
the King's particular Command; and on April 23. A. 1613. he was judicially
admonished by the High Commission, that saving the Catechizing of his own
Family only, he should not afterward Preach, Catechize, or use any of the
Offices or Function of a Minister publicly or privately (...) he should be
lawfully restored and released of his said Suspension. But shortly after the
beginning of the Reign of the Royal Martyr, he was again restored; and was
afterward again silenced, and so continued till August 2. A. 1631. and then he
was again restored. And Mr. Dod's Life represents his Case as parallel with
this beforementioned. He was in King James his time suspended and restored,
and again by the King's particular Command disabled from Preaching, and was by
King Charles the First re-ennabled or restored.

Thus as fortis fortem amat, one tender Conscienced man too loves another such;
and the Executive Power of the Law in re-ennabling after temporary Disability,
was tenderly administered by these our Princes to these Conscientious Men, with
respect to their real Capacity of Favor to be showed them.


A. You have here given me a taste en passant of part of the Dispensative
Power, as exercised in the three Realms during some Conjunctures in the Reign
of King Charles the First, and for which I thank you, and particularly for what
you told me of the Act of Parliament dispensed with in Scotland, of which I
never heard before; and am apt to suppose a thing of that Nature was never done
before in that Realm.


B. I can assure you, to those who know the Public Transactions of that
Kingdom, the thing will not in the least seem new. I can tell you that on the
26th of November, A. 1593. King James the 6th of Scotland made an Act of State
in favor of three Roman Catholic Earls, Huntly, Arroll and Angus, by which
Act he allowed them several Privileges, contrary to Acts of Parliament made
against Roman Catholics. And His Majesty in his Act of State expressly
dispenses with those Acts of Parliament: and which Dispensation tho Queen
Elizabeth importuned him to revoke (and for that purpose sent the Lord Zouch as
her Ambassador to him) he still adhered to the Act of State he had made, and
continued his Dispensation.


A. Have you this Matter of Fact out of any of the Records in England or
Scotland?


B. I have it out of the Original Papers under the hand of Queen Elizabeth and
her great Minister Burghly, and the Original Instructions of the Lord Zouch
when sent by her to expostulate with the King about it, that were lately in my
Custody, and by me sent to our gracious Sovereign: and I shall some other time
give you a more particular account of that Dispensation.


A. But (I beseech you) did not the Protestant Divines of the Church of
Scotland then cry out of the unlawfulness or inexpedience of that Dispensation?


B. I have read it in a learned Book of Dr. Maxwell a Scotch-man, Printed A.
1644. (and who was then Bishop of Killally in Ireland, and had formerly been
Bishop of Rosse) that Mr. Robert Bruce one of the Ministers of Edinburgh, and
who had a great sway in the Church of Scotland, was pleased with the King's
extending his Favor to Angus and Arroll, but out of a factious Compliance with
the Earl of Arguile, was displeased at its being shown to Huntly. But that
Loyal Bishop there acquiesceth in the reason of State, that inclined the King
to Pardon the three Earls, and his thereby hindering the growth of Faction in
Scotland, and providing for his more easy and secure access to the Throne of
England on the Death of Queen Elizabeth.

And so you may easily guess what sort of men in Scotland looked with an evil
eye on that Act of the Royal goodness, and who did not. The Bishop there had
applauded the great depth of the King's Wisdom, and his transcendent Goodness
in the Pardoning the three Earls, and mentioned that there was nothing of
Religion in the Case of Bruce's Aversion against the Pardon of Huntly, for that
Angus and Arroll were as bigot Papists, if not more then Huntly.

I can likewise direct you to my Lord Primate Bramhal's celebrated Book called
A Fair warning to take heed of the Scottish Discipline, where in Chap. 6. thus
entitled, viz. That it robs the Magistrate of his Dispensative Power; he says
by way of instance, When the Popish Earls of Angus, Huntly, and Arroll, were
excommunicated by the Church, and forfeited for Treasonable Practices against
the King, it is admirable to read with what Wisdom, Charity, and Sweetness his
Majesty did seek from time to time to reclaim them from their Errors, etc. and
on the other side to see with what bitterness and radicated Malice they were
prosecuted by the Presbyteries and their Commissioners, etc. sometimes
threatening that they were resolved to pursue them to the uttermost, tho it
should be with the loss of all their Lives in one day, etc. sometimes pressing
to have their Estates confiscated, etc. He refers there in his Margin to Ass.
Edinb. 1594.

But any one who shall consult D'Ossat's Letters, and there in the Second Book
carefully read over the 37th Letter that was writ to Villeroy in the year 1596,
and three years after the Date of King James his Act of State, and observe what
that great Sagacious Cardinal there refers to concerning the Circumstances of
those three Earls, and how all the Prudence that could be shown by man, was but
little enough for the Conduct of that King in that Conjuncture, in order to his
removing what Impediments either from Rome or Spain, or his Native Country
might obstruct his Succession to the Crown of England; will not wonder at his
having dispensed and continued his Dispensation as aforesaid.


A. I have not yet asked you whether the Divines of the Church of England, did
not lift up their voices like a Trumpet against the Dispensative Power thus
exercised by their Prince, as you have mentioned?


B. They discharged their Duties in Preaching occasionally against all growing
Errors: but they wanted none to mind them of the Saying, Impium esse qui Regi
dixerit, Inique agis. The Pious and Learned Author of Certain Considerations
tending to Peace, etc. mentions how the Bishop of St. David's in King James's
Reign, A. 1604. did in a set Speech in Convocation show, that Ministers were
not in the late Archbishop's time disabled from their Ministry on the Account
of Nonconformity to the Ceremonies by Law enjoined; and concluded his Speech
with the motion of Petitioning the King, That if the removal of some of the
Ceremonies enjoined could not be obtained, nor yet a Coleration for them of
more stayed and temperate Carriage, yet at least there might be procured a
mitigation of the Penalty, etc.

And as the Suspension or Disabling of Hildersham and Dod from their
Ministerial Functions, so the Restoring of them to the same without all such
things done by them as the strictness of the Laws required, was in both those
Princes Reigns executed by the Bishops.

Nor do I remember to have read of any Divine of the Church of England to have
in the least looked with an evil eye on the goodness of the Dispensative Power
in the Reign of King Charles the First being extended to particular Persons;
but the hated Sibthorpe, who in his Sermon of Apostolic Obedience (as he
called it) does speak of Men's being bound to observe the Laws of the Land
where they live, except they will suffer as busy bodies, or except they will
have that inconvenience granted, that the general Laws or Government of a
Nation must be dispens's withal, according to the particular Conceit and
Apprehension of every private Person: whereout what Coleration of Heresy, what
Connivence at Errors, what danger of Schisms in the Church and Factions in the
State, must necessarily follow, etc. and having mentioned the Liberty of a few
erroneous Consciences bringing the Bondage of many regulated Commands, he
says, We must prefer the general before the particular, and not let every one
be loose to their List and Affection, but all must be kept within the Lists of
their Duty and Subjection.

And I but just now told you of that Prince's avowing* that the Bishops advised
him to the tenderness he showed in dispensing with his Laws, to gratify the
pretended tenderness of the Consciences of some of his Scottish Subjects in that
Conjunct^* ^eand by which Dispensing one would have thought they might have
been sufficiently antidoted against the strong Delusions of entering into War
for Religion.

Oh that such thoughts had been then impressed on their Minds, as are contained
in the General Demands of the Ministers and Professors of Aberdene, p. 29. as I
find them cited in the Book of Mr. Ley beforementioned, viz. There be other
means more effectual for holding out of Popery (and so of any unlawful
innovation) in which we ought to Confide more then in all the Vows and
Promises of Men, yea, also more then in all the United Forces of all the
Subjects of this Land, to wit, diligent Preaching and Teaching of the Word,
frequent Prayer to God, humbling of our selves before him; and Amendment of our
Lives and Conversations, and Arming our selves against our Adversaries by
diligent searching of the Scriptures, whereby we may increase in the knowledge
of the Truth, and in ability to defend it against the Enemies of it.

Oh that the Demagogues of those times had caused such words then to have been
writ in our Churches, or I might rather wish that those Heads of Parties had
had themselves then hearts of flesh, and that such tender words had been like a
Law written there.

But the Urgentia imperii fata were upon us; and that delicate use of
Conscience that is in 2. Cor. 13. 5. called examen vel probatio nostrum
ipsorum, and whereby it resembled the best property of a beam in Scales, namely
its tenderness, and turning with the least part of a grain, was among the great
Actors in that Rebellion quite laid aside, and all the (...) i. e. the
weightier Matters of the Law did not stir their Consciences: and the great
Obligation of their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy signified no more then
the dust of the balance.

Tho they pretended to so nice a Tenderness about any thing that looked like an
Oath in familiar discourse and was not one, as at the Saying in faith, or in
troth, and so would seem to come under Solomon's Character of him that fears
an Oath, (but as to which words of in faith, or by my faith, our Judicious
Sanderson de Iuramento makes them amount to no more then a mere Asseveration,
or at the most an Obtestation; and says, that the genuine interpretation of
the words, by my faith, whether in an assertory or promissory matter is this, I
speak from my heart, I pawn my faith to you that the thing is so). yet they at
the same time would ridicule or seize on any one who had told them of what they
were Sworn to in the Oath of Allegiance, and of the recognition they made
there, as the words of that Oath are, heartily, willingly and truly upon the
true faith of a Christian.


A. There was a Solemn League and Covenant afterward took by those who had so
apparently outraged the Oath of Allegiance, and it was taken generally by all
the Layety and Clergy of the Parliaments Party; and was there not a general
Tenderness of Conscience expressed then in the observance of that Covenant?


B. In the course of my Observation of Men and Things, some things have more
particularly occurred to me to show you that the great Takers and imposers of
that Covenant did as plainly and without any seeming remorfe outrage their Oath
in that Covenant, as they did their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. For
after they had first sworn to endeavor to preserve the Reformed Religion in
the Church of Scotland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, and
then sworn to endeavor to reform Religion in these Kingdoms of England and
Ireland in all Points, according to the Examples of the best Reformed Churches;
and so were bound to reform us according to the Pattern of Scotland, (for that
Church must necessarily pass for the best Reformed Church, that stands in need
of no Resormation, being to be preserved by them in the State it was) the
Parliament instead of settling in England the Presbyterian Government which then
in Scotland, had within its Verge four Judicatories, and all pretended to be
founded on Divine Right. 1. A Parochial Session. 2. A Presbyterian Consistory.
3. A Provincial Synod. 4. A General Assembly, as they were bound to, did in
effect settle ERASTIANISM (a Tenet, or hypothesis of Church Government that the
Scotch and English Presbyterian Divines avowed as great an hatred of as of
Popery it self; Erastianism giving the Supreme Power in Ecclesiasticals to the
Civil Magistrate) and in their Printed Votes and Orders reproved the
Presbyterian Divines for challenging an Arbitrary Power, and which they would
not grant, nor set up ten Thousand Iudicatories within the Kingdom, as the
Parliaments words were: referring to the Scots Parechial Session, where a
competent number of Lay Elders (whom they call Presbyteri non docentes) and
Deacons proportionable to the Precinct and Extent of the Parish are conjoined,
and which associate Body thus compacted is the Spiritual Parochial Sanhedrim.

But this very first Point of that Church Government, the Parliament hindered
Presbytery from gaining here, and opposed its moving in that lowest Sphere of
the Parochial Session of settling so many Thousand Ecclesiastical Courts of
Pye-Powder in England, and whereby it could never hope to climb up to the
Primum mobile of a General Assembly, which in reality was the Sphere the
Parliament it self moved in.

Mr. Prynne who was one of the greatest Champions for that Covenant, was yet an
Eminent professed Erastian, and Mr. Coleman a Member of the Assembly of
Divines, another of those Champions for the Covenant, was likewise a declared
Erastian, and a great Favorite of the Parliaments, and whose frequent Sermons
before them for Erastianism were Printed by their Order; and which Sermons of
his,* and likewise his Books writ for it were with great heat impugned in Print
by Mr. Gillespy a Divine of Scotland, and one of the Commissioners in England
for that Kingdom: and who in a Printed Sermon of his Preached before the House
of Lords, does call Erastus the great Adversary; and in one of his Pamphlets
against Mr. Coleman, called Nihil Respondes, mentions how the Presbyterians and
Independents were both equally interessed against the Erastian Principles.

And as to the greatness of the number of the Covenanters out of Parliament
that rejected the Iure-divinity of the Scots ruling Elders, Mr. Coleman gives
us his Judgment in p. 12. of his Reply to Nihil Respondes, viz. that 9/10 of
the Assembly, and 900/1000 of the Kingdom denied a Ruling Elder to be an
instituted Officer jure divino.

But Heylin having told us in his History of Presbytery, That Presbytery did
never setle its Lay-Eldership in any one Parish in England: we may easily
thence suppose the National Violation of that National Covenant, without any
apparent regret of Conscience on that account.

How all the Independent Clergy and Layety who had took the Covenant did in a
manner simul and semel most notoriously violate it, in setting up the model of
their Church Government is not unknown.

But indeed, as the very sagacious Author of the Book called, The main Points
of Church Government, etc. Printed in London, A. 1649. has observed, The known
sense of the Scottish Nation which framed the Covenant, and for whose
Satisfaction the Covenant was here taken, does include Independency under the
name of Schism, or at least under those words contrary to sound Doctrine; and
our Independent Divines could not but know this to be their sense of it, and
yet we know of none that did protest against it, or explain themselves
otherwise at the first taking of the Covenant, if they have done it since.

And I might further tell you, that after the Engagement was set up of being
true and faithful to the Commonwealth of England as it is now Established
without a King or House of Lords; tho several of the Presbyterian Divines out
of a sense of their Oaths and Allegiance, and their Covenant were so Loyal as
to refuse it, I have not heard of any of those Independent ones who did.

But such was the Inundation of Practical Atheism in the Kingdom that our Civil
Wars had caused, that when the Engagement was set up, almost the whole Body of
the Lawyers in England took it rather then they would lose their Practice.
These men knew the meaning of the Acts of Parliament containing the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and yet were abandoned by a disloyal Sophistical
Principle of the want of Power in a lawful Sovereign to protect them, absolving
them from their Obedience, to cancel their Oaths in the Court of Conscience.

And in a word further to show you how the tender Regard of public Promises
was here grown one of Pancirol's lost things, I shall tell you, that tho in the
Parliament of Richard Cromwell, none was allowed to sit but he who had first
took a Recognition of engaging to be true and faithful to the Lord Protector,
etc. and not to propose or give any Consent to alter the Government as it is
settled in one single Person and a Parliament, yet the Republicans in that
Parliament were not in the least diverted by that Recognition from endeavoring
there to alter the Government, and it was there avowed by them, that a Promise
or Oath took without Doors, did not bind within.

And at last to bring up the Rear of men's Perjury, after all the Oaths legal
and illegal had been so much confounded, when the late King's Restoration was
almost in sight on the then General Monk with his Army coming to London, a new
Oath of Abjuration of the Royal Line was at that time set on foot in Council,
and which some there would have had imposed on the General himself.


A. Good God! What a Concatenation of Perjuries was our Land so long enslaved
with? you have referred to the Solemn League and Covenant for extirpating
Popery and Superstition, and while a General Assembly, and Parliaments were
planting here the Doctrine of the Council of Lateran, namely the Absolving
Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance.


B. And while they were planting a Discipline, that Archbishop Whitgift in his
Reply to T. C. p. 299. 559. and Bishop Hall in his Book of Episcopacy, Part 3.
p. 34. and Bishop Downham in his Defense of his Sermon, l. 1. c. 8. p. 139. And
Archbishop Bramhal in his Fair warning to take heed of the Scottish Discipline
almost throughout, do charge with POPERY; and where the last Archbishop does
represent the Covenant with the terms of Baal, Baal berith and Baalims, and
says, It were worth the enquiring whether the marks of Antichrist do not
agree as eminently to the Assembly general of Scotland, as either to the Pope
or to the Turk. This we see plainly that they spring out of the Ruins of the
Civil Magistrate: they sit upon the Temple of God, and they advance themselves
above those whom the Scripture calls Gods.


A. That Archbishop's saying, It were worth the enquiring thus concerning that
general Assembly as then used, is the only thing wherein I differ from him, for
I think there is no doubt in the case.


B. To this you may add the thoughts of their being associated against
Superstition, while they were planting the grossest Superstition that any Age
has known, if we may take our measures of Superstition from that definition of
it in the Reformatio legum Ecclesiasticarum, viz. Superstitio cultus est ad
Deum relatus, immenso quodam proficiscens humano Studio, vel animi certa
propensione quam vulgo bonam intentionem vocant, etc.

Let any one consider, how after the beginning of the Parliament of Forty, they
had obtained in the very Act that took away the Ship Money, that all the
Particulars prayed or desired in the Petition of Right should be enacted; one
whereof was, That no Oath should be imposed on the Subjects that was not
established by Act of Parliament, and how in despite of that Law, they without
any such Act, out of a blind Zeal for Religion, imposed this dreadful Oath on
the People: Let any one but read over The Covenant with a Narrative, and the
Speeches of Mr. Nigh and Mr. Hendersham at the time of the Solemn Reading,
Swearing and Subscribing of the Covenant by the House of Commons, and Assembly
of Divines in St. Margaret's Church* and observe in Mr. Nye's Speech, his
Saying, that ASSOCIATION is of Divine offspring, and his resembling of this
Covenant to the Covenant of Grace, and the matter of it there represented by
him as worthy to be sworn by all the Kingdoms of the World, as a giving up of
all those Kingdoms to Christ; and where it follows, yea, we find this very
thing in the utmost accomplishment of it, to have been the Oath of the greatest
Angel that ever was, who setting his feet on two of Gods Kingdoms, the one upon
the Sea, the other upon the Earth, lifting up his hand to Heaven, as you are to
do this day, and so Swearing, Rev. 10. etc. and consider how he there makes
this Oath to be the most effectual means for the ruining Popery and Prelacy,
and leaves it to be considered, whether, seeing the preservation of Popery has
been by Leagues and Covenants, God may not make a League and Covenant to be its
Destruction, after he had beforementioned the Associations of the Religious
Orders and Fraternities, and the Combination by the la Saint Ligue for the
muniting of Popery, as incentives to this League; and how he does again go to
the Magazine of the Apocalypse for some Weapons for this Covenant, and has
other artillery for it from the Jewish State, citing the words of the Prophet,
Let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that shall not be
forgotten, and how according to the ratio nominis of Superstition, viz. of men's
over-importunate Prayers that their Children might outlive them, he concludes
with a devout Prayer, that this Covenant may outlive their Childrens Children;
and let any one behold in Mr. Henderson's Speech the like flame of
Enthusiastic Zeal (or of the Superstition quam vulgo bonam intentionem vocant)
against Superstition and Idolatry in Worship, etc. and concluding it with his
belief, that the weight of that Covenant would cast the balance in our English
Wars; I say let any one consider all this, and tell me if ever he saw a more
pompous Scene of Superstition, and more magnificent Procession bestowed on it,
and contrived as Bishop Sanderson's words are in his Lecture, De bona
intention (and having his eye on that Covenant) viz. Obtentu gloriae Dei,
reformandae Religionis, propagandi Evangelii, extirpandae superstitionis,
exaltandi regni Domini nostri Jesus Christi; and if ever he saw what the Bishop
in that Lecture calls The Jesuits Theology, viz. Omnia metiri ex Commodo
Sanctae matris Ecclesiae, more strongly asserted then in the Contexture and
Imposition of that Covenant.

But those two Divines lived to recover their Allegiance, and a due sense of
their Oaths for it, and to see that foetus of their Brain, that at its solemn
Christning they wished immortality to, renounced publicly as a spurious Birth;
and to the Scandal of that Age, a race of other Oaths in England as infamously
born, intercept its inheritance.

Nay, let me tell you, that in the Nation of Scotland* Loyalty has been a
growing Plant of Renown since the year 1660. and the Idol of their former
Covenanted Presbytery been by the Loyal Nobility and Gentry and Populace there
generally abhorred. And tho Sir George Wharton in his Gesta Britannorum relates
it as a strange thing that on the 21st of August, A. 1663. the Parliament of
Scotland Pass^d an Act for a National Synod, the first that ever was in that
Kingdom under the Government of Bishops; yet I can tell you of an Act of
Parliament that passed there afterward, that declared the right of the Crown to
dispense in the external Government of the Church.

I shall entertain you with it out of the Scotch Statutes, viz.


In the first Session of the Second Parliament of King Charles the Second,
there passed an Act asserting His Majesty*s Supremacy over all Persons, and in
all Causes Ecclesiastical.

Edinburgh, November 16th 1669.
THe Estates of Parliament having seriously considered, how necessary it is,
for the Good and Peace of the Church and State, That His Majesty's Power and
Authority, in relation to Matters and Persons Ecclesiastical, be more clearly
asserted by an Act of Parliament; Have therefore thought fit it be Enacted,
Asserted and Declared, Like as his Majesty, with Advice and Consent of his
Estates of Parliament, does hereby Enact, Assert and Declare, That his Majesty
has the Supreme Authority and Supremacy over all Persons, and in all Causes
Ecclesiastical within this his Kingdom; and that by virtue thereof, the
Ordering and Disposal of the External Government and Policy of the Church does
properly belong to his Majesty and his Successors, as an inherent Right to the
Crown: And that his Majesty and his Successors may Setle, Enact and Emit such
Constitutions, Acts and Orders, concerning the Administration of the External
Government of the Church, and the Persons employed in the same, and concerning
all Ecclesiastical Meetings and Matters to be proposed and determined therein,
as they in their Royal Wisdom shall think fit. Which Acts, Orders and
Constitutions, being recorded in the Books of Council and duly published, are
to be observed and obeyed by all his Majesty's Subjects, any Law, Act, or
Custom to the contrary notwithstanding. Like as his Majesty, with Advice and
Consent aforesaid, does Rescind and Annul all Laws, Acts and Clauses thereof,
and all Customs and Constitutions, Civil or Ecclesiastic, which are contrary
to, or inconsistent with, his Majesty's Supremacy, as it is hereby asserted,
and declares the same void and null in all time coming.

A. You told me before how the King dispensed with the five Articles of Perth,
settled by Act of Parliament; but this Act yields so great a territory to the
Dispensative Power, that my thoughts cannot suddenly travel through it. It
acknowledges in the Crown a more sublime Power then of dispensing with
Presbyterians or Independents, or of suspending the Penal Laws against them,
namely of abolishing Episcopacy, and of making Presbytery or Independency the
National Church Government.

Car tell est notre plaisir now for the external Form of Church Government, is
allowed to make the Pattern in the Mount. And (...) accordingly as Mr. Baxter
in his Book called a Search for the Schismatics, represents Archbishop
Bramhal's new way of asserting the Church of England in his Book against him,
1. To abhor Popery. 2. That we all come under a foreign spiritual Jurisdiction,
obeying the Pope as the Western Patriarch, and also as the Principium Unitatis
to the Universal Church; governing by the Canons, etc. may not the King by this
Act make the external Government of the Church of Scotland Patriarchal, and the
Pope Patriarch?


B. The Act needs no Comment: and if you will tell me that the Scots showed
themselves Erastians or Latitudinarians when they made it, I shall acquaint you
that that Archbishop in his Schism guarded, p. 319. asserts, That a Sovereign
Prince has Power within his own Dominions for the Public good to change any
thing in the external Regiment of the Church, which is not of div^ne
Institution, and that he had in p. 4. of that Book, allowed the Pope his
Principium unitatis, and his Pre-eminence among Patriarchs, as S. Peter had
among the Apostles; and that in p. 78. of his Just Vindication of the Church of
England, he takes notice that by the Statute of Carlisle, made in the days of
Edward the First, it was declared, That the Holy Church of England was founded
in the Estate of Prelacy by the Kings and Peers thereof.

But now further to entertain your thoughts with the great Scene of the New
Heaven and the New Earth in that Kingdom, and of Men there walking at liberty,
as the words in the Psalms are (or at large, as it is in the Ma^gin, and as in
the Latin, indesinenterque ambulabo in ipsa LATITUDINE quia mandata tua quaero)
whose measures were before staked down to the Narrow tedder of Presbytery, and
whose Souls were once enslaved to a blind Zeal for that Church Government (as
what they then fancied to be the putting the Scepter into Christ's hand, and
the only efficacious means to keep out Popery) I shall tell you that they have
now put the Scepter into their Prince's hand to rule the Church with what
external Government he will, who were form^rly so ready to enslave both
Kingdoms, by designing to put the Royal Scepter of Scotland into the French
King's hands, and to bring a Popish French Army into Scotland to enforce the
setlement of Presbytery.


A. One would hardly think it possible that they should then design any such
thing.


B. As the Civil Law rangeth things that wound men's Piety* Reputation, or good
Manners, among Impossibles; so one would think those of the Scots then
designing a thing of that Nature, to be an Impossibility. And any one would
thus think it impossible, who considered that the Crown of England, A. 1560.
sent Forces into Scotland, whereby the French were driven out of that Kingdom,
and that thereupon in the Public printed Prayer prefixed to the Scots
Psalm-Book, it is said, viz. And seeing that when we by our own Power were
altogether unable to have freed our selves from the tyranny of Strangers, thou
of thine especial goodness did move the hearts of our Neighbors (of whom we
had deserved no such favor) to take upon them the common burden with us, and
for our deliverance not only to spend the lives of many, but also to hazard the
Estate and Tranquillity of their Realm; grant unto us, O Lord, that with such
reverence we may remember thy benefits received that after this, in our default
we never enter into hostility against the Realm and Nation of England. Suffer
us never, O Lord, to fall to that ingratitude and detestable unthankfulness,
that we shall seek the Destruction and Death of those whom thou have made
Instruments to deliver us from the tyranny of merciless Strangers, etc. But he
who shall read King Charles the First's Declaration concerning his Proceedings
with his Subjects of Scotland since the Pacification in the Camp near Berwick,
Printed A. 1640. will find this Fact too true: and the Letter there likewise
Printed, which was under the hands of the Leading men of the Presbyterian
Faction in Scotland writ to the French King, and wherein his assistance is
implored.


A. But by that Act about the Supremacy in Scotland, A. 1669. that you read to
me, I see that the old Leaven of Presbytery is there sufficiently purged out,
and that the very mass of Blood in men's Principles relating to the Regal Power
is universally sweetened.


B. You have great reason to judge so; and if you had read the Scotch Statutes
since the year 1660, you would find the Body of that Nation having the
temperamentum ad pondus for Loyalty.

And your having mentioned the old Leaven there purged away, minds me of
minding you that that Nation having so nobly discharged its moral offices in
that Case, ought to be absolved in the thoughts of all the Loyal from the Fact
of its former deflection from Loyalty: and that the great measures of Christian
Charity ought to extend beyond that Judgment of Seneca, that poenitens est fere
innocens, and even as far as S. Paul's generous discharge of the Corinthians on
their having purged out that ferment, viz. For behold what carefulness it
wrought in you, what clearing of your selves, yea, what indignation, yea, what
fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea, what zeal, etc. In all things ye have
approved your selves to be clear in this Matter. Look on their Acts of
Parliament in the time of K. Charles the Second, by one of which it is
declared, That his Majesty his Heirs and Successors, by Uirtue of the Royal
Power which they hold from God Almighty over this Kingdom, shall have the sole
Choice and Appointment of Officers of State, and Counselors and Judges; and by
another, That the Estates of Parliament considering that the Kings of this
Realm deriving their Power from God Almighty do succeed Lineally thereunto. And
I can direct you to another, that contains in it so strange a Resignation to
the King's measures, as may make you again wonder at the possibility of such a
temper, and not to be equaled by any thing I have read of* but that pang of
Zeal wherewith so many once at Cambridge were affected for Edward the Senior,
when they swore to will what he willed; I mean that Act of Parliament in
Scotland An. 1661. Concerning the League and Covenant, and discharging the
renewing thereof without his Majesty's Warrant and Approbation. The Act
concludes with an Inhibition, That none presume to renew that Covenant or any
other League or Covenant without his Majesty's special Warrant so to do. Thus
then that Covenant tho by them so much nauseated, they showed themselves ready
again to swallow, if his Majesty for any such reasons of State, as they could
not foresee, should enjoin them so to do.


A. You do indeed make me wonder at this great example of the tenderness and
extent of loyal Obedience in Scotland.


B. I can tell you of another Act of Parliament, viz. the 5th Act of the second
Session of the second Parliament of K. Charles the 2d Edinburgh 13. August The
Act against Conventicles, where their very Zeal against them is a Wall of Fire
to guard the Dispensative Power. The Act runns thus, Forasmuch as the
Assembling and Convocating his Majesty's Subjects without his Majesty's Warrant
and Authority is a most dangerous and unlawful Practice, prohibited and
discharged by several Laws and Acts of Parliament under high and great Pains,
etc. for the suppressing and preventing of which for the time to come, his
Majesty with Advice and Consent of his Estates of Parliament, has thought sit
to Statute and Enact, etc. That no outed Ministers who are not LICENSED by the
Council, Persons not Authorized or TOLERATED by the Bishop of the Diocese,
presume to Preach, expound Scripture, or pray in any Meeting, etc. and that
none be present at any Meeting without the Family to which they belong, where
any not licensed, authorized nor tolerated, as said is, shall Preach, expound
Scripture, or Pray, etc.


A. The Act for Uniformity here 16 Car. 2. does justice to the Prerogative of
the Crown in dispensing, by taking care that the Penalties in it shall not
extend to the Foreigners or Aliens of the forriegn Reformed Churches allowed or
to be allowed by the King's Majesty, his Heirs and Successors in England, and
which were granted to them with non-obstante's to all Acts of Parliament.


B. And the Act 22o Car. 2. entitled, Seditious Conventicles prevented and
suppressed, passing in the Parliament of England in the same Year that the Act
against Conventicles did in Scotland, and concluding with a Proviso, That
nothing therein contained, shall extend to invalidate or avoid his Majesty's
Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs, but that his Majesty and his heirs and
Successors may from time to time, etc. exercise and enjoy all Power and
Authority in Ecclesiastical Affairs, etc. any thing in this Act
notwithstanding, showed such a Concordant Sympathy between the two Realms in
tenderness for the prerogative of dispensing with the Penal Laws
Ecclesiastical, as is between the Strings of two distant Lutes, on the touching
the String but of one of them. But I must tell you, that tho by this Proviso
the benefit of the Dispensative Power has been sufficiently secured to the
Churches of Foreigners here, and the King's Ecclesiastical Supremacy justified
in its power of indulging the Conventicles of all sorts of Recusants, yet as in
the Scotch Act the Crown's dispensing with Conventicles has been more express
then in the English Act, so has the administration of Prerogative in that kind
been more tenderly and signally exercised in Scotland, then I have observed it
to be in England.

For I find in a Look called A Compendious History of the m^st remarkable
Passages of the last 14 Years, etc. printed An. 1680. that in p. 205. the
Author referring to the Month of July, 1677. says, that upon a Rebellion in
that Kingdom being nipt in the Bud, his Majesty was pleased to publish a
Proclamation, Commanding the Judges and all Magistrates to apprehend and punish
all such as frequented any Field-Conventicles, etc. according to the Prescript
of the Law, as also to prosecute with all Legal Rigor the execrable Murderers
of the late Archbishop of St. Andrews: declaring withal that his Majesty being
desirous to reclaim all such as had been mis-lead through Ignorance or blind
zeal, had according to the Power reserved to his Majesty by the 5th Act in the
2d Session of the 2d Parliament, suspended the execution of all Laws and Acts
against such as frequent house-Conventicles on the southside of the River Tay,
excepting the Town of Edinburgh, and two Miles round the same, etc.

And the truth is, it must likewise be to the honor of that Nation
acknowledged that in the worst of Times, they after their Covenant did not
Contract any such guilt of Perjury by a superfetation of enterfering Oaths, as
great Numbers of our Land did: and that they were exemplary to England in
Loyalty, and in propping up the hereditary Monarchy, while so many here in the
Plott-Conjuncture were infatuated with the Project of the EXCLUSION, as to give
me occasion by a fresher instance, and but of yesterdays occurrence to invite
you to behold a Spectacle of the divine Justice in abandoning such Men here to
the guilt of Superstition who used unjust means to extirpate it.

Such among us who had not took notice of that English and Scotch SAINT LIGUE,
and its being so generally exploded, and who in the late Ferment about Popery
would have fortified an Exclusion with an Association; and again set up
Association as of Divine-Off-spring, you see how being wild with excessive
Fears and Iealousies of the growth of Popery, they were guilty of the
Superstition of founding Dominion in Grace.


A. Considering how Men here have laughed at the Obligation of their lawful
Oaths, and that for unlawful Oaths a Land mourns, methinks it is an adventurous
thing for a Prince to take possession of his Inheritance of the Empire of such
a Land so encumbred with the guilt of Swearing and Forswearing.

O when may we see that ancient general tenderness in point of Oaths here, that
flourished among us in the days of our first Reformation: nay even in some
times of our Roman Catholic Ancestors!


B. I believe never, till after all the living here being resolved to dust, and
a new Race of Mankind enriching themselves and their Country by the Culture of
the Earth and Manufactures, men shall be above Temptations from necessity, to
take God's Name in vain; and when the very use of Oaths Assertory or
Promissory, will be dispensed with by Nature.

I am sure the Spectacle of mangled and slaughtered Bodies covering a Field
immediately after a Battle has not more horror in it, then the sight of the
Consciences mai'md and wounded by the inobservance of public Oaths has been
since the Era of 41.

And as our Chronicles mention, that they who were born in England the Year
after the great Mortality An. 1349. wanted some of their cheek Teeth, I may say
that generally they who have been born here the Years after 41. wherein the
Plague of Perjury by the outraging those Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy was
so epidemical, have seemed able only to swallow those Oaths, but not to show
upon them in serious and considerate thoughts: no not at the very frequent
times of their taking them.

And still tho in speculative Points in England Consulitur de Religione; yet
conclamatum est as to a general tender regard to the Religion of those Oaths.

There was (I think) a want of tenderness in some as to their sworn assisting
and defending all the Privileges and Preheminences belonging to the Crown,
during the late Ferment about my Lord Danby's Pardon: and I may more sadly
reflect on the same Men's want of recollecting their Oath obliging them to the
King his Heirs and Successors at the time of the Ferment about the Exclusion.


A. I think that many who by repentance have been cured of the Epidemical
Plague of Perjury that reged here in 41. and of such a Plague, and another of
Fears and Iealousies since 81, have yet sustained more damage thereby, then
they who were born the Year after 1349 did in wanting some of their Cheek
Teeth; and that their case is like that of those who were recovered of the
great Plague at Athens that Thucydides has described, and who tells us, that
after their recovery, their Souls had lost the faculty of Memory, and were
dozed with an (...) about what themselves had done, or what had passed in the
World during the horror of that very Plague, or before or since. But after all
this said, I am to ask you if you will make all those perjured who having took
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, promoted the exclusion?


B. By no means. I have more Humanity and Christian Charity then to do so. I
shall here observe to you that Divines in their measures of Men's sinful Actions
do often make use of the distinction of materialiter and formaliter. Thus for
example, Ames in his Cases of Conscience l. 5. c. 53. Si quis falsum dicit,
putans esse verum, mentitur tantum materialiter. Si quis verum dicit, putans
esse falsum, mentitur formaliter. And he having before in l. 4 c. 4 viz Of
Heresy, made pertinacy a requisite to a man's being formally an Heretic, and
said that Pertinax est qui non est paratus Captivare intellectum and rationem
suam omnem Sacrae Scripturae, adds, Haereticus igitur potest esse quis
materialiter, dum assensum praebet erro^i pernicioso, vel ex simplici
facilitate out temeritate haereticis or dendi qui sub honesta aliqua specie
fallunt, vel ex ignorantia qui ^ormaliter non est haereticus: cum pertinacia
and obstinatio animi deest, atque adeo pro simpliciter haeretic^ non est
babendus. Concordant with these measures of Ames, have I observed those of some
ingenuous Roman Catholic Writers, who have declared that they will not
pronounce all Protestants to be Heretics formaliter.

And it is therefore no wonder that such their Judgment of Charity has been
retaliated by some of the most Renowned Divines of the Church of England, viz.
the Lord Primate Bramhal, Bishop Tailor, Dr. Hammond and others, who have
denied to pronounce the worshipping the Host to be formal Idolatry; that is to
say, to be not so at all in reality, since we know that according to the trite
Rule, forma dat esse.

And thus that Primate in his Schism Guarded says very well for that purpose,
p. 57. Every one who is involved materially in a Schism is not a formal
Schismatic, more then she that Marries after long expectation, believing and
having reason to believe that her former Husband was dead is a formal
Adulteress, or then he who is drawn to give Divine Worship to a Creature by
some misapprehension, yet addressing his Devotions to the true God, is a formal
Idolater. And having there cited S. Austin of Heresy, He who did not run into
his error out of his own overweening Presumption* nor defends it
pertinaciously, but received it from his seduced Parents, and is careful to
search out the truth, and ready to be Corrected if he find it cut, he is not to
be reputed among Heretics; he says, it is much more true of Schism, that he
who is involved in Schism through the error of his Parents or Predecessors, who
carefully seeks after truth, and is prepared in his mind to embrace it
whenever he finds it, he is not to be reputed a Schismatic.

I know Azorius de Iuramento gives his Judgment well in thesi, That when a Law
is changed to which a man is bound by Oath, tho he is thereby materially
discharged, yet formally he is bound in respect of his will: for if ever he
actually assents to the alteration, he is really perjured. And so leaving it to
such who were Men of great Knowledge and Consideration, and had took the Oaths,
and were ready to promo'e a new Law for altering the hereditary Monarchy; to
think of the danger they incurred of the formal guilt of that Crime, I have
more Charity then to conclude all the rash, and the incogitant, and the weak,
and the seduced by the fantastic Interpretation of the Oath, to have been
perjured.

But as about the year 1164. Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury was at a Council
held at Northampton accused by the King of Perjury, and Condemned as guilty of
it, because he had not observed those English Customs that he was sworn to (as
I find Francisc. Long. de Council. p. 806. Col. 1. cited for it) so if you have
taken the Oath of Supremacy, and Sworn to defend all the Privileges and
Preheminences granted or belonging to the King, his Heirs and Successors, and
united to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and are of opinion that one of the
Privileges of those Heirs and Successors is to succeed to that Crown as it
comes to their turn according to Proximity of Blood, and by their inherent
Birthright, and as the Hereditary Succession ju^e Coronae is settled by the
Common Law of England, I shall tell you that the Pious and profound^ly Learned
Divine Dr. Hicks, who has studied this Point as much as any man, has in his
Writings told you that having taken this Oath, you could not honestly consent
to a Bill of Exclusion, which would have deprived the next Heir (and in him
virtually the whole royal Family) of the chief Privilege and Pre-eminence that
belonged to him by the Common Law of this Realm, etc.

Your Curiosity (I believe) has led you to read over his learned Iovian, and
to observe what he there says in his Preface, that some Men did pervert the
meaning of the word Heirs in the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, from its
common and usual acceptance to another more special, on purpose to elude the
force and Obligation which otherwise they must have had on the Consciences of
the Excluders themselves.

But it is not only the Authority of this single great Divine that I can lay
before your thoughts for the rendering the Attempt of the Exclusion contrary to
our Oath: but I can direct you to the censure of the three Estates of a Loyal
Nation, and of His late Majesty in the case. For the Oaths in Scotland, binding
the takers both to the King and his Heirs and Successors as ours do here, I can
tell you that in the Third Parliament of King Charles the Second, Aug. 13.
1681. you will find the Act in these words, viz. The Estates of Parliament
considering that the Kings of this Realm deriving their Royal Power from God
Almighty alone, do succeed lineally thereto, according to the known degrees of
Proximity in Blood, which cannot be interrupted, suspended, or diverted by any
Act or Statute whatsoever, and that none can attempt to alter or divert the
said Succession without involving the Subjects of this Kingdom in Perjury and
Rebellion, etc.

I know that during the late turbid interval of the Nation, some Loyal men of
the Church of England were so much misguided, as to think that because de facto
Parliaments have heretofore directed and limited the succession of the Crown in
other manner, then in course it would otherwise have gone (as the words in the
Printed Exclusion-Bill were) they might therefore of right do so again;
notwithstanding they knew that after the Parliament of King James to prevent
the Right of Succession from fluctuating any more, had justly recognized and
declared, That the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and Rights belonging to the
same, did by inherent Birthright and lawful and undoubted Succession descend
and come to him, as being lineally, justly and lawfully next and sole Heir of
the Blood Royal of this Realm, it did afterward by a New Oath of Obedience or
Allegiance, oblige men's Consciences both to the Crown and the hereditary lineal
Succession, and notwithstanding they knew that that Parliament had took care of
continuing the Obligation of the Oath of Supremacy for the bearing Faith and
true Allegiance to the King, his Heirs and lawful Successors, and to assist and
defend all Privileges, and Preheminences and Authorities granted or belonging
to the King, his Heirs and Successors, etc.

But I doubt not but the Consciences of the Considerate Loyal, now
expostulating with them in the cool of the day, whether they did then well in
being angry with the Imposers sense of their Oaths, and in not penetrating into
the Obligations thereby incurred; and particularly in not weighing whether such
who had taken those Oaths, and yet by Projects and Expedients would have
banished the Heir even after he should come to be Actual Successor from the
effects of their Sworn Allegiance, and of their Sworn Assistance and Defense of
all Privileges and Preheminences and Authorities granted, or belonging, etc.
had not visibly out-ran their Oaths, they will recollect the late dreadful want
of tenderness for the observance of the same.

It will be hard for many men on a serious Self-examination to reflect
otherwise on themselves, after that Sir W. I. himself (as the Printed Speeches
in the Oxford-Parliament have it) called an Expedient of that kind Iesuite's
Powder, and mentioned that on the Heirs coming to the title of King, the
learned Lawyers say, that by 1. H. 7. all Incapacity is taken away by the
Possession of the Crown, and after that another learned Lawyer had there said,
I owe the Duke Obedience if he be King: but if he be King and have no Power to
Govern, he is the King and no King: and had before said, That an Act of
Parliament against Common sense is void. To make a man King, and not suffer him
to exercise Kingly Power, is a Contradiction.

And I am sure it is a Contradiction to nothing more then our Oaths.

I desire not by referring to the breach of those Oaths to touch the tenderness
of any man's sore place, or to reproach him as to what he has done for the
time past; but to promote the tenderness of his Conscience: and that his
Conscience may not reproach him for the time to come, for not assisting and
defending all Privileges and Preheminences belonging to the Crown.

When I consider the noble and vigorous Loyalty that your self and others who
were mistaken in the Point of the Exclusion, have since shown in the Service of
His gracious Majesty, and the great Care that you and they in the Post where
you were* took in the Settlement of his Revenue, and of avoiding the Character
of those of Israel, who brought their newly anointed King no Presents; and your
read^ness at his call to venture your life for the support of his Crown: and do
observe in you and them a fixed Preparation of mind for the defense of every
Privilege, that is made to appear to you as belonging to the Crown, and that
your Loyalty like a bone well set is the firmer for having been broken, I
account that the Si non e^rasset, fecerat ille minus, may be applied to you,
and that after His Majesty's Pardon and the Series of your Heroical Actions of
Loyalty in his Service, you ought by all equal Judges, according to the
Instance I mentioned before, to be absolved, as who in all things have approved
your selves to be clear in this Matter.

And I believe you being one of the Church of England, the Adherents to which
do now as generally call themselves The Loyal, as the Independents did once
vocife^ate themselves to be The Saints, and the Principles of which Church do
enjoin Remorse and Penitence, and rending of the heart, and as much tenderness
to any who have disrobed the Crown of any of its Rights and Privileges, as was
in David when his heart smote him because he had cut off the skirt of Saul' s
Garment, and whose Divines do not only Preach the Doctrine of Non-resistance,
but whose Oaths bind to it, and that of Supremacy binding to a positive
Assistance of all Privileges, etc. your ^nlighten'd Conscience will be your
constant Remembrancer against any relapse.


A. I thank you for thus gently leading me by the hand to such a height of
Noble thoughts relating to that Oath, as from whence I am able to look back
with grief on my past aberrations through inadvertence, from what my Oath
obliged me to in relation to the Support of the hereditary Monarchy (and
concerning which Obligation, the Casuistical Discussion you sent me did
sufficiently illuminate me) and to take a prospect into my duty that lies
before me to assist and defend to my Power all Jurisdictions, Privileges, etc.
granted or belonging to the King's Highness, etc. or united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm.

I am sensible that as some vain Swearers in common Discourse, will upon their
being occasionally reproved for it, be apt to swear that they did not swear,
and that as there are Fools that say in their Souls that there is no God, and
that there is no Soul; so there is a sort of careless men who having taken this
great Promissory Oath, will yet by their Actions deny their having sworn to
assist and defend some of those Privileges, and likewise be apt to say in their
hearts they have not invoked God as Witness and Revenger in the case of that
Oath, and that they are not absolutely bound by it, or but only by their
reserved sense; or as if a man representing his Country, he were only to take a
kind of formal Oath in animam Domini, and not to venture his own Soul.

But for my part, I account it as vile to be perjured in a solemn Promissory
Oath as in a judicial Assertory one; and shall hereafter think my self as much
bound to use all exactness and tenderness in the recollection o^ my thoughts
after a Promissory Oath, as every Man of Honor does before an assertory Oath
when he is a witness in a Court of Law. And I think that it is only the
multitudo peccantium about solemn promissroy Oaths, as for example, about the
promised assistance and defense of the Privileges of the Crown in the Oath of
Supremacy, that diminishes the Shame and ^gnominy of men's being either through
corrupt affections or incogitancy (and the crassa negligentia which the Law
makes to be dolus malus) Vacillant or Contradictory in the Series of their
actings promised, or through lachesse or subdolcus pretenses withholding their
performance of part of what they obliged themselves to do; and that keeps the
populace from a nauseous looking on them as falsarii, and as much as on
Witnesses produced in Courts, who in the things asserted by their Testimony are
for want of precaution of thought, varii and vacillantes and contradictory to
themselves, and minglers of Falsehood with truth, and who conceal part of the
whole truth they were to depose.


B. There is another thing that makes the Moral offices required in an Oath
Promissory call for some kind of Consideration, that an Oath Assertory does
not: for we are not to depose o^ Matter of Law, but only of Fact: but in the
Promissory parts of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance our thoughts are
obliged to have regard to Matters of Right and Law. We are to our Power to
assist and defend all Privileges and Preheminences GRANTED or BELONGING to the
King, etc. and which ARE united to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.


A. But by this means, while you would have men keep up the ease of their
Consciences by such assistance and defense, will not they be put to it to make
their lives uneasy, by buying Law Books, and being Students of the Crown-Law,
and of the extent of the Regal rights; a thing never intended by the Makers of
the Laws for those Oaths, and whereby such who are to assist and defend and
Rights of the Crown by Action in Land or SeaService would be hindered therein
by Speculation?


B. No man need amuse himself about any such matter. Nor are our Princes, who
by their Coronation Oaths oblige themselves to defend all our rightful Laws and
Customs, bound thereby to study the Report-Books of the Law concerning the
Rights and Properties of their Subjects, and whereby the time of Princes would
be taken up from defending them. And I shall tell you, that tho all men are
morally bound to frame the best Conceptions, and make the truest
representations of the Divine Nature they can, and which by the measures of the
Scripture ^s comprehended under our Duty of glorifying God; yet not to study
the Controversies between the Remonstrants and Contra-Remonstrants about the
absoluteness of the Divine Decrees, and Dominion, or whether God according to
his absolute Dominion can torment an innocent Creature.

And thus tho we are bound to honor God's Vice gerents, and to assist and
defend their Rights, Privileges, and Preheminences we are not to consume our
whole lives in the investigation of Truth in the Moot-Points about the same.

But as to this thing, that great Casuist of the Age, Bishop Sanderson, may
help to set us right in his Third Lecture of Oaths, Sect. 17* where putting the
Case when Subjects are required to take an Oath for Preservation and Defense of
Laws and Liberties, Privileges, Prerogatives and Preheminences of some Superior
Power, as of a King, a Commonwealth, or Lord Paramount, such as are among us,
the Oaths of H^mage, of Royal Supremacy, etc. he says, No man denies these
Oaths to be lawful or obligatory: but in respect of the frequent incertainty of
the Laws whereunto they relate, it may very well be do^bted how far they
oblige. Doubtless the Subject to his Power is obliged to defend all Rights
which appear either by Law or Custom Legitimate, whether defined by the written
Law, or in force through long use of time, or prescription, that is, so far as
they are known, or may morally be known. But he is not equally obliged to the
observation of all those which are Controverted or doubtful, especially since
Powerful men are accustomed to stretch their tedders, and leap over the
Landmarks of their Neighbors, not contenting themselves within the bounds of
their own Right. Nevertheless a Subject ought always to be prepared in Mind so
soon as the justness of those things which are doubtful shall appear, to a
knowledge and defend them.

It may be hence rationally deduced that such who are called to the Helm of
State, or are Members of Parliament, if any Matters relating to any
Jurisdictions, Privileges, and Authorities granted or belonging to the Crown
shall come in question before them, are by virtue of the Oath of Supremacy
bound to endeavor to know whether those Jurisdictions, Privileges, and
Authorities are granted, or do belong to the Crown, that is, so far as they are
known or may morally be known before they refuse to defend and assist them: and
much more before they shall do any act of offending or resisting the same, and
before they shall entertain any hard thoughts of their Prince for claiming this
or that Privilege. And where the right of any Jurisdictions, Privileges granted
or belonging to the Crown is not Controverted or doubtful, that Oath binds them
immediately to assist and defend the same, and not so much as to move any thing
against them, except in some such case as I shall presently mention.


A. Did ever any Parliament presume to destroy, or offend or usurp upon any
Privilege, or Pre-eminence, or Authority, of which the Right, as belonging to
the Crown, was not controverted?


B. Yes, the long Parliament of 40 did so. The Power of the Militia was
acknowledged by the Parliaments Petition at Windsor to be a flower of the
Crown. And therefore the Royal Martyr's dying Breath might (one would think) be
Thunder to their Consciences, when in his Speech on the Scaffold, he said, I
never intended to entrench upon their Privileges. They began upon me. It is the
Militia they began upon. They confessed that the Militia was mine; but they
thought fit to have it from me.

No doubt such men intended to entrench on the King's Privileges and
Preheminences, and they intended to violate their Oath of Supremacy.


A. Did they offend any other Uncontroverted Rights of the Crown?


B. Many more then I have now time to name; but cannot forget the fatal
Consequences of their outraging one of those uncontroverted Rights which was at
the King's Pleasure to Prorogue or Dissolve Parliaments, by putting such
incessant hardships on that Pious King to engage him to pass the Act that that
Parliament should continue till both the Houses did consent to the dissolution
of it; and of which Mr. Hobbs in his Behemoth, says, that it amounted to a
total Extinction of the King's Right, in case that such a grant were valid,
which I think it is not, unless the Sovereignty it self be in plain terms
renounced, which it was not.

And he having said, That the King signed that Bill the same day he signed the
Warrant for the Execution of the Earl of Strafford, and having raised the
Question, Whether the King could not have saved him by a Pardon, and said, that
he would have done it if that could have preserved him against the Tumults
raised and countenanced by the Parliament it self, does mind me of the horror
of those days, when they who were Sworn to assist and defend the King's
Privilege and Pre-eminence in Pardoning any one, tho he knew him justly
Condemned to dye, did endeavor by Tumults to oppose his Pardoning one whom he
thought not to have deserved Death.

That Royal Privilege was in like manner by that Parliament trampled on in the
Case of the Pardon of Archbishop Laud.


A. I shall here by the way ask you if you did not once tell me that the most
profound Observers of the Affairs in Ireland; had agreed in it as their firm
Judgment, that the Irish Rebellion had never happened if the Parliament of 40
here had not meddled in the Case of the Earl of Strafford, and occasioned his
removal from being chief Governor of Ireland.


B. I shall by the way answer you, that I did tell you so, and that they judged
that the Character of that Earl's great Wisdom and Courage, and Activity, and
of universality in his Correspondencies, had gained such an Ascendant over the
Genius of the Irish, that if he had continued Lord Lieutenant of that Kingdom
in his former Power, they would not have ventured to rebel.


A. You have instanced in Uncontroverted Privileges of the Crown that that
Parliament did offend and resist, by their putting such incessant hardships on
their King, as your words are; and it was folly as well as breach of their Oath
for them thus to strike at the Pardoning Power of the Crown that is the
Privilege both of King and People. Yet let me ask you whether you account that
he who in any case shall endeavor that by the Legislative Power any
uncontroverted Jurisdiction, Privilege, Pre-eminence, or Authority granted or
belonging to the Crown may be altered or restrained in its exercise, breaks his
Oath? Did that Parliament do so who made the famous Act for barring the known
Privilege of Nullum tempus Occurrit Regi, I mean, that glorious Act of 21o of
King James the First, C. 2. of which the Title is, Conceald Lands shall not be
Recovered, unless it may be proved that the King had title to them within 60
years; i. e. 60 years before the 19th of February in the 21st year of King
James the First, which was the day of the beginning of that Parliament, and on
which Statute my Lord Coke has an excellent Comment in Instit. 3. C. 87.
against Concealors (turbidum genus hominum) and all pretenses of Concealments
whatsoever; and on occasion of which Act it is yet acknowledged in the Book
called, The Court and Character of King James, written by Sir A. W. and Printed
A. 1650. that that King loved good Laws, and had many made in his time, and in
his l^st Parliament, for the good of his Subjects, and suppressed Promoters and
Progging Fellows, gave way to the Nullum tempus, etc. to be confined to Sixty
years, which was more beneficial to the Subjects in respect of their quiets,
then all that Parliaments had given him during his whole Reign?

Or did the late Kings Loyal long Parliament do so in their obtaining the Act
for the Habeas Corpus, and others that might be named?


B. Having premised it to you that those words in the Oath of assisting and
defending ALL Jurisdictions, ALL Privileges, etc. are operative words, and of
strict Interpretation, and whereby we stake our Eternities to assist the King's
Temporal Rights, and invoke God so to help or assist us as we shall assist all
those Privileges, and that the Prince and the Church being looked on as Minors,
the breach of an Oath to defend the Privileges of the King must appear to
common sense as odious as if any Guardian of a Minor did break an Oath to
defend his Person and Interest, or did take part with any to destroy the
Minor's Rights; I shall yet be so fair as to tell you that I do not so account
it: provided that he who shall do so shall have a moral certainty that the
Prince being sensible that the alteration or restraint of such Privilege will
be very beneficial to the Subjects both in the present and future times, and
necessary to the enabling them the better to support the Crown, has signified
his desire of the same, and does so desire it: or if he knows not his Princes
so desiring it, believes that the Cogency of the Reasons he has humbly to
offer for such alteration being made, is such as may Incline others to
supplicate the Prince to consent to it, and the Prince so to do.

Yet in this latter case, if afterward the Sovereign notifies his desire of the
continuance of such known Privilege, I am then by my Oath to assist and defend
the same, and am not to the Cogency of my Reasons to add that of Importunity.
For there is a par or proportion between importunity and force; whence we see
that according to the King's Ecclesiastical Laws, in case of a former will, a
latter gained by importunoe preces in the time of the Testator's Sickness, is
often adjudged void. And as I am not by importunity when my Princes Affairs are
in a Sickly state, or that the Die of War has ran against him abroad* to press
and tire him then into a parting with his known Privileges, so neither with a
Salvo to my Oath, which binds me to assist and defend them, can I if I find his
Judgment or Mind sickly, lay Temptations before him to buy him as it were out
of a Privilege that is just and advisable for him to keep* I am neither to
starve nor pamper my Prince out of such a Privilege. Nay more, if my Prince did
by any Error part with any such Privilege, as not knowing the same to be
inherent in the Crown (as in the Case of an Answer of the Royal Martyr drawn by
one of his Ministers not deeply versed in the Law, to some of the Parliaments
Propositions, by which Answer he is acknowledged to be one of the three
Estates) I, who know that the Privilege and Pre-eminence inherent in his Crown
is to be above them all, and have in the Oath of Supremacy Sworn that the King
is the only Supreme Governor, and so none Coordinate, or equal to him, I am
to take no advantage of that error, but am still to assist and defend such his
Pre-eminence.

And if ever a Prince did by fear part with such Privilege or Pre-eminence,
there being a par between fear and force, according to that Law of the Proetor
in the Digests, Quod vi aut metu factum est ratum non habebo (and in which Law,
as Baldus says, the Proetor was inspired by the Spirit of God) I am not only
not to take any advantage of such act of the Prince done by fear or force, or
to upbraid him therewith, but am still to assist and defend such Privilege so
derelinquish'd by him, and am to account the same belonging to him as the word
is in my Promissory Oath, and to account him still in Law possessed of the
same, according to the rule of Possessio etiam animo retinetur: and which is
justly applied in the Case of any one who in a Storm at Sea throws his Goods
overboard to lighten the Ship.

His late Majesty therefore did but right to himself, when in his Declaration
of the 25th of October, 1660. Concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, he took notice
how some had caused to be Printed and Published in England a Declaration before
Printed in his Name when he was in Scotland, ( i. e. referring to the
Declaration Printed at Edinburgh, 1650.) and says thus of it, viz^ Of which we
shall say no more, then that the Circumstances by which we were enforced to
sign that Declaration, are enough known to the World: And that the worthiest
and greatest part of that Nation did even then detest and abhor the ill usage
of us in that particular when the same tyranny was exercised there by the Power
of a few ill men, which at that time had spread it self over this Kingdom, and
therefore we had no reason to expect that we should at this season when we are
doing all we can to wipe cut the memor* of all that has been done amiss by
other men, and we thank God have wiped it out of our own Remembrance, have been
our self assaulted with those rep oaches, which we will likewise forget.

And it was goodness worthy the great Soul of a King to forget the Outrages of
such who did strip their Political Father of his Power, and then reproach him
with his nakedness.

I may here likewise tell you (and not mal a propos) how much the patience and
long-suffering of the same Prince was exercised in a late Conjuncture that so
much eclipsed his Prerogative in the Case of the Earl of Danby's Pardon, and
when the Commons did set up against it somewhat in his Father's Answer to the
19 Propositions before mentioned, that nothing but the tempest of the Age in
the Parliament of 40 could have occasioned, viz. Since therefore the Power
legally placed in both Houses of Parliament is more then sufficient to restrain
the Power of Tyranny, etc. But because a Parliament so perpetuated as that was,
did prove more then sufficient to restrain pretended Tyranny, and real just
Government, will a considerate man say any such thing now, when the breath of
Prerogative can dissolve them in a moment, and in that moment all their
thoughts perish, and all the high-flying thoughts that would soar above
Imperial Power be found dead in the Nest?

And I may here tell you, that in the Answer of some Nonconformists to Dr.
Stillingfleet's Sermon (an Answer Printed in London in the year 1680. during
the ferment about the Plot, and wherein they desire Indulgence) I think their
attacquing the Service on the Gunpowder Treason Plot, in thanking God for
Preserving the King and the Three Estates of the Realm assembled, by saying,
That the late King made no scruple in his Answer to the 19 Propositions to
reckon himself one of the three Estates, was a thing that on recollection they
will judge ought not to have been done.

But I am here further to tell you, that though it may be consistent with our
Oath in some such case as was mentioned, to endeavor the altering by the
Legislative Power some uncontroverted Privileges of the Crown, and in such a
way as I have mentioned, I likewise wish you in your thoughts to make a
distinction of those Privileges or Preheminences belonging to the Crown, that
are absolutely Essential to its Preservation, and to that of the whole Realm,
and which are by God and the Law put as a Depositum into the hands of Kings,
and the removing of one of which would have the effect of taking a Stone out of
an Arched Building, and such as no Sovereign Princes can be without; and such
as our Princes have in their flourishing Reigns to the great content and
happiness of their People always exercised, and Rights (as the late Earl of
Shaftsbury said of that of the Flagg) that our Princes cannot part with: and
Privileges that are not such: and two of which former sort of Privileges, and
which are parts of the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, I account we are
expressly in the Promissory Clause of that Oath Sworn to defend, and assist,
namely of the lineal Succession to the Crown, and of the King's Prerogative;
and of which Prerogative we have this Description in Blount's Law-Dictionary,
That the Prerogative of the King is generally that Power, Pre-eminence, or
PRIVILEGE which the King has over and above other Persons, and above the
ordinary Course of the Law, in the Right of his Crown: And then adds, Potest
Rex ei, lege suae dignitatis, condonare si velit, etiam mortem promeritam. LL.
Edw. Confess. cap. 18. and then says, that Spelman calls it the L^x Regiae
dignitatis.

The Author of the Law-Dictionary had there his eye on the Law of Edward the
Confessor, where under the title of Misericordia Regis and Pardonatio, it is
declared, that si quispiam forisfactus (which the Margin interprets rei
Capitalis Reus) poposcerit Regiam misericordiam pro forisfacto suo, timidus
mortis vel membrorum perdendorum, potest Rex ei, lege suae dignitatis,
condonare si velit, etiam mortem promeritam; ipse tamen malefactor rectum
faciat in ^quantumcunque poterit quibus forisfecit, and tradat fidejussores de
pace and legalitate tenenda, si vero fidejussores defecerint exula bitur a
Patria.

And I remember there is a famous Act relating to the old Privileges and
Prerogatives of the Crown and to their resumption by the Crown, viz. The Act of
27. H. 8. c. 24. called, The Recontinuing of certain Liberties taken from the
Crown; and it begins with saying, that whereas diverse of the most ancient
Prerogatives and Authorities of Justice appertaining to the Imperial Crown of
this Realm have been severed and taken from the same by sundry Gifts of the
King's most Noble Progenitors, to the great diminution and detriment of the
Royal Estate of the same, and to the hinderance and great delay of Justice; and
thereupon says, for Reformation whereof be it Enacted by Authority of this
present Parliament that no Person or Persons, etc. shall have any Power or
Authority to pardon or remit any Treasons, Murders, Man-slaughters, or any
kinds of Felonies, nor any Accessaries to any Treasons, Murders, etc. or any
Out-laries, for any such Offenses aforesaid, committed, perpetrated, done, or
hereafter to be committed, done, or divulged by or against any Person in any
part of this Realm, etc. but that the King's Highness, his Heirs, and
Successors, shall have the whole and sole Power and Authority thereof, united
and knit to the Imperial Crown of this Realm; as of good RIGHT and Equity it
appertains, etc. and then orders all Writs in a County Palatine to be made in
the King's Name, etc.

That Statute does give you a Prospect of great variety and use in order to the
Settlement of your thoughts about some things in your Oath. You there see the
Natural recourse of the Royal Rivers of Prerogative to the Ocean from whence
they came; and when you there find that the Crown could communicate to Subjects
the exercise of the Prerogative of Pardoning Murder, however restrained by ACT
of Parliament, and all the dreadful Disabilities incurred by Out-laries for
Felony and Treason, you are not to wonder at any ones telling you, that the
King himself has the Privilege of Pardoning a Disability incurred by Law for
Heterodoxy in Religion: and especially when you shall see the whole and sole
Power of Pardoning the same united and knit to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, as of GOOD RIGHT and EQUITT appertains. And according to those words
in your Oath about your defending all the Rights and Privileges united and
annex^d to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, you are to defend that great Royal
Power of Pardoning, and which our Ancestors in Harry the 8th's time thought so
essential to Public Justice.

And therefore you will still do well to remember that your sworn defense and
assistance of all the Privileges and Preheminences of the Crown does more
particularly bind you in the Case of these fundamental ones to put no hardship
on our Princes, nor yet to use any softness of Allurements to tempt them to
renounce them. The Countryman, who being by his Physician prescribed some
Grains of Laudanum, and desiring a greater quantity of the Apothecary, and
saying, Shall I have no more for my Money? and whereby he would have been
Poisoned, was not less Sagacious then such Senators who by Subsidies would
engage any Prince to part with so much of his Prerogative as would destroy the
Body politic.

Alas; as for several uncontroverted Rights of the Crown of an inferior
Nature, as our Princes have been ready enough in all Ages to part with them for
the good of their People, and their own promoted thereby, and have had grateful
returns from their Parliaments by Subsidies on such an account, so none need
fear but that in all future times succeeding Monarchs will that way be as
indulgent as the former ones were; and that as Solomon says, the King himself
is served by the Field, and the Plough having here variously supported the
Throne, and particularly by the robust Infantry it has yielded to serve the
Crown in Arms; the keeping up of the Spirits of our Yeomen (and likewise of
those who Plough'd the Sea) by the Liberty our Laws allowed them, and the
Crowns being no gravamen to the Body of the People, and only to the Royal Heads
that wore it, was and will be always necessary in order to the keeping up the
being of the Nation.

There is therefore scope and encouragement enough in England for a man who is
a Candidate for a Patriot's place, to carry it by being a Consessor of
unmercenary Loyalty, and arriving at honor, or the consentiens laus bonorum by
being a Loyal Patriot: and there is as good popular air for any one to feed on
who will assert the just Liberties and Privileges of the English Subjects as
any Greece or Rome afforded: and there was no need for any one to move for a
Statue for the Hero who promoted that old act against old Concealments in King
James the First's time, or the late one for the Habeas Corpus; for such an one
must find his Monument in the Hearts of all the Subjects of England. Nor was
there ever Prince more Cordially and Passionately concerned for the Liberties
of the People of England then the Royal Martyr: and who fell revera as their
Martyr according to his words on the Scaffold, and where he said, If I would
have given way to an Arbitrary Power, to have all Laws changed according to the
Power of the Sword, I needed not to have come here.

His style could not there recede from that of his Printed Declarations, and in
one of which, for Example that in 41. he thus mentions his hopes, viz. That God
will yet make us a great and a glorious King over a free and a happy People.


A. If you had not thus coupled the LOYAL Man and the PATRIOT together in your
Discourse, I should have asked you whether you would have Men throw up the many
good Laws that the Parliament of 40 obtained for the ease of the People by
partly importuning the King?


B. I assure you, I shall never give you or any one else cause to think that I
have not a high value for some of those Laws: and do now show you my value of
them, by telling you that I do not look on them as the offspring of any
factious importunity, but as the just and natural issue of the goodness of our
Prince: and you will find they were so, if you consult the Declaration I last
cited, and where his never to be forgotten words are, viz. That as We have not
refused to pass any Bill presented to Us by Our Parliament for redress of those
Grievances mentioned in the Remonstrance, so We have not had a greater Motive
for the passing those Laws then Our own resolution (grounded upon our
Observation, and understanding the State of Our Kingdom) to have freed Our
Subjects for the future from those Pressures which were grievous to them if
those Laws had not been propounded. which therefore We shall as inviolably
maintain, as We look to have Our own Rights preserved, etc.

And in his Declaration of August 12. 1642. he says, Would men enjoy the Laws
they were born to, the Liberty and Property which makes the Subjection of this
Nation famous and honorable, with all Neighboring Kingdoms? We have done Our
part to make a Wall of Brass for the perpetual defense of them, while these ill
Men usurp a Power to undermine that Wall, and to shake Foundations which cannot
be pulled down, but to the Confusion of Law, Liberty, Property, and the very
life and being of Our Subjects.


A. You have named then two fundamental Privileges or Rights of the Crown,
which by the Oath of Supremacy we are bound always to assist and defend. And I
am to tell you frankly and without going to hide my Transgression, as did Adam;
that though I have often and in several Capacities took that Oath, yet on the
very day I last took it, and while the very echo of those words, so help me
God, was audible in the air of my mind, and before the Ink was quite dry that
recorded my Oath, I without considering that as it is the Privilege of our
Prince that his Heirs by the Right of the Crown should succeed him, so it is
the great Privilege of those Heirs to succeed; I was yet so far from assisting
and defending that Privilege, that I immediately endeavored to subvert the
same, and tho my Prince's Mind was notify'd to me for my not so doing. Nay,
further to make you my Confessor, I was so far gone in a Lethargick
carelessness of my Oath, that when I saw the excluding the title of the Lawful
Successor was not likely to pass into a Law, I was tempted to endeavor by
Expedients, as if I had took an Oath and no Oath, to make him a King and no
King. And God having given me space to repent of my past incogitancy in
relation to that Oath, it being now brought before me in the Course of
Providence to assist and defend another of the Preheminences which my Prince
tells me is granted and belonging to the Crown, and which you have mentioned as
his Prerogative above the ordinary Course of the Law, in the Right of his
Crown, and that he first made use of an emergent Necessity, I will through the
Divine assistance use all the means I can both of serious sedate and
unprejudicate Consideration, and of the Consilium Peritorum, and Discourse and
Communication with others whom in meekness and lowliness of mind. I am obliged
to esteem better then my self, to fix my own Judgment of Discretion in this
matter: and will not deny to assist and defend this Pre-eminence of my Prince
in particular without being morally certain that it is not granted or belongs
not to him, and will take the best care I can to effect that by any that by any
lachesse or omission of the great Duty of Consideration, I may give no man
occasion again to exercise his Charity in not pronouncing me to be formally
perjured; and that after my Prince has pardoned me my attempted excluding him
from the Throne, I may not endeavor the disabling him from any one of his
Rights while he is on it (for so the style of the Exclusion*Bill ran, and it
might have been as well called the Disabling Bill, according to the words
there, shall be Excluded and DISABLED, and is hereby Excluded and Disabled,
etc. from all Titles, Rights, Prerogatives, etc.) and rights that I have sworn
to defend.

The Lord Chief Justice Vaughan, (who was a man of the first-Rate Talents, if
you consider both his natural and acquired parts) does yet in Thomas and
Sorrell's Case in his Reports call the King's Power of Dispensing, dark
Learning, and says it seemed so to him, tho after so many Arguments in the
Case. And as that great Man found it dark, so I think he left it such in some
measure, however yet so many daring Sciolists (and who never looked on a
Law-Book in their lives) will pretend to O^niscience in the Matter, and perhaps
out of a vain Jealousy of the King's Omnipotence being thereby asserted.

But I know your thoughts have travailed far in this dark Learning, and wherein
you confessed to me once, that you had received some Illumination from that
Iudge's Argument, and as likewise you had from a Manuscript Report of that Case
of Thomas and Sorrel, containing an account of the things urged by the other
Judges, and by the Council concerned in that Case, and which are not mentioned
in Sir I. Vaughan's Report of it, and where he relates little but his own
Argument. He was a fair Reasoner and frank Discourser on all occasions, and not
biased by any mercenary humor: and according to that Candor you have often
commended in him, and which I have likewise experimented in your self, let me
now again make use of it in your imparting to me your thoughts in order to the
Directing and Settling of mine as to the observance of my Oath in this
particular.

And tho I know we live in a crooked and perverse Generation, wherein so many
are at the same time decrying both summum jus and Persecution, and too all
relaxation of the Laws; and their Spirits lie like that Haven, Acts 27. 12.
toward the Southwest and Northwest, two opposite Points, (and one would scarce
think it possible that men's Spirits could be so extremely winding and crooked,
and thus opposite to themselves) and while too they are crying out that any
lawful Dispensing with the Laws established, is Contradictio in adjecto: yet
that Lord Chief Iustice's Report has showed me the legality of the
Dispensative Power in many particulars, so far as to excite in me a desire to
know more of it, and to move me to pity the ignorance of my Countrymen, who
thus cry out of Contradictio in adjecto, and not knowing what a Dispensation in
Law means, will fall under that censure of the Monk, viz. Corrigis magnific^t
and nescis quid Significat, and of that Adage in Erasmus, Stultior Choraebo,
who not being able to reckon in Numbers beyond five, would yet undertake to
Compute the numbers of the Waves in the Sea, oras I may say in the words of S.
Paul, desiring to be Teachers of the Law, understanding neither what they say,
nor whereof they affirm: yet I assure you the Vogue of the Mobile will no more
influence my thoughts about the Motion of the Laws by Dispensation, then it
would about the Motion of the Earth, and who would take it very ill if they
should be told it moves as fast as a Bullet out of a Canon, because they do not
perceive it.

A late great Philosopher of our Country has told us, That every day it
appears more and more that years and days are determined by Motions of the
Earth; and another has from the Diurnal and Annual Motion of the Earth
endeavored to salve the Flows and Motions of some Seas, illustrating the same
by Waterin a Bowl arising or falling to either side, according to the Motions
of the Vessel: but perhaps should a Prince in his Writings inculcate the
Philosophy of the Earths motion, the populace would have Fears and Iealousies
of the instability of the Foundations of their Houses and Towns, and of the
shaking of their Property, and as they have by Dispensations, and they would be
apt to quote Scripture against such Motion: nay, tho they should be told that
such Motion would ennoble the Earth by exalting it into Heaven; and too as
Dispensations may be said to do by conducting those to Heaven who believe
Humane Laws obliging the Conscience, and yet shall not observe some of them.
But as when ever you have heretofore discoursed to me of Copernicus and
Galilaeus, and their Hypotheses, you always found me an attentive Hearer, you
will be sure now much more to find me so while you are speaking of any of my
Prince's Privileges that I am sworn to defend; for I am now concerned not to
salve Phenomenon, but to save my Soul by keeping my Oath. And in the temper I
am in, now my whole Soul is overflowed with the sense of my having so lately
through incogitancy violated that part of my Oath that so plainly obliged me to
assist and defend the Hereditary Monarchy, I shall be as cheerfully attentive
to you while you acquaint me with any Obligations resulting from my Oath, as I
would be to any one who told me how much I owed another, and at the same time
enabled me to pay it.


B. I shall be most ready when we meet next (which I suppose will be very
shortly) to afford you lumen de lumine, in any of the few things I know about
this dark Learning. In the mean time I shall observe to you on the occasion of
your Mentioning the Lord Chief Justice Vaughan's Report of Thomas and Sorrell's
Case, that as it has through the Divine benignity been the frequent Method of
Providence to send into the World unheard of Maladies and Remedies in the same
Conjuncture of time, and so likewise to make pestiferous Haeresiarchs and
learned Confessors of the truth Contemporary, and further when Heaven had made
many of the inquisitive curious to thirst after the knowledge of truth in the
works of Nature, then to bless the World with the Discourses and Writings of
Galilaeus, Tycho-Brahe, my Lord Bacon, Gassend^s and Des Carts, and Dr.
Harvey, who opened such great Springs of real Learning as refreshed that noble
thirst; so it seems before the Date of His late Majesty's Declaration of
Indulgence in the 24th year of his Reign, and of the Act about the Test in the
25th year of it, and both which were likely to produce among the Learned so
many Inquiries into the Legality of the Dispensative Power inherent in the
Crown (and even among the unlearned an Epidemical Disease of talking about the
same) it came to pass in the course of Providence, that by as Learned Judges as
ever sat on the English Bench, and as Learned Council as ever appeared at its
Bar, the Learning about the Dispensative Power was ventilated and discussed in
a Series of several years in the Case of Thomas and Sorrel.

For the Cause began in the King's Bench 18. Car. 2. and was there argued by
some of the Great Council of the Kingdom, and there again argued on both sides
by other Council in Michaelmas-Term, in the 19th year of his Reign. And in
Hilary-Term in 25. and 26. Car. 2. this Cause for the weight and difficulty of
it was adjourned out of the King's Bench into the Exchequer Chamber, and there
argued by others of the Greatest Council of the Kingdom; and many Law Books
quoted. And the Case was afterward argued by all the Judges of England at six
several Days in Easter, Trinity, Michaelmas and Hilary Terms, viz. by two
Judges each day, and the Judges differed in several Points, and even about the
definition or meaning of Dispensation. For so that learned Chief Justice tells
you, and says, That some of his Brothers defined it to be liberatio a poena,
and others to be Provida relaxatio Juris, which (says he) is defining an
ignotum per ignotius, and liberare a poena is the effect of a Pardon, not of a
Dispensation, etc.

Thus (as I may say) there was a Circumvallation by the Learning which
concerned Dispensing, that encompassed some time preceding that Declaration of
Indulgence in the 24th year of his Reign, and some time following both it and
the Act of the Test. I shall some other time perhaps entertain you with the
Learned Manuscript Report of the whole Case: but shall now tell you that during
that Series of years, there was no angry motion in the Sea of the Populace
occasioned by any thing said in any of the Arguments that propp'd up the
Dispensative Power; no, not by that mentioned in Keeble's Reports about Thomas
and Sorrell's Case to have been said in the Exchequer Chamber by Ellis the
King's Sergeant (and whose Opinion was as Current for Sterling-Law as any Man's
of the long Robe.) Viz. That the King may SUSPEND an Act of Parliament till
next Session.

And now since it has thus appeared out of that Chief Justice his Report, that
at least a sixth part of the Sworn Judges of the Realm (as he thought) were
unacquainted with the meaning of Dispensing, I think it may pass for a Miracle
if any great number of the mobile did understand it.

But without their troubling their heads with Law Books, if they would but mind
their English Bibles, and there consult the 12th of S. Matthew, they would soon
forbear calling the lawful Dispensing with the Laws established a
Contradiction. Our learned Ames on the Priests in the Temple Profaning the
Sabbath and being blameless, observes very well in his Cases of Conscience, 1.
3. c. 17. That Praecepta Deiex sua natura nunquam ita Concurrent, at necesse
sit alterum eorum proprie violare per peccatum. Quum enim praeceptum aliquod
minus negligendum est, ut majus observetur, minus illud cessat pro illo tempore
obligare (that is to say, is dispensed with) ita ut qui ex tali occasion illud
negligunt, sint plane inculpabiles, id est non peccent. Matthew. 12. 5, 7. And as
to that in the Chapter of David's entering into the House of God and eating the
Shewbread, which was not lawful for him to eat, etc. the Lord Bishop of London
in his Second Letter to his Clergy, Printed A. 1680. in the Paragraph about The
half Communion, occasionally thus observes with great Judgment, That a positive
Command of God cannot be disobeyed without guilt, unless on some one or more of
these grounds, either, 1. That God dispenses with it as he did with
Circumcision in the Wilderness. Or, 2. That some Evil greater then the
Consequence of the Nonperformance of it will certainly follow: as when David
ate the Shewbread and they that were with him: which depends on that rule of
our Savior, which tho applied to the Sabbath, yet extends to all other
positive Commands, that man was not made for them, but they for man: Or lastly,
in case of incapacity, as the Children of Isreal's not going up to Jerusalem in
the time of Captivity.

And there are other words in a foregoing Chapter of S. Matthew that are still
applicable to the Pharisaical ignorance of such as reproach DISPENSING as
unlawful, Go and learn what that means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice.

But according to the Example of our Blessed Lord in Having Compassion on the
multitude, I think you have taken a just occasion for the pitying so many of
your Countrymen who in the present Conjuncture presume to exercise themselves
in great Matters, or in things too high for them relating to Law and State, and
who without enquiring about the modus of Dispensing with the Laws established,
wherein Lawyers differ, cry down the thing it self wholly and absolutely as a
Contradiction to the lex terrae, and in which not being so all Lawyers agree.

My Lord Primate Bramhal in his Book of A fair Warning to take heed of the
Scottish Discipline, showing in Chap. 6. (that I have before referred to) That
it robs the King of his Dispensative Power, does wish any one averse to that
Power no greater Censure then that the Penal Laws might be duly executed on him
till he recant his error. And how Penal a thing by the Laws of Nations, it is
to alienate the hearts of People from the Prince's Government, all the great
Writers of those Laws, and of the Iura Majestatis have enough shown.

Moreover how Criminal, a thing of that Nature is in the Court of Conscience,
our two great Writers of it, Ames and Sanderson have enough taught us. The
Moral offices of Subjects toward their Princes are well set forth in Ames his
Cases of Conscience, 1. 5. c. 25. and where he says. Debent ex singulari
reverentia cavere, ne temerarium judicium ferant de ipsorum administrationes
Exodus 21. 28. Eccles. 10. 20. 2 Pet. 2. 10. Jud. 8. Fundamentum hujus cautionis
est, 1. Candor ille qui cum erga omnes debet adhiberi, tum singulariter erga
Superiores. 2. Difficultas explorandi fontes and causas negotiorum Publicorum.
3. Moderatio illa qua leves infirmitates and offensiones tolerare debemus, and
communi tranquillitati condonare.

And Bishop Sanderson in his 11th Sermon, Ad aulam, showing the inconvenience
of rashly judging things to be unlawful, observes how thereby men's affections
are ali^nated from one another: and says he, our own deceitful hearts must
needs tell us, how hardly we think of those Men who do those things, we think
unlawful: as for example, if we think dressing of Meat and using any
recreations to be profanatious of the Lord's Day, we must needs judge those men
who do so use them, to be prophaners of the Lord's Day; and he further
observes, That Governors thereby come to be robbed of a great deal of that
honor that is due to them from their People, both in their affections and
subjection: and says, if we have in our thoughts prejudged any of the things
commanded by the Magistrate to be unlawful, our hearts will be sowred toward
our Governors, and Men will directly, or indirectly and obliquely speak evil
of them, etc.

Mr. Hobb's writing of the passions, observes well, That the passion whose
violence or continuance makes madness, is either great vain glory, which is
commonly called Pride and Self-conceit, or great dejection of Mind, and that
excessive opinion of a Man's own self for divine Inspiration, for Wisdom,
Learning, Form and the like becomes distraction and giddiness: the same joined
with Envy, Rage, vehement opinion of the truth of any thing contradicted by
others, Rage, etc. and if the excesses be madness, there is no doubt but the
Passions themselves when they tend to evil are degrees of the same. And
therefore when we see so many Mechanical Persons, as to the Point of
Dispensation in general, not allowing their own Rule of Cuilibet in sua art
credendum, so many Men and Women, and such whom the Law terms Infants, so rude
in the knowledge of the Law, and yet so transported with Pride and
Self-Conceit, and such an excessive opinion of themselves for Wisdom and
Knowledge, and for being inspired with new light in this dark Learning, none
need wish them greater Punishment then such their Distemper; adding thereunto
the Pharisaical humor they have been so much abandoned to, namely, of their
own dispensing with Moral and Eternal Duties, and such as I have referred to in
Ames and Sanderson, and things in their own nature indispensable, and which are
the weightier Matters of the Law, while they cry out of the dispensing with
Positive Rites and Institutions as illegal.


A. There is another punishment too that I think we may well agree to leave
them to, and that is what Grotius cite, out of Plato, viz. poena errantis est
doceri, but we must submit that to time; and when God pleases, the heart of
the rash shall understand knowledge. And in the mean while, to the noise of
such People who wilfully shut their eyes, we will stop our ears. You may well
suppose me, who have read that Report of Sir I. Vaughan, lawyer enough to
assert and defend according to my oath the Regal privilege of the Dispensative
power in General: but as to the modus of it, and whether according to the lex
terrae the Crown can dispense with incapacity incurred by Act of Parliament, I
am yet to learn: and am so solicitous to find out the truth therein, that I
shall be glad if at our next meeting you will take the shortest way to my
satisfaction therein, tho it may perhaps occasion your for a while striking out
of the road of the former discourse we were in.


B. You know we had made some entrance into the consideration of the promissory
part of the Oath, and of the Dispensative power, as promised to be assisted and
defended, and as a Privilege inherent in the Crown. But since you will have me
take the shortest way I can out of the words in your Oath, to satisfy you about
the dispensing with such incapacity as you have mentioned, I must in compliance
with your desire refer you to the Assertory part of the Oath, when we meet
again.


To the Right Honorable the Lord Marquess of Powys, one of the Lords of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
I Having in p. 57, 58, 59. of the following Second Part occasionally dilated
on the Common Place or Notion of Heaven having so often made so much use of the
weight of one man in the balance of Government, I esteemed my dedicating this
Part of my Work to your Lordship but common Justice to your Character, who have
been the happy Instrument of God and the King in making so many Englishmen
happy.

My Lord, It is but natural when the Just are in Authority, for the People to
rejoice (as Solomon tells us) and for them likewise to anticipate the Honors
of the Prince's affording to a Person heroically just, by wishing them. And
this is most properly applicable to your Lordship; and that in your Case may be
said what Pliny in his Panegyric mentions of Nerva's adopting Trajan, That it
was impossible it should have pleased all when it was done, except it had
pleased all before it was done.

My Lord, It was Nature that prompted them to presage with Pleasure the Profit
that would come to them from the accessions of Honor to you, and whereby they
knew that the height of your Power would be naturally productive of Blessings
to them as the height of Hills and Mountains is of Springs for the benefit of
the lower Earth, and of those who inhabit it, and which are found wanting in
Countries where there are no Hills. And the Ancient placing of the Statues of
Magistrates by Fountains, may be supposed to have been an indication of the
Peoples valuing them as the Causers of what did console and refresh them.

My Lord, when I consider how much your Lordship and other just Persons of the
Roman Catholic Communion have in the performance of the moral Offices of
Natural Obedience to your Prince obliged so many of his Subjects by your being
helpful to them against Oppressions in their Estates and Consciences, I hope I
shall not appear too sanguine in my Conjecture of any ferment soon naturally
ceasing about the exercise of the Dispensative Power being a gravamen to
Property.

My Lord, I shall in the former of the two remaining Parts of this my Work (and
which are both ready for the Press) entertain your Lordship with such a farther
Assertion of those offices of that Obedience called Natural, as I believe will
give no offense to any Zealot, or Patriot, and as I have hitherto took care to
give none to either: For tho I think it not deniable that our Princes may by
their Laws limit the exercise of that Allegiance or Obedience, with respect to
Circumstances, yet as no Humane Laws can legitimate the entire withdrawing of
any part of the Obedience enjoined by the Divine Law natural or positive, so
how our Lex ^rrae has not limited the exercise of the Regal Power from the
Dispensing with Disability, as in the Case now so much agitated, I have shown,
and shall further. But I conceive it here necessary for me to acquaint your
Lordship that I have been often put to it as speaking cum vulgo and grosso
modo, and for brevity's sake to use the aforesaid Expression of Dispensing with
Disability, and with Disability incurred by Act of Parliament, that is, with
what is generally enacted to be incurred, and SEEMS to be alike incurred by all
Persons who perform not what the Act enjoins; and which Dispensing with
Disability is frequently used in popular discourse for the pardoning it, and
for the liberatio a poena, and as the Lord Chief Justice Vaughan's Report by me
so much cited mentions dispensing to have been defined by some of the Judges.
But to a judgment so vastly comprehensive and profoundly penetrating as your
Lordships, the dispensing with Disability must easily appear to be properly
meant of the preventing it, and the dispensing with what might Cause it
(according to the style of Queen Elizabeth's Letters Patents) or effect the
actual incurring of what will revera be incurred by the Persons not exempted by
Dispensation from the doing what the Law enjoins: and which will be made to
appear obvious to every man's understanding in one of the following Parts, and
wherein I shall have occasion to speak less cum vulgo and more closely and
accurately of the Nature of Dispensing, and of its effects in either forum,
then yet I have had.

And now having Named that Great Queen, I shall not doubt but since the Members
of the Church of England do now under our most puissant and most just Monarch
find themselves as secure in the Profession of the Religion by Law established
as they did in her great and glorious Reign, it will upon recollection of
thought appear as natural to them to hold themselves obliged to show the same
tenderness for every branch of Prerogative, and particularly for that of the
Dispensative Power, that was then so remarkable in Parliament, and throughout
the Realm.

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Obedient Servant, P. P.

PART II.
B. I again bid you welcome, and am ready to go on where we last left off, and
do not in the least doubt of your welcoming any thing I can say to you that may
import you to know in order to your sworn assistance and defense of every
Privilege belonging to the Crown. And I shall frankly tell you, that you and
other Protestants who in a late Conjuncture did show a more then ordinary zeal
against Popery or Papal Usurpations, ought to consider that you have thereby
put your selves under an especial Obligation of tenderness ^for all the rights
of your Prince, and of hating all popular Usurpations or diminutions thereof,
with an exemplary and most perfect hatred, and of thereby avoiding the being
judged hypocrites and factious.


A. I do herein most fully agree with you: and that the late zeal of the same
Persons against papal Usurpations, and for popular ones was a scandal to the
Age. I remember you once observed to me, how tender the Protestants in the
times of Queen Elizabeth and King James the first, were of every Right and
Privilege of the Crown with the most perfect tenderness, while the Attaques
from the Court of Rome against those Princes had made the highest Ferment in
the minds of the Populace. But I think there never was any Conjuncture of time
here, when so many of the declaimers against Popery, and so many of the fautors
of Plot-witnesses were so much at the same time for a Plot and no Plot, and for
a King and no King; that is to say, did so much make a stalking-horse of
Popery, whereby to strike at Prerogative.


B. But you know that the talk of Plots and Popery was before applied to that
use. You know Archbishop Laud in his Star Chamber Speech* A 1637. mentions it
p. 11. as the scope of the Libellers of the Faction to kindle a jealousy in
Men's minds, that there were some great Plots in hand to change the Religion
established, and to bring in (I know not what) Romish Superstition. And the
history of those times shows you how the Men that cried up Plots then did
decry Prerogative. And in the Conjuncture of 41. the famous Protestation of May
the 5th that year, begins with Outcries of Designs of Popish Priests and
Jesuits and other Papists and their PLOTS and CONSPIRACIES, and the Preface of
the Covenant runs on in the style of ^loody Plots and Conspiracies: But you
likewise know the dismal state of Prerogative in those times then occasioned by
raising of those false Alarms of Plots.

And I may account it as a beneficial Providence to the Age, that shortly after
our last Plot-Epoche, Mr. Hobbs his History of the Civil-Wars coming first out
in print through the License of the Press (and having been reserved to the
detecting then the artifices of the Demagogues that produced the Usurpations
between the Years 1640. and 1660.) the Book notwithstanding all the prejudice
against the Author (whether just or unjust) being writ with so much strength
and beauty of Wit, as to make it fly like lightning round the Kingdom in so
many Impressions, did then prove to many ingenious and thinking Men an
effectual Antidote against the poisons of those old Artifices then again
scatter'din the Press, being so destructive to Loyalty as heretofore.

Sir John Davis in his Report of the Case of praemunire Hill. 4. Iacobi does but
right to the loyalty of Roman Catholics and to the genius of the People of
England when he says there, That the Commons of England may be an example to
all other Subjects in the World, in this, that they have ever been TENDER and
sensible of the wrongs and dishonours offered to their Kings, and have ever
contended to upheld and maintain their Honor and Sovereignty. And their Faith
and Loyalty has been generally such (tho every Age has brought forth some
particular M^nsters of disloyal^y) as no pretense of Zeal of Religion could
ever withdraw the greater part of the Subjects of submit themselves to a
foreign yoke; no, not when Popery was in its height and exaltation.

It is therefore no marvel that toward the latter end of the Reign of the late
King, the very Mobile who had been so zealous against papal usurpations, and so
fiery in charging ALL Papists with disloyalty, did upon their discovery of the
artifices of republican deluders to put an inglorious domestic yoke on the
Monarchy, then think themselves obliged by the universality of their loyal
addresses to show the more extraordinary zeal against any Popular Usurpations.
And so I account it but natural to you who are made e meliore luto, to be ready
to show your most consummate zeal for every Privilege of the Crown.


A. It is not possible for any Man to wish me more sensible of my obligation in
this point then I really am: and the rather for that I find so many men's
loyalty to be but a kind of loud noisy nothing, or a metaphysical universale,
however they may ^ansie it to be a real being: but what I know cannot exist a
part from the particular Rights and Privileges belonging to the Crown being
assisted and defended, and from a serious endeavor to understand the truth
about their belonging to it. And my solicitousness to find out which in the
shortest way possible and particularly as to the Privilege of discharging
incapacity or disability incurred by Act of Parliament, (as I told you at our
last meeting) engaged me to divert you out of the course of your method, and
whereupon you told me you would refer my thoughts to the Assertory part of the
Oath.


B. Well: what ever damps I may see on English Men's loyalty, or degeneracy from
its nature by the arts of faction a while perverting them not to assist and
defend this or that Privilege of the Crown, I shall never despair of their
coming again to themselves: and that tho as in a vessel of Water and Oil, while
any one is shaking it, the Water may overtop the Oil, so likewise in their
minds while shaken and stirred by Demagogues the Oil of the Lord's anointed is
not there uppermost; yet that through its own nature, and through the English
good nature and their natural addiction to Religion, it will in time naturally
appear to be so.

And now to go on without further prefacing on either side, what if I should
tell you that it imports you to consider, that in in the Assertory part of the
Oath of Supremacy, you have declared and asserted that authority, as due to the
King that was challenged and used by king Henry the 8th and Edward the 6th,
that is, that the King under God, has the Sovereignty and Rule over all manner
of Persons born within these his Realms of what Estate either Ecclesiastical or
Temporal so ever, so as no other foreign Power, shall or ought to have any
superiority over them?


A. I would then tell you, that you have mentioned some things to be in this
Oath, that I remember not to be there.


B. I grant that I mentioned to you somethings that are not expressed in the
Oath, and in the form of it as it is administered, and was enacted 1 Eliz. c. 1.
and by which Act the refusers of such Oath are punished with DISABILITY to bear
Office. But in the same year in which that Act passed, Queen Elizabeth in an
ADMONITION annexed to her Injunctions, thought fit to exercise her Royal
authority of the Interpretation or Declaration of the sense of that Oath
enjoined by Act of Parliament; and in that Admonition you will find those words
that you remember not in the Oath you took: as likewise her ACQUITTAL of all
Persons from all manner of Penalties, and consequently of disability, who took
the Oath according to the sense of it published in her Interpretation. And if
you consult the Act, you will see that the disabilities inflicted in the Act on
the refusers of the Oath are various. And thus then you see, that as soon as
you have done taking the Oath, you are immediately called on by your Conscience
to defend the Privilege and preeminence of your Prince, viz. of interpreting
his Laws, and of discharging the disabilities thereby inflicted.


A. I now remember that I have read that Admonition of the Queens; but I
account Proclamations, Injunctions, and Admonitions of Princes to be but
temporary Laws, and that therefore this Interpretation of the Queen's and her
discharging of Disabilities expired with her Reign.


B. To obviate such thought, I shall tell you that in the Act of the 5th of
Queen Elizabeth, c. 1. and by which the Refusal of the Oath of Supremacy is
punished more severely then by the beforementioned disability, viz. by
Proemunire for the first Refusal, and by making it Treason for some Persons to
refuse it a second time (but Penalties that none ever doubted but the Crown
might by its Pardon discharge) there is a Proviso that the Oath (viz. of
Supremacy) expressed in the said Act made in the said first year, shall be
takeu and expounded in such form as is set forth in an Admonition annexd to the
Queens Majesty's Injunctions Published in the first year of her Reign, that is
to say to confess and acknowledge in her Majesty, her Heirs and Successors,
none other Authority then was challenged, and lately used by the Noble King
Henry the Eighth, and King Edward the Sixth, as in the said Admonition may more
plainly appear. And this too lets you see that the Parliament by thus referring
to the Queen's Admonition did approve of her Power therein exercised, and of
her having acquitted her Subjects from the Punishment of disability.


A. I must then, I see, fairly grant you that by that Parliament's having thus
perpetuated the interpretation of the Oath of Supremacy contained in Queen
Elizabeth' s Admonition, I am bound in Conscience to take it in that sense, and
am perjured if I do not so keep that Oath; and must likewise grant that you
have shown how auspicious that Oath by the Queens interpreting the same, and
the Parliament about five years after approving that Interpretation, was to the
Assertion of such her Power; and that if any taker of the Oath should gainsay
such Power, you have prepared such a Confutation in the case as was used to the
old Philosopher who disputed against Motion, and whom his Adversary confuted by
removing him from his place. But as you are a fair arguer, I am to take leave
to tell you, That that Parliament, tho they approved the Queen's Admonition in
general, did not particularly show their Approbation of the Queen's Power of
dispensing with the Penalties that she exercised in that Admonition.


B. They did sufficiently show their Approbation of the whole; and therefore
you need not question their approving of its parts. But because you seem to lay
some stress on that Parliament's not expressly approving in terminis the Queen's
Power of discharging the Penalties (and one of which by the Act of 1o
Elizabethoe was disability) I shall tell you that whereas Queen Elizabeth had
thought it expedient for the Supporting of the Consecration of the Bishops of
the Church of England to dispense with whatever might cause Disability,
according to her Supreme Authority, by her Letters Patents, the very same
Parliament at their next Session did 8o Elizabethoe, c. 1. in terminis
terminantibus declare their Approbations of the Queens dispensing with
disability by those Letters Patents: for it having been in that Statute
mentioned, that for the avoiding of all Ambiguities and Questions that might be
objected against the lawful Confirmations, investings and Consecrations of the
said Archbishops and Bishops, her Highness in her Letters Patents under the
Great Seal of England, etc. has used and put in her said Letters Patents
diverse other general words and Sentences, whereby her Highness by her Supreme
Power and Authority has DISPENSED with all Causes or doubts of any
Imperfection or DISABILITY that can or may in any wise be objected against the
same, etc. it follows, That all Acts and things heretofore had, made or done by
any Person about any Consecration, Confirmation or Investing of any Person
elected to the Office or Dignity of any Archbishop or Bishop, etc. by Uirtue of
the Queens Majesty's Letters Patents or Commission, etc. be and shall be by
Authority of this present Parliament declared, judged and deemed at and from
every of the several times of the doing thereof good and perfect to all
respects and purposes: any matter or thing that can or may be objected to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Sir E. Cook in the 4th part of his Iustitutes. c. 74. viz. Of Ecclesiastical
Courts, takes notice how our adversaries had made objections against our
Archbishops and Bishops consecrated about the beginning of the reign of Queen
Eliz. and consequently against the Bishops ever since: That they were never
consecrated according to law, because they had not three Bishops at least at
their Consecration, and never a Bishop at all, as was pretended, because they
being Bishops in the reign of Edward the 6th were deprived in the reign of
Queen Mary, and were not (as was pretended) restored before their presence at
the Consecration. These pretenses being but Cavils are answered by the Statute
of 8o Eliz. c. 1. and provision made by authority of that Parliament, for the
establishing of Archbishops and Bishops, both in proesenti and in futuro in
their Bishoprics.

But Mason in his 3d Book c. 7th. De ministerio Anglicano, in his answering the
objection, has recourse to the Queens Patents referred to by the Statute of 8o
Eliz. and having mentioned the Queen's dispensing by her supreme authority cum
quavis causa aut suspicione c^jusvis DEFECTUS, aut INABILITATIS quoe quovis
modo contra eorum consecrationem obtendi poterat, he says, verba in diplomate
Regio sic se habent, supplentes nihilominus suprema authoritate nostra Regia ex
mero motu and certa scientia nostris, si quid in hiis quae juxta mandatum
nostrum per vos fient, aut in vobis aut vestrum aliquo, condition, statu, aut
facultate vestris ad praemissa perficienda desit, aut deerit, eorum quae per
statuta hujus Regni, aut per leges ecclesiasticas in hac part requiruntur, aut
necessaria sunt, temporis ratione aut rerum necessitate sic postulante: and
then adds, unde serenissima Regina ut omnem calumniandi ansam proecidere,
ipsique invidioeos obstruere posset, etc. DISPENSARE dignata est, siquid forte
Lynceis oculis invidia, alicujus statuti vel canonis violati proetextu possit
obtendere. And then having brought in his Popish opponents objection, Hem quid
audio? Vos P^ntificis maximi Dispensationes dente canino soletis arrodere, and
jam nihil pudet in Actis Parliamentariis laicali magistratui, Reginoe, foeminoe
dispensandi facultatem transcribere? Dispensandi inquam cum quavis causa aut
suspicione ullius defectus aut INABILITATIS, quoe incidere poterant, idque in
sacris ordinibus, he makes this reply, viz. Papa aliquando dispensat nimium
papaliter, sed non perinde Elizabetha. Suas tantum leges RELAXAVIT: Cum
transgressionibus contra leges suas DISPENSAVIT. Quod Deus fixit nunquam
refigere, aut rescindere est molita. And there afterward to the objection; si
dicatur Reginam sufficientem dispensandi cum illis potestatem habuisse,
proferatur aliquod illius potestatis fundamentum, ^i non ex scriptura sacra,
saltem ex Conciliis aut patribus, aut uno aliquo approbato exemplo, in toto
mill and quingentorum annorum curricu^o, the reply is, Nonne Principis est
legum suarum r^gorem res ubi postulat emollire? Non magno opinor opus est
m^limine ad hoc probandum: and as to what was objected against a Prince's
dispensing with an ecclesiastical Canon, he says, Canonum (quatenus sunt leges
Principis ecclesiasticoe) summum jus, rigorem, and duritiem moderari spectat ad
officium principis. And then he judiciously confutes Sanders his reproaching
our Bishops in his book of Schism, with the term of Parliamentarii episcopi,
and he referrs to the words in the Statute of 8o Eliz. that I have mentioned to
you, and says of them, Omnino liquido ostendunt Comitia Parliamentaria non
consecrasse, ordinasse, vel constituisse episcopos aut ministros, sed jam
secundum leges ecclesioe LEGITIME Consecra^os, and rite ordinatos, ac
Constitutos, pro talibus habendos esse DECLARASSE, etc.

And so I doubt not but you mind the words in that Act relating to the Queen's
Letters Patents, viz. shall be by authority of the Parliament (not made good,
for they were so before, but) declared, judged and deemed good.


A. I apprehend you.


B. But to return to the Consideration of what you are on the whole matter
obliged to by virtue of the Oath of Supremacy in the Case now before you: and
herein I find that by Virtue of the Queens interpretation of that Oath, and the
Parliaments Approbation thereof, that when in the Assertory part of the Oath
you do utterly testify and declare in your Conscience that the King's Highness
is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm as well in all Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical things or Causes as Temporal, you have as in the Presence of God
solemnly given your cordial Assent to, and made your most Religious
acknowledgment that the SOLE Supreme Government or Sovereignty and Rule under
God over all manner of Persons born within these Realms, is in the King; and
you are obliged to judge that tho the Oath speaks of all Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical THINGS or Causes, and the interpretation of all manner of
Persons of what Estate either Ecclesiastical or Temporal soever they be, yet
there is no inconsistence between the Oath and the Interpretation, for that as
a Learned man in his Comment on that Oath has well observed, there is no
Opposition between these two, Persons and Causes; the Principal object of a Law
is a Person, and a Person with respect to his Actions, a Person morally
Considered; and he there quotes Suarez de Legibus, l. 1. c. 8. saying, Ad leges
per se requiritur potestas in personam, secundario in Res alias: and for that
the Assertory clause in the Oath declaring the King the only Supreme Governor
of this Realm, does necessarily imply his being the only Supreme Governor of
all Persons in it.


A. But perhaps you did not take notice that probably one reason why Queen
Elizabeth was willing that her Interpretation that related to the Assertory
part of the Oath, I mean as to her Power over all the Persons of her Subjects,
and which was Published in the Admonition after her Injunctions, should in the
aforesaid Act in the 5th year of her Reign be approved in Parliament, might be
to satisfy the scrupulousness of some men's Tender Consciences, and who might
thereby think that according to the Rule of ejus est interpretari cujus est
condere, that the Oath of Supremacy enjoined by Parliament 1o Elizabethoe could
not receive an Interpretation but from the Queen in Parliament, and that that
Consideration might therefore be supposed to be the cause of the Queens
interpreting, being approved or declared good by the Parliament in the Fifth
year of her Reign.


B. I shall tell you that as to the sufficiency of the Queen's Power to
interpret the Oath by her sole Authority, it appears not that the Proviso in
the Statute of 5 Eliz. did in the least arise from any such scruple, and so De
non apparentibus, etc. And here without troubling you with the Notions of the
Royal assent creating the Soul of the Law, and by the words of le Roy le veult*
after the Body of it has been prepared by the three Estates and that the three
Estates have nothing to do to interpret a Law that is once made, and
accordingly as Sir C. Hatton, formerly Lord Chancellor of England, in his
Treatise of Acts of Parliament and their Exposition, tells us, That the
Assembly of Parliament being ended, functi sunt officio, and speaking
particularly of those of the Lower House, says their Authority is returned to
the Electors so clearly, that if they were all together assembled again for
interpretation by a voluntary meeting, eorum non esset interpretari, etc. I
shall once for all observe to you, that our Monarchs when in the exercise of
the Prerogative inherent in them, and inseparable from them, relating to
Matters of Peace and War, the Coining of Money, or the Dispensing in Matters
Civil or Ecclesiastical, they condescend to have the same in particular ^ases
approved or strength^n'd by Parliament, are no more deprived of their Sole
Supremacy therein, then the Body of the Sun is divested of its Heat and Light
by diffusing the same through the Air.

But I have before observed to you, that the apparent Cause in the Proviso of
5o Elizabethoe, whereby the Queens Interpretation is Enacted, is the better to
transmit the obligatoriness of the Interpretation in point of Conscience beyond
her Life, and to the Reigns of her Heirs and Successors, and to bind us who
live now to acknowledge such Power due to our present King over the Persons of
all his Subjects, as was in her interpretation challenged to be due to Harry
the Eighth and Edward the Sixth.

I shall not trouble you with my Judgment about Moot-points of Law relating to
the Regal Power of interpreting Acts of Parliament, and particularly such
wherein Oaths are founded. My Lord Coke, Inst. 3. c. 74. tells us, That an Oath
cannot be ministered to any, unless the same be allowed by the Common Law, or by
some Act of Parliament: neither can any Oath allowed by the Common Law, or by
Act of Parliament, be altered but by Act of Parliament: and says in the
Margin, So resolved, An. 26. El. in the Case of the Undersheriff. And then
says the Oath of the King's Privy Council, the Justices, the Sheriffs, etc.
was thought fit to be altered and enlarged, but that was done by Authority of
Parliament. For further proof whereof see the Statutes here quoted (i. e. those
referred to in his Margin) and it shall evidently appear that no old Oath can
be altered or new Oath raised without an Act of Parliament.

I have only here referred you to Matters of Fact in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, a Reign that the Royal Martyr in p. 3. of his Declaration to all his
Loving Subjects of Aug. 12. 1642. refers to with so much honor by saying, We
declared our Resolution, etc. and desired that whatsoever mistaking had grown
in the Government either of Church or State might be removed, and all things
reduced to the order of the time (the memory whereof is justly precious to this
Nation) of Queen Elizabeth, etc. and do leave it to you to consider how Great
the Power of Interpretation of Laws is in it self; a Power almost infinitely
greater then the discharging either the Obligations of some Penal Laws or their
Penalties Pro hic and nu c, and as to some particular Persons, as any one will
grant who has seen the extent of the Power of interpreting in the Canon Law,
where the Glossa ad Cap. Statuimus 4. Distinct. 4. gives us this Interpretation
of Statuimus: STATUIMUS (i. e.) ABROGAMUS. And I can for this purpose t^ll you,
that Bartol^s in his Tractatus testimoniorum speaking of the Imperial Power
concedendi veniam oetatis, says Carolus quar^us sanctissimus and nebilissimus
Imperator inter (...) mult^ concessit, ut ego meique descendentes quos legibus
d^los esse contigerit, per un versum imperium oetatis ven^am concedere
vale^mus, servata^ forma^ quoe legibus reperitur ins^rta; and whereby you see
that a Power of dispensing with incapaci^y, was by the Prince given as an
inheritance. But none can imagine that the Power of interpreting Laws can be so
conferred: So that therefore according to the Rule of Law, Non debet cui plus
licet, quo^d minus est non licere, you ne^d not w^nder at the Prince's
dispensing with incapacity in particular cases, whom you have seen interpreting
Laws. And you may consider that if the Queen did contrary to the measures of
Law referred to in my Lord Coke, by her sole Supreme Ecclesiastical Authority,
seem to alter the interpretation of a Stature Oath for the better, what she did
found afterward its approbation in Parliament: and in fine; I leave it to you
to consider how much the Power of dispensing with any Law may be thought
Coincident with interpreting, since as I shall some other time show you at
large that the dispensing with Laws, is in effect the equitable interpreting
that in such and such cases and circumstances they were not intended, and ought
not to bind, but ought to be relaxed.

And now I must take the occasion offered me to give you a prospect of the
Queens Dispensative Power, both of the Interpretation of this Oath, and of the
acquittal from Disabilities that is not bounded by the Statutes of 5o or 8o
Elizabethoe beforementioned, and wherein she again stood on the single basis of
her own Supreme Authority Ecclesiastical, without having recourse then to a
Parliaments approbation. Mr. Ney in his learned Observations on the Oath of
S^premacy* having spoke of the Queens Interpretation of the Oath in her
Admonition, and of the Parliamentary Proviso 5o Eliz. does thus go on, There is
something of Explication further (meaning of the Oath) in the Arti^les of
Religion concluded in the year 1562, and then recites the 37th Article as
follows, viz. The Queens Majesty has the Chief Power in this Realm of
England, and other her Dominions, unto whom the Chief Government of (...)
Estates of this Realm, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil in all Causes
does appertain, and is not nor ought to be subject to any foreign Jurisdiction.
Where we attribute to her Majesty the Chief Government, by which Title we
understand the minds of some slanderous Folks to be offended, we give not to
our Princes the ministering either of Gods Word, or of the Sacraments, the which
thing the Injunctions also lately set forth by Elizabeth our Queen do most
plainly testify, but that only Prerogative which we see to have been given
always to all Godly Princes in holy Scriptures by God himself, that is, that
they should rule all Estates and Degrees committed to their charge by God,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword
the stubborn and evil doers.

The Bishop of Rome has no jurisdiction in the Realm of England.

The Laws of the Realm may punish Christian Men with death, for h^inous and
grievous Offenses.

It is lawful for Christian Men at the Commandment of the Magistrate to wear
Weapons, and serve in the Wars.

Now after the Oath of Supremacy had been enjoined in the first year of her
Reign, and the Admonition annexed to her Injunctions was then likewise
published, viz. A. D. 1559. and after the Parliament had by proviso (...) the
interpretation of the Oath, (which Parliament began the 12th of January in the
5th year of her reign, and from which day all things d^ne in that Session are
to bear date) the Articles of Religion agreed on by the Archbishops and Bishops
of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden at London in
the 5th year of her reign, and A. D. 1562. were by the Archbishops and Bishops
of both Provinces subscribed the 29th of January in that year, and by the
Clergy of the lower House of Convocation on the 5th of February following, and
to all which the Queen gave her Royal Assent. And in the Articles there was by
the Queens Royal Prerogative an additional Interpretation probably at the
instance of the Clergy given to the interpretation, in the Admonition* and in
the Parliaments Proviso: and the which additional interpretation had in it no
respect to, nor mention of what, being in several places of the former one,
might amuse the Clergy with some Fears and Iealousies, namely the Duty,
Allegiance and Bond that were acknowledged due to Harry the 8th and Edward the
6th, and the Authority that was challenged and lately used by those Princes;
however yet that latter Clause is qualified in the Admonition. But for the 37th
Article beforementioned allowing the measures of the Royal Supremacy from the
Prerogatives given by God in Scripture to holy Princes, whereby our Clergy
might seem to have brought the Prerogative into its own proper Element, and
theirs too (the knowledge of the Scriptures being their profession) our Clergy
no doubt were always thankful to the Crowns Dispensative power, and so
exercised out of Parliament: and whereby they were secured from penal
disabilities either by suspension or deprivation for not taking the Oath in the
sense of the Admonition.

Thus as things in their proper place are at rest, the Queens Dispensative
power and the Consciences of the Clergy by this interpretation of the Oath were
so much at rest, that about eight or nine years afterward the same 39 Articles
that had been by the Archbishops and Bishops and Clergy of both Provinces
agreed on in the year 1562. were by the said Archbishops, Bishops and Clergy
again agreed upon, and again ratified by the Queen in the year 1571. the 13th
year of her reign, and when care was taken by the Government that that
interpretation being incorporated in the body of the 39 Articles should be
deemed good in Parliament by the Statute of 13o Eliz. c. 12. as the other
interpretation in the Admonition had been by the proviso in the Act of the 5th
of that Queen, and probably for the same reason: and as her dispensing with
disability expressly in the 8th year of her reign was.

In the Act of the 13th of Eliz. reference was made to those Articles as agreed
on by the Archbishops and Clergy and set forth by the Queens authority Anno
1562. and the Act is entitled, Reformation of Disorders in the Ministers of
the Church, and in which it was enacted, That all such as were to be ordained
or permitted to preach or to be instituted into any Benefice with cure of
Souls, should publicly subscribe to the said Articles; which shows (if you
mind it) that tho the Parliament did well allow and approve of the said
Articles, yet the said Book owes neither Conf^rmation, nor Authority to the
Act of Parliament. And that Act concerning only Clergymen, tho the
interpretation in the 37th Article is left to oblige the Clergy, yet that in
the Admonition might concern you to stick to, if nothing had since happened
whereby the dispensative power inherent in the Crown, may have given your
Conscience the benefit of the interpretation thus afforded to the Clergy.

But therefore I shall here tell you, that the Canons of King James the ^st.
Anno 1603* being confirmed for him and his Heirs and Successors are binding
now, however it has been objected as the unhappiness of Queen Elizabeth's
Canon^, viz. A. 1571. A. 1584. A. 1597. wanting those formal words of Heirs and
Successors, to expire with her. And as those words are in King James's Canons
so are the words of enjoining their being observed, fu^fill'd and kept not only
by the Clergy, but by all other Persons within this Realm as far as lawfully,
being Members of the Church it may concern them: and tho in the first Canon
there entitled, The King's Supremacy over the Church of England in Causes
Ecclesiastical to be maintained, it is ordered, That all Ecclesiastical Persons
shall keep and observe, and as much as in them lies, all and singular Laws and
Statutes made for the restoring to the Crown of this Kingdom, its ancient
Jurisdiction over the state Eccl^siastical, yet in the next Canon entitled,
Impugners of the King's Supremacy censur^d, the measures of the King's
ecclesiastical Authority being taken from the Godly Kings among the Jews
according to the 37th of the 39 Articles, was an extending to the Layety the
ben fit of the Interpretation obtained by the Clergy, the which was in effect a
judgment of the Convocations, that the pursuance of that Interpretation of the
King's Ecclesiastical Power, and the avoiding of the punishment of Disability
by the use of that Power, was not aga^st the Law of the Land: but the 5th
Canon, viz. Impugners of the Arti^les of Religion established in the Church of
England censured, and in which the establishment of the 39 Articles is solely
referred to them, as agreed on in Convocation in the year 1562. without any
notice of the Parliament of the 13th of Eliz. having done any thing about them,
does more clearly secure to you the benefit of the Interpretation the Clergy
had.


A. You have mentioned so many things to me relating to the interpretation of
the Oath of Supremacy which I never knew before, that may seem to perplex the
Conscience of any one who would take it, and to expose it to such a kind of
Ordeale-Purgation per ferrum candens, that may make the passage through it
dangerous to Ones Conscience.


B. Look you to that who have taken the Oath, and do you consider how far you
are by the Interpretations that I have referred you to, obliged to take your
measures in the Matter that lies now before you, as to your assisting and
defending the Prerogative of the Dispensative Power: and I likewise recommend
it to you to observe how much to the satisfaction and ease of the minds of the
generality His Majesty's Lay-Subjects, he by Connivence has dispensed with
their not troubling themselves to study the Duty, Bond, or Allegian^e that was
acknowledged to be due to Henry the 8th, or Edward the 6th, or the Prerogative
given by God to Godly Princes in the Scripture, or the Christian Emperors in
the Primitive times: for however our Divines are by the 39 Articles and the
Canons of King James, and King Charles the First particularly obliged to study
these Points, and that the knowledge of the same may oblige Men of learning and
leisure among the Layety to Conduct their Consciences thereby in their
observance of this Oath, yet His Majesty's not reviving among all his Subjects
by any Proclamation or Ecclesiastical Injunction or otherwise, the notices of
these forgotten things, cannot but be acceptable to the generality of them as a
Dispensation by Connivence. And therefore in Complaisance with, and gratitude
to him, they are by the Law of Nature bound to give him what is plainly his
Due, according to the plain Oath tendered to and taken by them, and to take
care that they do not exercise an Illegal Power of dispensing by way of
Interpretation of that Oath to the Subversion of the sense of the Assertory and
Promissory parts of it; both which are the Supporters of the Royal Dispensative
Power.

But reserving for some other time my thoughts relating to the Dispensative
Power exercised by the Godly Princes in Holy Scripture, and by the Christian
Emperors, I shall desire you now to look on your Oath in the plain natural
sense of it, and as much as if no authoritative one had ever been given of it.
Consider, that when you declare the King is the only Supreme Governor of this
Realm, or Governor of all Persons in it, no Humane Laws can bind our
Consciences by any disability Penal incurred from serving him. When Kings say
there is a Necessity for our Service, St. Paul has said, we must needs be
subject to them; and which as Grotius has well observed, implies Obedience to
their Commands as well as Submission to their Coercion.

As Dr. Done in his Pseudo-Martyr observed well concerning the Oath of
Allegiance, All the Substance of the Oath is virtually contained in the first
Proposition, That King James IS lawful King of all these Dominions, the rest
are but Declarations and Branches naturally and necessarily proceeding from
that root, the same as to the Point we are upon may be verified of the Oath of
Supremacy, The King's Highness IS the only Supreme Governor of this Realm (not
shall be by virtue of this Act) IS SO notwithstanding any thing that has been
done, or is a doing, and whereby any former Princes supposed de facto
consenting to tie up his hands from Governing all his Subjects, and ranging
them in their Stations in his Service, is out of the Case of your Oath, who
have sworn thus, that King James the Second IS the only Supreme Governor, etc.

Since therefore you have in your Oath acknowledged that the King is the only
Supreme Governor, and that according to the 37th Article of the Church of
England, He HAS the rule of all Estates and Degrees committed to his charge BY
GOD, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, I will ask you, if any Humane Law
can disable any Persons from being governed by him, more then it can Children
from honoring their Parents. According to those words in Malachi, If then I be
a Father, where is my honor? and if I be a Master, where is my fear, etc. may
it not be said to every Subject, while the King IS your King, while he is your
only Supreme Governor, and while he is your Political Father, will you not be
Governed by him? Or in effect, will you Govern him by thinking to oblige him
not to employ this or the other Subject, and in effect endeavor both to
dishonor and disable him who is the Head of the Community (as it were) by loss
of Member? Will you dishonor him who bears the Sword by imposing on him your
belief that such a Member of the Body Politic is a gangrened one, and
necessary to be cut off from serving the State, when he tells you he knows
the contrary? Or will you dishonor his Religion by saying that Papists are
disabled by their Religion from being sound Members of the State, when he
knows they are not so disabled by it, and accordingly as Sir William Temple
has in his Excellent Observations on the Low Countries made it appear, that
the Papists there are a sound part of the State?

Remember that the words only Supreme, as applied to your King in the Assertory
part of your Oath are not Otiosa Epitheta. You will find that our great
Casuist, Bishop Sanderson in his Seventh Lecture of the Obligation of
Conscience lays so much stress on those words in your Oath Only Supreme
Governor, as to judge him PERJURED who having taken the Oath, shall assert the
Figment (as he calls it) of Coordinate Power. Quid enim PERIURIUM dici
mereatur, si hoc non sit manifestissimum PERIURIUM, quem solum esse Supremum in
suo regno Moderatorem, Conceptis verbis juraveris, ei parem etiam in suo regno
potestatem constituere and agnoscere.

If you did but often enough consider your Prince, as asserted in your Oath, to
be Governor of the Realm, you would find in your thoughts no difficulty of
allowing him the Power of Commanding all Persons in it without exception to
serve him. Bishop Bilson in his Book of Supremacy, p. 238. says, Though
Bishops may be called Governors in respect of the Soul, yet only Princes are
Governors of Realms. Pastors have Flocks, and Bishops have Diocesses; Realms
and Dominions none have but Princes, etc. and so the style of Governor of this
Realm belongs only to the Prince, and not to the Priest, and imports a Public
and Princely regiment. And here I shall take occasion to tell you, that as the
Common Law, subjecting the Inhabitants of this Realm to the Government of
Bishops has not kept our Princes from exempting particular Persons and Bodies
Corporate from their Jurisdiction, but could not exempt them from being subject
to their Prince, and from obeying him, that much less could any Statute Law do
it.

It is upon the weight of reason that lies in this Assertory part of the Oath
that so many Writers of the Common Law have founded their Assertion of the
King's Power o^ Commanding the Service of all his Subjects, as essential to the
keeping up the Monarchy, (or the Rule of all Estates committed to him by God,
that I lately spoke of) and inseparable from it, no^ alienable by any Humane
Laws. It is the Supreme Power of our Princes as Governors of the Realm, that
has always entitled them to Press men for the Service of the Crown by Land or
Sea, and to recall both Soldiers and Mariners from the Service of Foreign
Princes upon emergent Occasions to serve their natural Liege Lord. And the Book
writ by a Learned Common Lawyer against the Exclusion, called, A Letter from a
Gentleman of Quality in the Country, etc. and Printed A. 1679. and so
deservedly extolled by the Judicious loyal, tells you in p. 7. and 8. that If
it should be enacted by Parliament that No man should honor the King, or love
his Parents or Children, etc. such an Act would be ipso facto void, because
contrary to the express Divine Command, etc. The Statute of 23 H. 6. c. 8. and
several other Statutes Enact, that no Man shall be Sheriff of any County above
one year, and that any Patent of the King to any Person for a longer term, tho
with an express Clause of Non-obstante shall be void and of none Effect, and
the Patentee perpetually disabled to bear the Office. And yet notwithstanding
it is Resolved by all the Judges of England, that these Acts of Parliament are
void: and that the King may by Non-obstante Constitute a Sheriff for Years,
Life, or Inheritance. And what is the Reason which the Judges give of this
Resolution? Why, because, say they, in express words, this Act of Parliament
cannot bar the King of the Service of his Subject, which the immutable Law of
Nature does give to him. For Obedience and Ligeance of the Subject, (add they)
is due to the Sovereign by the Law of Nature. See 2 Hen. 7. 6. v. Calvin's
Case, 14. a. in Coke's 7th Rep.

We know that by the Statute of 4o. H. 4. c. 5. it is ordained, That every
Sheriff of England shall abide in proper Person within his Bailywick, for the
time that he shall be such Officer. But this Act has never been construed to
hinder the King as Supreme Governor and Ruler of all Persons in the Realm from
Commanding any Sheriffs to serve him elsewhere during their Shrievalties: nor
on such case to oblige the Sheriffs in Conscience to observe the Statute by
such Personal residence.

Baker in the reign of King Charles the first tells us of an Information A.
1629. in the Star Chamber against Mr. Long, for that he being high Sheriff of
the County of Wilts, had the Charge and Custody thereof committed to him, and
had taken his Oath according to the Law to abide within his Bailys-wick all the
time of his Sheriff-wick, and his Trust and Employment requiring his personal
attendance therein, did contrary thereto suffer himself to be chosen a Citizen
for the City of Bath to serve in the last Parliament, and did attend at
Westminster in Parliament WITHOUT HIS MAJESTY'S LICENSE, he being Sheriff at
that time: and that for the forementioned Offenses and Breach of his Oath, and
neglect of his Trust, and Contempt of his Majesty, the Decree was, That he
should be Committed to the Tower during his Majesty's Pleasure, and pay a Fine
of 2000 Marks to the King. Hereby you see that his Majesty's LICENSE or
Dispensing with that Statute had indemnify'd him from it in the Court of Law;
and that the potestas Superioris being necessarily implied in a promissory
Oath, the King as supreme Governor of all Persons in his Realms, commanding or
allowing such Officers service to the public elsewhere, had secured him in
either forum.

The known Custom of the Speaker of the House of Commons DISABLING himself when
presented to the King, but of entering on his Charge on the King's approbation
and pleasure signified (according to that saying of Cu^ me posse negem quod tu
posse putes) may pass for some representation to our thoughts of Disability to
serve the public, then evaporating when the King as Governor of the Realm does
give the Subject a Call so to do. You may find this practice of the Speaker's
disabling himself set down in Coke 4. Inst. c. 1. And I shall here by the way
take notice that he there likewise mentions it that one of the Principal ends
of Calling of Parliaments is for the redress of the Mischiefs and Grievances
that daily happen. And he had there before said, Now forasmuch as diverse Laws
and Statutes have been enacted and provided for these ends aforesaid, and that
diverse Mischiefs in particular, and diverse Grievances in general concerning the
Honor and Safety of the King, the State and Defense of the Kingdom, and of the
Church of England might be prevented, an excellent Law was made Anno 36. E. 3.
which being applied to the said Writs of Parliament does in few and effectual
words set down the true subject of a Parliament in these words, For the
maintenance of the said Articles and Statutes, and redress of diverse Mischiefs
and Grievances which daily happen, a Parliament shall be holden every year, as
another time was Ordained by a Statute. Before the Conquest Parliaments were to
be holden twice every year, etc.

But accordingly as my Lord Coke there takes notice of the style of the Statute
of 36. E. 3. viz. to the Honor of God, and of holy Church and quietness of the
People, and according to the style of the Statute of 10. E. 3. Because our
Sovereign Lord the King Edw. 3. which Soverainly desires the maintenance of
the Peace and Safeguard of his People, etc. has Ordained, etc. for the
Quietness and Peace of his People, etc. and suitably to the style of the
Statute of 14o E. 3. 1. To the honor of God, etc. The King for Peace and
Quietness of his People as well great as small, does Grant and Establish the
things underwritten, etc. and to that of 20. E. 3. and for this Cause desiring
as much for the Pleasure of God, and Ease and Quietness of our Subjects, and
according to that style in the Register, Nos oppressiones, duritias, damna
excessus, and praedicta gravamina volentes relinquere impunita, volentesque
salvationi and QUIETI populi nostri in hac part prospicere ut tenemut, etc.
and according to the Trust committed to Princes by God to endeavor that their
Subjects may under them lead QUIET and Peaceable lives in all Godliness and
Honesty (and which is the great Fundamental reason of the Moral Obligation of
Princes to relax the Summum jus of their Laws by sometimes DISPENSING therein)
since we may easily imagine by our thinking of a late Conjuncture, how possible
it was that the Peace and Quietness of the People might be disturbed by the
Annual Calling of Parliaments, according to the tenor of those Laws; our
Princes as Supreme Governors of the Realm, did often dispense with their
observance.

The Author of the Book called The Long Parliament Dissolved, Printed in the
year 1676. refers to the Laws of 4o E. 3. c. 10. and 36. E. 3. c. 14. 5. E. 3.
No. 141. 5. E. 2. No. -- 1. R. 2. No. 95. as positively appointing the Meeting
of a Parliament once within a year. And the People (says he) have silently
waited and born the Omission of our Princes in not so Calling Parliaments: And
he further mentions how Queen Elizabeth Prorogued a Parliament for three days
more then a year: and he presumes to complain of His late Majesty's Proroguing
his long Parliament to above a years time as illegal, and he argues for that
Parliaments being disabled from Sitting and acting afterward as a Parliament,
by reason of such Prorogation as contrary to the aforesaid Laws, and which, he
says, were declared to be in force when the triennial Act was made in 16.
Caroli 1mi. and so likewise in the Statute for repealing that triennial Act in
16. Car. 2o. in these words, And because by the Ancient Laws and Statutes of
this Realm made in the Reign of King Edward the Third, Parliaments are to be
held very often, etc.

And how the Judgment of the House of Lords was assertive of the legality of
that Parliaments not being disabled from sitting after such His late Majesty's
Prorogation, is fresh in memory.

But to return from whence I digress'd, I may here take notice to you how our
Princes as Supreme Governors of the Realm, and as having the Rule of all
Persons committed to them by God (and to whom they stand accountable for the
same) have held themselves obliged further to dispense with disability incurred
by Acts of Parliament upon a Religionary account, and which they have done to
the general satisfaction of their Subjects of all Religions.


A: What do you here intend to refer to?


B. I do here intend to refer to the Statute of 3o Iacobi c. 5. by one Clause
in which Act Convict Recusants are DISABLED from practicing Physic, or bearing
any Office or Charge Military, and by which Clause every Person offending, is
to forfeit for every such Offense 100 l. and the one Moiety thereof to be to
the King, and the other Moiety to him that will sue for the same, etc. But
notwithstanding the Zeal of that Prince against Popery, he out of a tender
regard to the Bodies and Healths of his People, and the ennabling many learned
Roman Catholic Physicians to preserve them, did by Connivence sufficient^y
dispense with that Law; insomuch that it may be said, that that severe
disabling Law came on the Stage, but as Cato into the Theater, only to go off
again.

And I have elsewhere mentioned it, that a Book afterward Printed in his Reign,
called The Foot out of the Snare, sets down the Names of about Twenty five
famous Roman Catholic Physicians then Practicing in London, and the places of
their abodes, and whom yet (I believe) no Informer ever molested.

And notwithstanding the disability incurred by that Act of Parliament, I
account that an eminent Roman Catholic Physician not long since dead, was not
by any among our various Sects of Protestants in the Plot-times, envied the
liberty of being in our Metropolis the greatest Practicioner of that noble
Science. By the same Clause Roman Catholic Lawyers are likewise disabled from
Practice, and under the same Penalty; but who likewise enjoyed the same
Dispensation by Connivence with those of the other Profession, accordingly as
Mr. Nigh in his Book, called Beams of former Light observes, p. 146. viz. The
Law, Physic, Merchandise, etc. may be practiced by a Turk, or Jew, or Papist
here among us, etc.

How severe the Laws in being are against Roman Catholics of the other great
Profession, namely of Theology, and of the Clerical or^er officiating here, you
know. But you likewise know my opinion I discoursed to you of in the
Conjuncture of the Plot, and Panick fears; namely, that by virtue of the
Contents of the Assertory part of the Oath we are upon, even our Protestant
Kings as Supreme Governors of the Realm both in Matters Ecclesiastical and
Civil, and as having the Rule of all Persons committed to them by God, were
morally bound to see our Roman Catholic Countrymen, while living among us
here, provided with a Competent Priesthood, as Physicians for their Souls, and
to administer the Sacraments to them.


A. Yes, I remember you Discourse of that matter then, and how you mentioned
it; that if any Turks or Jews, or any Heterodox Religionaries desired to live
here without a Priesthood, the Prince as Guardian of both Tables, was obliged
by his Coercive Power to make them put their own Principles in practice by
their having a Competent Priesthood, and which all the Sects of the Mahumetan,
Paga^, Jewish and Christian Religion own it as their Principle to have: and
that as Religion was necessary to the State to make men good Subjects and ready
to serve their Prince, and just Dealers, a Priesthood was necessary to Religion.


B. You are not therefore to wonder at the Dispensation by Connivence so many
Roman Catholic Priests enjoyed here in the Reig^s of former Princes. And I
shall some other time tell you how our Laws that DISABLE Papists from bearing
Arms, were in the time of the Rebellion after A. 1640. necessarily dispensed
with by the Royal Martyr as Supreme Governor of the Realm; and that none of the
Church of England did look with an evil eye in the least on such disability,
being then dispensed with by Prerogative.


A. I suppose you may have heard it objected that by the Statute of 25. C. 2.
which has lately employed your thoughts, the Prerogative of the King is not
touched; for that the King may grant the Offices to any of his Subjects, and
that the Act is only a Direction to the Subject to qualify himself accordingly
for the King's Service, and that if he be incapable to serve the King, it is
through his own default, and he is punishable for the same, as happened in the
Case of one who was made Sheriff and neglected to take the Oaths: and that
there was an Opinion given in the Case that no Subject could put himself out of
a Capacity to serve the King, but for so doing he is punishable.


B. But the more you think of this Matter, you will find the unreasonableness
of the Objection recurring upon your thoughts with greater force. For it is not
in men's Power to qualify themselves to serve the King by believing what
doctrinal Propositions they will: and tho you have heard of a Faith that will
remove Mountains, yet you may consider that it is as easy to remove them as
your Faith it self about Matters of revealed truth, and that considering the
Circumstances some men's Minds are involved in, they can no more alter their
beliefs about Transubstantiation, then they can transubstantiate themselves
into other Creatures; and are under a Moral incapacity of preventing another
incurred by Law. And therefore as it would be Injustice in a Judge to Punish a
man for the Errors of the mind that he knows not to be voluntary, and for a
man's not putting himself into a Capacity to serve the King, by the Professing
of the truth in Problematical Points, when the King of Kings has by the not
sufficient promulgating of such truth to his understanding, rendered him
innocent in his disbelief thereof, and so long morally incapable to profess it;
so by one man's after another appearing thus unable to qualify himself to
serve the King, he may be totally unserved.

I have often heard you complain of the narrow Idea's of the King's Supremacy
in some of the Non-Conformists: but if you will read the Protestation of the
King's Supremacy made by the N^n-conforming Ministers and Printed A* D. 1605.
you will find that they have there given in sufficient caution for t^eir
Principles, not allowing any of the King's Subjects being disabled from serving
him. For they having said in. 1. We hold and maintain the same Authority and
Suprem^cy in all Causes and over all Persons Civil and Ecclesiastical granted
by Statute to Queen Elizabeth, and expressed and declared in the Book of
Advertisements and Injunctions, and in Mr. Bilson against the Jesuits, to be
due in full and ample manner without any limitation or qualification to the
King* and his Heirs and Successors for ever, they add in. 2. We are so far from
judging the said Sup^emacy to be unlawful, that we are pers^ aded that the King
should sin highly against God, if he should not assume the same to himself, and
that the Churches within his Dominions should sin damnably, if they should deny
to yield the same to him; yea, tho the STATUTES of the Kingdom should de^y it
to him. And they tell you in Sect. 6. that the height of the King's Royal
Dignity consists in his Supremacy.

It is thus likewise a kind of familiar or Vulgar Error among Protestants to
think that in the ^ncient times this Fundamental Assertory part of your Oath
that the King is the only Supreme Governor of this R^alm, was not allowed. Long
before the Rescript of the University of Oxford to Henry the 8th, A. 1534.
mentioned that he was next under God their happy and Supreme Moderator and
Governor, and on which being brought into the Parliament House, an Act passed
whereby the King was declared Supreme Head and Governor of the Church, and long
before it was declared by the Parliament 16. R. 2. c. 5. that the Crown ^t
England has been so free at all times, that it has been in no earthly
subjection, but immediately subject to God in all things touching the Regality
of the same Crown, and to none other and long before Bracton's writing in the
Reign of H. 3. Omnis quidem sub Rege, and ipse sub nullo sed tantum sub Deo;
and ipse autem Rex non debet esse sub homine, sed sub Deo. etc. you will find
(if you look into Coke's 4th Instit. c. 74.) that in the Law before the
Conquest, the style runs, Rex autem quia Uicarius* summ^ Regis est, ad hoc est
constitutus, ut Regnum ter^enum and populum Domini and super omnia sanctam
veneretu^ Ecclesiam ejus and regat, etc. and where he tells you of the style of
King Edwin in his Charters, viz. of Ang^orum Rex, and totius Britannicae
tel^uris Gube^nator and Rector. And he there refers likewise to several Grants
made by Ab^ots and Priors to King E. 4. wherein they style him by these very
words Supremus Dominus noster.

But that he might perimere litem, as to the point of the ancientness of the
King's Supremacy, he there refers to the judgment of Parliament declared in
the Statute of 24o. H. 8. c. 12. viz. That by diverse authentic Histories and
Chronicles, it is manifestly declared and expressed, that this Realm of England
is an Empire, and so has been accepted in the World govern^d by one Supreme
Head and King, etc. unto whom a Body-Politick, compact of all sorts and degrees
of People divided in terms and by names of Spiritualty and Temporalty been
bounden and owen to beat next unto God, a natural and humble Obedience, etc.
And here I am led to tell you, that as it is on this Foundation of the King's
being the Supreme Governor and Ruler of all sorts and degrees of men thus
anciently acknowledged by our Roman Catholic forefathers, that the Regal Power
of Dispensing with the Laws that were Penal by Incapacity, and particularly in
order to the Crown's being enabled to command the Obedience and Service of all
Estates and Degrees of men, was built, so it is on the same that the
Usurpations of the Papal Dispensative Power of that kind were opposed. I shall
before we part give you instances hereof.


A. I thank you, but shall here tell you, that the Expression you used just now
about the King being disabled by his Subjects being so, has overcast my
thoughts with some kind of horror.


B. I cannot help it; but if you will have me speak with the frankness of a
Philosopher, concerning the Nature of things, the disabling of the Subjects
must have that effect in Nature, and of the disabling of their Country too. And
I think too you gave me a hint for some such thought at our last meeting. If
you do but consider the Services done to Monarchs by that abject Nation of the
Jews (and who by Tacitus were called the Vilissima pars servientium) and how in
our Savior's time they were serviceable to the Roman Empire in the Collection
of the Customs, and how much they have been since and still are useful to the
Grand Signior, and to many Christian Princes by gathering in their Imposts, you
will easily imagine the loss that would redound to Princes by Religionary
Heterodoxy disabling any to serve them.

It is but natural to men of the most inquisitive and penetrating thoughts to
differ from many Points of Theology received by Princes and their People: and
since such heterodoxy does difficult their access to Preferment, it is but
Natural to them by their working Thoughts and Industry to arrive at the
excelling the duller Orthodox in whatever course of life they take, and by that
means to try to push on their way into their Prince's favor, and consequently
to have very sharp regrets against any Methods that would incapacitate them for
it.

And as if this Civil Death were to Men of great Thoughts the terrible of
terribles, and what as hindering them from serving their Prince and Country were
like Burying them alive, I shall show you how a Man of great Abilities, and who
had made a great Figure in the Church and State, resented it in the Conjuncture
of A. 1640. I mean Archbishop Williams, who in his famous Speech in Parliament
that year against the Bill that afterward passed into a Law to Disable Persons
in Holy Orders from exercising any Temporal Jurisdiction, does thereupon
represent it, that under a CAIN' s mark an eternal kind of disability or
incapacity is laid on them from enjoying hereafter any of those Rights,
Favors, or Charters of former Princes, and which is the heaviest Point of all
without killing of Abel, or any Crime laid to their charge, more then that in
the beginning of the Bill it is said roundly, and in the style of Lacedaemon,
that they ought not to intermeddle, etc. And what his thoughts were of the
Injustice of such incapacity put on the Clergy, and of the odiousness of that
Punishment of incapacity, appears by what he afterward says, viz. I come to
the 4th part of this Bill, which is the manner of the inhibition every way
heavy in the Penalty, heavier a great deal in the incapacity. In the weighing
the Penalty, will you consider the small wyers; that is, poor Causes that are
to induce the same; and then the heavy load that hangs upon these wyers? It is
thus. If a Natural Subject of England, interessed in the Magna Charta and
Petition of Right, as well as any other; yet being a Person in Holy Orders
shall happen unfortunately to Vote in Parliament, to obey his Prince by way of
Council, or by way of a Commissioner be required thereunto, then is he
presently to lose and forfeit for his first offense all his Means and
Livelihood, etc. This Peradventure may move others most, but it does not me. It
is not the Penalty, but the Incapacity, and as the Philosophers would call it,
the Natural impotency imposed by this Bill on men in holy Orders to SERVE the
KING, or the STATE in this kind, be they otherwise never so able, or never so
willing, or never so virtuous, which makes me draw a kind of Timanthe' s veil
over this Point, and leave it without any amplification at all to your
Lordships wise and inward Thoughts and Considerations.

But if with so much thunder of Passion as well as lightning of reason that
learned Speech from the Bishops Bench did so much resent the punishing the
Clergy with disability to execute secular Offices, and to have the honor of
serving their Prince and Country therein, and for the imposing of which
disability that known place of Scripture, 2 Timothy 2. 4. No man that wars,
entangles himself with the Affairs of this life, was alleged in the House as
thus disabling them by the Law Divine (and as to which the Bishop in his Speech
gives a learned Answer) we may well imagine how Laymen of good Births and
Educations, and whose Diligence employed in Courts and Cities, and Camps
abroad, may have qualified them here to stand before Kings, must necessarily
aggravate in their thoughts the dishonor of incapacity to serve their Prince
in secular Employments.


A. Was that Speech of the Archbishop ever printed?


B. You will find it in the Apology for the Bishops to sit and Vote in
Parliament, printed in London A. 1661. And he has in that Speech some other
Expressions which corroborate that obvious natural notion of the King and
Kingdom being disabled by disabling of Clergymen from secular Employments. For
having reflected on the Bill for disabling them from sitting in the
Star Chamber and at the Council Table, sitting in Commissions of the Peace, and
other Comm^ssions of secular Affairs, he afterward says, But, my noble Lords,
this is the Case; Our King has by the Statute restored to him the Headship of
the Church of England. And by the word of God he is custos utriusque tabulae.
And will your Lordships allow this ecclesiastical Head no ecclesiastical
Senses? No Ecclesiastical Persons to be censulted with at all? No not in any
Circumstances of time and place? If Cramner had been thus dealt with in the
Minority of our young J^sias King Edward the 6th. what had become of that great
work of our Reformation in this flourishing Church of England?


A. The truth is, it being a kind of a Rule that all Men of Parts who have been
liberally educated, and even those excelling in mechanical professions, do
naturally desire to serve the King, and standing before Kings having been
annexed in Scripture as a reward to diligence in ones calling; a Mark of
disability put on Laymen to serve their Prince, cannot but tempt them to
passion on that account more then it ought to have troubled the Bishop when he
called it a Cai^'s Mark, in regard you have mentioned it, that Clergymen to
some did seem by the Law-Divine disabled from secular Employments.


B. According to the Opinion of Judge Vaughan in his Reports, who in Hill and
Good's Case there makes a lawful Canon to be the Law of the Kingdom as well as
an Act of Parliament, and whatever is the Law, is as much the Law as any thing
else that is so, for what is Law, does not suscipere magis aut minus, they were
by the Canon Law disabled from intermedling in secular Affairs: And according
to his description of malum prohibitum in Thomas and Sorre^'s case p. 358. you
may say they were by the Statute so disabled from intermedling. For he there
says malum prohibitum is that which is prohibited per le statute. Per le
statute is not intended only an Act of Parliament, but any obliging Law or
Constitution, as appears by the Case: for it is said the King may dispense with
a Bastard to take Holy Orders, or with* a Clerk to have two Benefices with
Cure, which were mala prohibita by the Canon Law, and by the Council of
Lateran, not by Act of Parliament.

The Lateran Council his Lordship there means, is that held under Alexander the
3d A. 1180, and which Council has it in these words, viz. neque servi neque
spurii sunt ordinandi: And, uni plura ecclesiastica beneficia non sunt
committenda.

And therefore the Bishop in that Speech says, That this Doctrine of debarring
Persons in Holy Orders from secular Employments, is the Doctrine of the Popish
Church, and first brought into this Kingdom by the Pop^s of Rome and Lanfrank,
Anselm, Stephen Langthon, and Othobone and with an intent to withdraw the
Clergy from t^eir receiving Obligations from either King or Lords, and make
them wholly dependants on the Popacy.

But Bishop Jewel tells us in his Apology p. 122. that Veteres Canones
Apostolorum illum Episcopum, qui simul and Civilem magistratum, and
ecclesiasticam functionem obire velit, jubent ab officio summoveri.


A. Yet notwithstanding their being disabled by the ancient Canons, and the
Nemo militans, etc. 2 Timothy 2. as often alleged against them by the Canons and
Canonists, I think they were frequently employed by our Princes in the greatest
Offices of the State.


B. They were so, and the Disability of a whole third estate as to bearing
secular Offices did not stand in the way of Prerogative. I have read it in
Fuller's Church History that in the year 1350. the Lords and Commons in
Parliament did find themselves aggrieved that the Clergymen engrossed all
secular Offices, and thereupon presented the ensuing Petition to the King
according to this effect, insisting only in the substance thereof, viz.

And because that in this present Parliament it was 1370. Ex Rot. Parl. in
turr. L^nd. in 45. Ed. tertii.
declared to our Lord the King, by all the Earls, Barons and Commons of
England, that the Government of the Kingd^m has been performed a long time, by
the Men of Holy Church, which are not justifyable in all Cases, whereby great
mischiefs and damages have happened in Iustifiables in the French originals.
Quaere, Whether not able todo justice, or not to be juststify'd in their
Employment as improper for it.
times past, and more may happen in time to come, in disheriting of the Crown
and great prejudice of the Kingdom, etc. that it will please our said Lord the
King that the Laymen of the said Kingdom which are sufficient and able of
Estates, may be chosen for these, and that no other Person be hereafter made
Chancellor, Treasurer, Clark of the Privy Seal, Barons of the Exchequer,
Chamberlain of the Exchequer, Comptroller, and all other great Officers and
Governors of the said Kingdom, and that these things be now in such manner
established in form aforesaid that by no way it may be defeated, or any thing
done to the contrary in any time to come, saving to our Lord the King the
Election, and removing of such Officers, but that always they be Laymen, such
as is abovesaid.

To this Petition the King returned that he would ordain upon this point, as it
should best seem to him by the advice of his good Council.

In fine, you see that tho the Clergymen were thus disabled by the general
Customs and Usage of the Realm, and by lawful Canons and provincial
Constitutions, accounted by that Judge beforementioned to be tanta-mount to
Acts of Parliament: yet you ^ee our Kings did frequently dispense with these
Customs, lawful Canons and Constitutions. And tho the Office of Bishops renders
them guardians of the Canons, yet you see how tender they have been of the
Regal power of Dispensing therein.

And as that saying of Wicliffe, however censured in the Council of Constance,
may perhaps with a little help be reduced to Orthodoxy, viz. That ^ne should be
Excommunicated by any Prelate, unless he know him Excommunicated by God, so
with parity of reason it may be said, that none should be totally disabled by
any Prince from serving him, unless he knew him really disabled by God; and
especially when he knew the contrary, and that the Services of the great men of
the Clergy had so often been successfully employed at the Helm of State: and
when for the honor of Clergymens Council some of the most profound pieces of
State Policy our English Story has in it are to be attributed to Clergy-mens
officiating in their Princes Councels, and as for Example, when by the figure
that Bishop Morton made at the Helm, he did make up the dismal breach, and
united the two Houses of York and Lancaster in the Happy Marriage between Henry
the 7th and the Lady Elizabeth, a^ when Bishop Fox who was Lord Privy Seal, did
by his Advice lay the Foundation of a more happy Union between the Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, by the eldest Daughter of Hen^y marrying James of
Scotland, and the younger matching into France, that so on their ever coming to
inherit, Scotland might be annexed to the Imperial Crown of England, and
England not be annexed as a Province to France, and for the Consequences of
which Advice, both Englishmen, and English and French Protestants have so much
cause to say, We Praise thee, O God, etc.

And I am here minded of what Fuller tells us on A. 14. H. 4. viz. It was moved
in Parliament that no Weishman, Bishop or other, shall be Justice, Chamberlain,
Chancellor, Treasurer, Sheriff, Constable of a a Castle, or Keeper of Records,
or Lieutenant in the said Office in any part of Wales, or of Council to any
English Lord, notwithstanding any Patent made to the contrary, Cum clausula non
obstante licet Wallicus natus: and that it was answered, that the King wills
it, except the Bishops: and for them and others which he has found good loyal
Lieges toward him, out said Lord the King will be advised by the Advice of his
Council. Ex Rot. Parliamentariis in turri Land. in hoc Anno: which Citation
Fuller professes to be taken out of the Authentic Records in the Tower.

There passed an Act of Parliament in the 4th year of Henry the 4th, by which
it is Enacted, That no Welshman shall be Justice, Chamberlain. Sheriff,
Coroner, nor other Officer in any part of Wales, notwithstanding any Patent to
the contrary with the Clause of Non-obstante: and yet without Question (says
my Lord Coke, 12th Rep.) the King might dispense with this Statute: but you see
how on the Parliaments resenting the Dispensations the Act had met with, and
particularly in Bishops having contrary to the tenor of the Act served the
Crown in Secular Employments, the King particularly adhered to the exercise of
his Dispensative Power in their Case.

It was upon the ground of this Assertion, viz. Of the Crown's being entitled
to Command the Services of all Subjects, that some Papists were employed by
Queen Elizabeth in Affairs of the State, notwithstanding any disability
incurred by not taking the Oath of Supremacy. And Viscount Montacute, tho a
Roman Catholic, was (as Cambden tells you) sent by her as her Ambassador to
the King of Spain, and employed too about the Business of the Scots, and to do
right to the Protestant Religion. Sir Edward Carne, likewise a Roman Catholic,
was sent by her as her Ambassador to the Pope.

And as to the sense of many of that Queen's most renowned Ministers of State
about the Deprivation of the Nonconformist Divines disabled eo Nomine from
their Ministry, being Penal to the People, the Author of certain Considerations
tending to promote peace and good will among Protestants, has mentioned it,
that Eight of that Queens Privy Counselors writ a Letter in their favor to
the Bishops of Canterbury and London, in the close whereof it is said, viz. Now
therefore we for the Discharge of our Duties, being by our Vocation under her
Majesty bound to be careful that the Universal Realm may be well governed
according to the Honor and Glory of God, and to the discharge of her Majesty
being the Principal GOVERNOR of ALL her SUBJECTS under Almighty God, do most
earnestly desire your Lordships to take some charitable Considerations of these
Causes that the PEOPLE of THIS Realm may not be DEPRIVED of their Pastors being
Diligent, Learned and Zealous, tho in some Points Ceremonial they may seem
doubtful only of Conscience, and not of wilfulness, etc. Tour Lordships loving
Friends William Burghly, George Shrewsbury, A. ^rwick, R. Leic^ster, C. Howard,
J. Crofts, Chr. Hatton, Fra. Walsingham.

And what sense the House of Commons had in the beginning of the Reign of King
James the First, of the Disabling of several of the Nonconformist Divines being
a Gravamen to the Realm, appears by the Petition of that House to the King,
Anno 1610. as I find it in Mr. Nye's Beams of former Light, p. 103. viz.
Whereas diverse painful and learned Pastors that have long time traveled in the
work of the Ministry with good Fruit and Blessing of their Labor have been
removed from Ecclesiastical livings, being their freehold, and from all means
of maintenance, to the great grief of sundry your Majesty's well-affected
Subjects, we therefore humbly beseech your Majesty would be graciously pleased
that such deprived and silenced Ministers living quietly and peaceably, may be
restored, etc.

But, in short, if you consider that the great Cause that excited the Loyal
Zeal expressed in the Statute of the First of Queen Elizabeth (and whereby so
many Statutes of Harry the 8th against the Papal ^pations were revived) was
that the King and Kingdom might not be disabled by Clergymens not being
Subjects to the Crown through Papal Exemptions, and that the Crown might Cum
effectu be restored to its Government over them, i. e. of the whole Realm, and
that our Monarchs should by means of such Exemption be no more disabled from
being Governors only IN their Realm, and not OF it (and as when the Right of
two Persons claiming to be Princes of Tuscany was before the Pope's Arbitrage*
he determined that one of them should be A Prince IN Tuscany and the other O^
it,) you will find that this Supreme Power over all Persons, as inherent in the
King, is the very Lapis Angularis on which your Abjuration of foreign
Jurisdiction, and on which the whole Promissory part of your Oath are built.
For when you have first declared in your Oath that the King is the only Supreme
Governor of this Realm, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or
Causes, as Temporal, and then what follows upon that, viz. That no foreign
Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, has or ought to have any
Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Pre-eminence or Authority Ecclesiastical, or
Spiritual within this Realm, you say, And THEREFORE I do ^tterly renounce and
forsake a^l foreign Jurisdictions, etc. And do promise that from henceforth I
shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the King's Highness, etc. and to my
Power shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions, etc. granted or belonging to
the King's Highness, etc. or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm* Thus then the Reason why you abjure foreign Jurisdiction ( for you
ABJURE when you swear to quit and forsake, as Mr. Nigh in his Observations on
that Oath tells us) and why you promise to assist and defend all Jurisdictions
granted or belonging to the King whose Subject you are) is resolved into the
Kings being the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, as well in all Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical things or Causes as Temporal.

I am here further to tell you that when by your Oath you have renounced the
Pope's Dispensative Power; you have asserted, and have obliged your self to
defend the Jurisdiction of the King's Dispensative Power in the room of it: and
the defense of which was the great design and drift of the entire Statute of
1o. Eliz. and of your Oath therein, and no collateral thing.


A. I have been and am pleased with that Prospect you have given me into the
Region of the Dispensative Power used by the Crown in the Interpretation of my
Oath, a Region that was before to me like the terra Australis and Borealis
incognita: but (to deal frankly with you) I am yet to seek out the meaning of
this notion last ^rted by you, that the drift and design of the Statute of 1o.
Elizabethae, and the Oath was to prop up the King's Dispensative Power. I doubt
not but you are perfectly sensible that he who speaks to that tender thing
called Conscience, and about an Oath, ought to be tender of any point he urges
to it, and not to wyre-draw any thing by forced Consequences that is to be
offered to it as Obligatory.


B. I assure you I go by those very measures in giving you my Judgment of the
design and drift of that Statute as I have done, and that he must put the
Statute on the wrack that will make it speak any other meaning. Consider what
the Prefatory part, as the key of it mentions, viz. That diverse good Laws and
Statutes that were made in Henry the Eighth's time as well for the utter
extinguishment and putting away of all Usurped and Foreign Power, etc. as also
for the restoring and uniting to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, the ancient
Jurisdictions, etc. to the same of Right belonging, by reason whereof we your
most humble and obedient Subjects from the 25th year of the Reign of your said
dear Father were continually kept in good order, and were disburden'd of diverse
great and intolerable Charges and Exactions before that time unlawfully taken
and exacted by such Foreign Power and Authority as before that was usurped,
until such time as all the said good Laws and Statutes by one Act of Parliament
made in the first and second years of the Reigns of the late King Philip and
Queen Mary, etc. were repeai'^: by reason whereof they then further mention how
they were then brought under an Usurped Foreign Authority to their intolerable
Charges, and they thereupon desire the Repealing of that Act. Here we are given
to see by their dating the era of their being well governed and disburthen'd
of diverse great intolerable Charges and Exactions taken and exacted by Foreign
Power, from the 25th of Henry the 8th, and had their eye on the Statute of the
25th of Henry the 8th, c. 21. entitled, No Imposition shall be paid to the
Bishop of Rome, which sets forth how the Subjects of this Realm were
impoverished by intolerable Exactions of great Sums of Money taken out of this
Realm by the Bishop of Rome as well in Pensions, Censes, Suits for Provisions
and Expeditions of Bulls, etc. and also for Dispensations, Licenses, Faculties,
Grants, Relaxations, Writs called Perinde valere, Rehabilitations, Abolitions,
and other infinite sorts of Bulls, Breves and Instruments of sundry Natures,
etc. wherein the Bishop of Rome has been not only to be blamed for his
Usurpation in the Premises, but also for his abusing and beguiling your
Subjects, pretending and persuading them that he has Power to Dispense with
all Humane Laws, Uses and Customs of all Realms in all Causes which be called
Spiritual, which matter has been usurped and practiced by him and his
Predecessors by many years, in great de^gation of your Imperial Crown and
Authority Royal, contrary to Right and Conscience. For where this your Graces
Realm recognizing no Superior under God, but only your Grace, has been and is
free from Subjection to any man's Laws, but only to such as have been devised,
made and obtained within this Realm for the Wealth of the same, or to such
other as by SUFFERANCE of your GRACE and your Progenitors, the People of this
your Realm have taken at their free liberty by their own Consent to be used
among them, and have bound themselves by long Use and Custom to the observance
of the same, not as to the observance of the Laws of any Foreign Prince,
Potentate or Prelate, but as to the Customs and ancient Laws of this Realm,
originally establish d Laws of the same by the same Sufferance, Consents, and
Custom, and none otherwise; it stands therefore with natural equity and good
reason, that in all and every such Laws HUMANE made within this Realm, or
induced into this Realm by the said Sufferance, Consents and Custom, your Royal
Majesty and your Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons, etc. have full Power
and Authority not only to dispense but also to authorize some elect Person or
Persons to dispense with those and all other humane Laws of this your Realm,
and with every one of them, as the quality of the Persons and Matter shall
require. And the Act afterward mentions the impoverishment of the People of
this Realm by the Imposts for Papal Dispensations, and refers twice to the
Charges of the taxa Camerae, calling them expressly in one place, Impositions
taken to the use of the Pope and his Chambers; and in another, the old Tax. And
at the removal of these intolerable Charges, as they are called in that of the
Statute of 1o Eliz. or intolerable Exactions, as they are called in the 25th of
Henry the 8th; that of the First of Elizabeth (as I said) had an eye in the
revival of this of Henry the 8th; and the Consideration of which Statute will
be of importance to us as to that part of our Promissory Oath that refers to
our defending the Jurisdictions, etc. united and annexed to the Imperial Crown
of this Realm; that Statute of Henry the 8th having in its Prefatory part
expressed the Pope's dispensing here to be in derogation of the King's Imperial
Crown and Authority Royal, and there afterward mentions how the Imperial Crown
of this Realm suffered by those Papal Exactions. And the Preface of the Statute
of 1o Eliz. refers in general to diverse good Statutes made in Henry the 8th's
time, for the Restoring and uniting* to the Imperial Crown of this Realm the
Jurisdictions, Authorities to the same of Right belonging* and which ushers in
the reference to the Statute of the 25th of Henry the 8th: and then in the
following Clause it is said, that for the repressing of the usurped Foreign
Power, and the restoring the Rights, Jurisdictions and Preheminences belonging
to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, etc.

Thus then you see that I have fairly showed you out of this Statute of Queen
Elizabeth, where your Oath is situated, that the Restoration of the Ancient
Jurisdiction of the Crown in dispensing, was restored to the Imperial Crown of
this Realm, the which the Pope had formerly usurped on in Matters both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, and which you are obliged to defend against any Papal
or Popular Usurpations whatsoever. I was enforced for your clearer
understanding of this Statute to conduct you to the 25th of Henry the 8th, and
where you find several Expressions that make it the right of the Imperial Crown
of this Realm to dispense with the disability or incapacity incurred by Law.
You have there the word REHABILITATION, and what is called there the Writ of
Perinde valere, which Blount tells you in his (...) is a Dispensation granted
to a Clerk, who being defective in his title to a Benefice, or other
Ecclefiastical Function is de facto admitted to it. And it takes Appellation
from the words, which make the faculty as Effectual to the party DISPENSED
WITH, as if he had been actually CAPABLE of the thing for which he is dispensed
with at the time of his Admission. A. 25. H. the 8th, it is called a Writ.

You have in your Oath acknowledged the Crown of this Realm to be a Crown
Imperial, and if you had not by the Comparing the two Statutes together, found
that the Power of Rehabilitation of Persons disabled was restored and united to
the Crown, as what was anciently due to it, and used by it; yet on the
Consideration of the Crown here being called Imperial, and of its being a res
judicata among all that write of the Power of such Crowns that a Dispensation
with Persons in this kind, is allowed them as one of the jura Majestatis, you
ought by virtue of your Oath to be very careful how you deny this mark of
Sovereignty to the Imperial Crown of this Realm which you see wants none of the
other.

I think I have now let you see that I have here put no forced or wyredrawn
Consequences on you, and would hate to do any thing of that Nature in common
Discourse, and about a common or trivial matter, and much more in the concern
of an Oath. You know I have often praised that Letter in D'Ossal where he
reflects on some Men thus, viz. Le sont gens d'esprit, de scavoir and de
labeur, qui ^ont forge, mais de fort ma^vaise foy, ne fai^sans Conscience, and
n' ayans honte de traitter un cas de Conscience, and si important a la Religion
Catholic and a toute la Chrestiente, en chichaneurs and sophistes.

But further yet to let you see that in minding you in point of Conscience, and
by virtue of this your Oath; duly to prop up the Regal Power of Dispensing with
Incapacity, I put no wyre-drawn Consequences upon you, and do with the
simplicity that becomes a Christian speak to you ex animo, I shall again give
you the Judgment of Parliament in the Case, and to that end shall first direct
you to the Statute of 37o. H. 8. c. 17. that begins, In most humble wise show
and declare to your Highness your most faithful, humble and obedient Subjects,
that where your most Royal Majesty is and has always justly been by THE WORD
OF God, supreme head in the Earth of the Church of England, and has full Power
and Authority to correct, punish, and repress all manner of Heresies, Errors,
Uices, etc. and to exercise all other manner of Jurisdictions commonly called
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, nevertheless the Bishop of Rome and his adherents
minding utterly as much as in him lay to abolish, obscure, and delete such
Power given by God to the Princes of the Earth, whereby they might gather, and
get to themselves the Government and Rule of the World, have in their Councils
and Synods Provincial made diverse Ordinances and Constitutions that no LAY or
Married man should or might exercise any Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, nor
should be any Judge or Register in any Court commonly called Ecclesiastical
Court, etc. as by the said Councils and Constitutions Provincial appears,
which standing and remaining in their effect not abolished by your Grace's
Laws, did sound to appear to make greatly for the said usurped Power of the
Bishop of Rome, and to be directly repugnant to your Majesty as Supreme Head of
the Church, and Prerogative royal, your GRACE being a LAYMAN, and albeit the
said Decrees, Ordinances and Constitutions by a Statute made in the 25th year
of your Reign be utterly abolished, etc. But forasmuch as your Majesty is the
only and undoubted Supreme Head of the Church of England, and also of Ireland,
to whom BY HOLY SCRIPTURE all Authority and Power is wholly given to hear and
determine all manner of Causes Ecclesiastical, and to correct Uice and Sin
whatsoever. and TO ALL SUCH PERSONS AS YOUR MAJESTY SHALL APPOINT THEREUNED,
that in Consideration thereof, as well for the Instruction of Ignorant Persons,
etc. and setting forth of your Prerogative Royal and Supremacy: It may
therefore please your Highness, that it may be Ordained and Enacted, that all
and singular Persons as well LAY as those that be now Married or hereafter
shall be Married, etc. which shall be made, ordained, constituted and deputed
to be any Chancellor, Uicar General, etc. Scribe or Register by your Majesty,
or any of your Heirs and Successors, or by any Archbishop, Bishop, etc. may
lawfully execute and execute all manner of Jurisdiction commonly called
Ecclesiastical, etc.

Here you see the enacting clause founded on the previous solemn acknowledgment
of the King's supremacy, and on his having the power given him, not by
Parliaments or People, but by SCRIPTURE, to appoint such to be ecclesiastical
Judges who were by Custom and by the Laws of Councils and Provincial Synods
formerly equivalent to Acts of Parliament, incapacitated so to be. And from
whence it is consequently apparent that no positive humane Laws whatsoever
inflictive of Penal incapacity could against the Right inherent in him by the
positive Law of God, oblige him not to dispense with the others by his supreme
Power when he found it necessary so to do. For it is on all hands confessedly
true, that Parliaments can no more then the Bishop of Rome delete such Power as
is given by God to the Princes of the Earth.


A. But because a Parliament declared that such a supreme Power is given by the
Scripture to Princes, you know it does not follow that it is so. And moreover
you know that was a Popish Parliament that so declared it.


B. But I likewise know that as it is in my Lord Chief Justice Vaughan' s
Reports in Hill and Good' s Case, that if a Marriage be declared by Act of
Parliament to be against Gods Law, we must admit it to be so, for by a Law,
that is, an Act of Parliament it is so declared; so that Act of Parliament
having declared it, that by Holy Scripture all Authority and Power is wholly
given to the King, and to all such Persons as he shall appoint to hear and
determine, etc. tho such Persons were by a lawful Canon incapacitated so to do
(a Canon that that Judge in the words immediately following the other makes to
be the Law of the Kingdom as well as an Act of Parliament) we must admit such
Power and Authority inherent in the King's Supremacy by the Word of God, thus
to supersede incapacity. And whether the incapacitating Canons were lawful ones
or no, it is not tanti to enquire, since as we know a Power inherent in Kings
by the Word of God, cannot be either by lawful Canon or Act of Parliament taken
away: and much more ought such Power to be construed and admitted as inherent
in him by the Scripture, while the Act of Parliament continues in being.

But I shall yet bring the acknowledgment of your Prince's Supremacy in this
point as thus founded on Scripture, clos^r to your Conscience by letting you
see that you have not only the Judgment of a Popish Parliament in the Case, but
of that very Statute of Queen Elizabeth that enjoins your Oath of Supremacy;
for it revives that Statute o^ Harry the 8th and all and every branches and
Articles in it, as you will find it in your Statute-book.


A. You have mentioned one thing in that Statute of Harry the 8th that does a
little startle me: and that is that he and the three Estates applied there the
design of keeping up those Canons of Councils and provincial Constitutions that
incapacitated LAYMEN, as levelled at the exclusion of the King himself, not only
from his Prerogative, but from being in a capacity to exercise ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction as supreme head of the Church, as I find by those remarkable
words, YOUR GRACE BEING A LAYMAN.


B. You do well to take notice of that, and are therefore not to wonder at it
if you should hear your Prince who was a Dissenter to the Church of England,
and others concerned for him, to have apprehensions of what prejudice might be
meant him by some subtle Projectors of Laws, to incapacitate all Papists and
Presbyterians from acting in any Office in Church or State, however many loyal
Persons might be far from intending such prejudice thereby: his Grace being a
Papist, or Presbyterian.


A. I must confess that if the Kings Power of commanding the Services of all
his Subjects be inherent in him by the Word of God, and as such declared by
Parliament, any Men's endeavors to take away that Power, may well be imputed to
great incogitancy.


B. You say right: and I was hence induced to wonder, that after the Act and
Acknowledgment of his Majesty's Prerogative in the Choice of his Officers of
State-Councellors and Judges had thus passed in the first Parliament of
Scotland in the late King's reign, viz. The Estates of Parliament considering
the great Obligations that lie upon them from the Law of God, the Law of
Nations, the Municipal Laws of the Land, and their Oaths of Allegiance to
maintain and defend the Sovereign Power and Authority of the King's Majesty,
and the sad Consequences that do accompany an encrochment upon or diminution
thereof, do therefore from their sense of humble duty declare, that it is an
inherent privilege of the Crown, and an undoubted part of the Royal Prerogative
of the Kings of this Kingdom to have the sole Choice and Appointment of the
Officers of States and Privy Counselors, and Nomination of the Lords of
Session as in former times, and that the King's sacred Majesty, and his Heirs
and Successors, are by virtue of that Royal Power which they hold from God
Almighty over this Kingdom, to have the full exercise of that Right, etc. any
Men could by a following Act of Parliament there be incapacitated to serve
their Prince in those Stations.

I shall here tell you, that the incapacitating a few Papists or Quakers
Presbyterians or Anabaptists to serve their Prince may to some seem materia
l^vis, and that the King and his Realm cannot suffer much by the disabling a
small party of men from public employments. But it is otherwise. And let any
one who has observed but two or three of the late great transactions of the
age here, as for instance, the late King's Restoration, the throwing out of the
Exclusion-Bill, the turning of the current of Faction in our Metropolis, and
consider how much in each depended on the Talents of ONE man, he will not
wonder at him who shall affirm that the incapacitating of but one Man may be
very fatal to the Commonweal.

I suppose you cannot have forgot the Verse you repeated to me out of the famed
Poem of Absolon and Achitophel, viz. So much the weight of one brave Man can
do. And Providence made use of his weight for the Public good by the figure he
made in his Prince's Councils notwithstanding the Address of the Commons to
have him thence removed: as likewise of the weight of another of those noble
Persons heroical loyalty in the administration of the Government,
notwithstanding an Address from the Commons to his Prince to remove him from it.

I doubt not but you have read it in Cromerus his History of Poland l. 7th.
that the King of Poland being dead, the Kingdom was offered to Lescus a Nephew
of Casimire's, on condition he would banish Govoritius: and that Lescus refused
the Crown rather then he would banish so faithful a Councellor. And you cannot
be ignorant of the weight of one man in the Nicene Council, I mean Pophnutiu^,
who by citing those words of the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Marriage
is honorable in all, etc. turned the stream of the whole Council when they
were going to give a Decree against the marriage of Priests.

You know of how much weight one Man would have proved in that place in
Scripture, Ezekiel. 22. 30. And I sought for a Man among them that should make up
the Hedge and stand in the Gap, etc. And that the wise man has told us, that it
was by the wisdom of ONE poor Man, that a City was delivered.

You cannot but have observed, that almost all the great and noble inventions
in nature, owe their births to a single Person; and that particularly one poor
Man by his Wisdom discovered the American World. I need not mind you of the
introduction of Laws by one Man in several of the old Grecian Polities; and of
the great Ocean of the Civil-Law yet encompassing the World, having so narrow a
Springhead, as the head of a single Person's introducing the Laws at Athens.

You have read of the unus homo nobis cuncta^do, etc. and of the tantum potuit
unius Viri fortuna and virtus.

You know how Queen Elizabeth expressed her value of the weight of one Man, I
mean our great Navigator Sir Francis Drake, by her refusing to commissionate
competent Judges to try him for putting to death Dourishius in America, and
after an Appeal brought about it by the next of Kinn to him: and how afterward
King James the first showed his value of the Talents and usefulness of Sir
Walter Raleigh, by employing him in his Service, with Power of the Life and
Death of others, whilst he lay under the highest disability, by being attainted
of High Treason.

It would be somewhat like pedantry to digress too far into such a Common
Place; and wherein almost infinite instances will be tumultuarily crowding into
any Man's thoughts. But I shall here further tell you, that from the notion of
ludit in humanis, etc. and of him who sits in the Heavens having some
Disablers in derisien who imagined a vain thing, and from Heavens often
choosing to make that Stone that the Builders rejected and disabled, the Head
of the Corner: and from the severe threatening in St. Matthew against him who
shall offend ONE of these little ones who believe in Christ, and from the
caution there of despising not ONE of these little ones, you may occasionally
call to mind your moral Offices of honoring all Men, and of adoring the Divine
Providence, when it makes such Persons its instruments in the preserving of
Nations, who by any systemes of Politics or Laws were disabled from being such.


A. I thank you for the occasion you have given me to meditate about this, and
do think that Man having the style of vain applied to him in Job. c. 11. v. 12.
Vain Man WOULD be WISE, tho Man be born like a wild Asses colt, and there made
a politic-would-be, and not only resembled to a Brute, but made to be born like
one, and of Brutes like to the Ass, and of Asses to the wild one, and even of
such to the wild Asses Colt, and being thus under an incurable complication of
natural Incapacities, ought to be very careful how he goes about, by any
artificial incapacities, to afflict or reproach any of his Race that are born
to too many, and much more to limit the Wisdom of Providence in the choice of
its instruments, and to take the work of the cicuration of the untamed World
out of God's hand.

And here I shall afford you some amends for the pleasant historical hints I
just now had from you, by observing to you in short what partly makes for your
purpose; that tho as Palaeotus in his learned T^actate de Nothis spuriisque
filiis has mentioned, such were tam Mosaica quam Pontificia ac Civili lege
omnino detestabiles, and as infamous disabled particularly by the Canon Law
from ecclesiastical Dignities, yet to show how these outcasts of the Law were
by Heaven rendered instrumental in the Government of the World, he there says,
Notantque hi qui historias ab origin Mundi sunt exorsi, arts ownes and
scientias ab hujvsmodi sobole, a filiis scilicet Lamech fuisse inventas, and ab
eis subtiliora omnia and utiliora excogitata: and he concludes his Book by
instancing in the Names of many Europaean Kings and Princes and Roman Emperors,
and particularly of Constantine the great, and likewise of Popes of Rome, who
were of the base-born Class of Mankind.

Both God Almighty and our Princes, can make Vessels of Honor of what Clay
they please, and place them where they will.


B. You find it DECLARED in the Statute of the 31th. of H. 8. c. 10. that It
appertains to the King's Prerogative Royal to give such Honor, Reputation
and Placing to his Counselors, AND OTHER his Subjects, as shall be seeming to
his most excellent Wisdom; and so when King James gave Sir Walter Raleigh tho
dead in Law, and laboring under the highest disability beforementioned, the
Power and Honor of commanding the lives of others, he did but what appertained
to his Prerogative.

And thus when King Harry the 8th by his Prerogative, like the Sun both raising
and gilding a poor Vapor, made Cromwell who was the Son of a Blacksmith Lord
Privy Seal, and likewise enabled him, tho a Layman, to to be his Vicegerent
for ecclesiastical Causes, and however incapacitated by some positive humane
Laws to make that figure, he did but uti Iure suo.

And I shall tell you as to the subject of the weight of one Man, or the
consequences of disabling one Man, that we were upon; if you consider how much
the excesses of the Papal Usurpations, and the overbalance of the Monastic
Revenue in the Nation, were removed by the parts and endowments of Cromwell the
Vicegerent in Matters Ecclesiastical, you may easily imagine that if the
measures of the Canon Law and Canonists and the long received customs or any
humane Law had then prevailed for the disabling of Cromwell cum effectu from
bearing Office or intermedling in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction as the Kings
Vicegerent, what a Church of England we should have at this time enjoyed.

You may well imagine how much the Disabling of Laymen from intermedling in
ecclesiastical Jurisdiction had passed for a general Custom here, when Bishop
Downham in the Defense of his Consecration Sermon p. 185. says that as for
lay-Chancellors or Commissaries, the Bishops in the times of S. Austin and S.
Ambrose had none: and that not so much as the Steward of a Church might be a
Layman: and when the Puritan Writers did still upbraid our Discipline on the
account of the incapacity of Laymen to be Bishops Chancellors, as adjudged by
the ancient Canons; and with the Canon of indecorum est laicum esse vicarium
episcopi, etc. and by which Canon the Bishop who made a Layman his Vicar, was
declared to be contemptor Canonum.

But it was the Regal Power of Dispensing with the Canons and Customs that
disabled Laymen from intermedling in ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, that laid
the foundation of the Reformation in Harry the 8th's time, as it was the same
Power of dispensing with the Canons and Customs that disabled Clergymen from
intermedling in saecular Employments, that perfected the superstructure of it
in the reign of Edward the 6th that young Josias, as was before mentioned.

Fuller tells us in his Church History that Harry the 8th's making a Layman his
Vicar General was the greatest instance of his ecclesiastical Power that ever
was given. And my Lord Herbert in his Harry the 8th does seem to reflect on
Cromwell's not being thought capable of that Office: for his words on his being
made the King's Vicegerent are, It was thought strange by the People, because
there was no Example of any Kings of Israel the lawfully in their own Persons
enjoying the mixed Power of the Temporal and Spiritual, or of the Pope's, having
deputed Ecclesiastical Power to a Layman. But as to his saying that there was
no Example of the Pope's deputing Ecclesiastical Power to Laymen, I shall
observe that his Lordship had not considered that according to the Gloss in C.
been quidem Distin. 96. Laicus potest excommunicare ex Papae delegatione: and
that tho a Bishop cannot by the Canon Law delegate his Power to a Layman, for
that a Bishop is not above the Ius Commune Positivum of the Pope, yet the
Canonists hold that the Pope by the Plenitude of his Power may dispense with
his own Laws, and by so doing delegate the Power of Excommunicating to
Abbesses, although jure Communi, as not having the Power of the Keys, they are
disabled from so doing: and that Pope Urban the Second, constituted a Layman,
Roger Earl of Sicily and his Heirs, his Legates a latere in that Kingdom by way
of Inheritance for ever: and that our Henry the Second writing to the Pope to
recall Be^ket's Legatine Power, and to confer it on the Archbishop of York, the
Pope refused so to do, but offered the Legatine Power to the King himself, and
sent Letters to the King for that purpose: but which the King in scorn threw
away.

The Legatine Powers are de jure Communi, as the Canonists tell us, very great;
and allow the Legates to visit or cause to be visited by such as they shall
think fit, all Churches, Monasteries, Colleges, Universities, Hospitals, and do
authorize them to make new Statutes and Orders, and not only to receive Appeals
from ordinary Judges and Delegates, but to judge and decide all Ecclesiastical,
Civil and Criminal Causes, and that summarily and sine forma and figura
Iudicii; to make Prisoners of Bishops, and send them in Custody to the Pope, to
bestow Benefices that were vacant, to unite Churches, to interpret the Mandates
of the Pope: and if the Pope has entrusted any thing to be done by them, yet
to entrust the doing thereof to others, to execute all their Jurisdiction in
Places exempt as well as not exempt, and to dispense in all Cases wherein they
are not Prohibited, and to exercise the Jurisdiction of granting Indulgences,
and to dispense with pluralists, and with the incapacity of Sons immediately
succeeding their Fathers in Church Livings, and to give Absolution to the
Excommunicate in many Cases reserved to the Apostolic See, and likewise in
many Causes inflictive of Excommunication ipso jure, and in many Cases to
restore such as are deposed and degraded, and to rehabilitate them even by
restoring them to Fame.

All these Branches of Authority, with many others not named here, were it
seems offered by the Pope to our King: but which he holding as Vicegerent to
the King of Kings, and by his Word, might well refuse their tenure from the
servus servorum, and by his Bulls.

All our Roman Catholic Princes having made an inroad on the Papal
incapacitating Canons by way of Dispensation, when they made their Lay-Judges
Super-Intendents over their Bishops, and who were by Laymen required to
Absolve such who were disabled by Excommunication, and to receive their bounds
and measures in Ecclesiastical Proceedings by Writs of Prohibition, and
Consultation, and Attachment issued out by Laymen; the exercise of the Regal
Power in Ecclesiastics distributed and dispersed among so many Lay hands, did
not seem so powerful nor invidious as when the united Beams of Ecclesiastical
Vice-gerence met in the Ministry of one Lay Person, and dazzled the Eyes of the
whole Kingdom, and when (according to the Power that was 37o. H. 8. declared by
the Parliament to be given to the King by Holy Scripture) he made Cromwell his
Vicegerent for the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

But as that Statute intimating that the Councils and Constitutions Provincial
that ordained, that no Layman should exercise or occupy any Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, did stand and remain in their effect not abolished by his
Grace's Laws, and did sound to appear to make greatly for the usurped Power of
the Bishop of Rome, and to he directly repugnant to his Majesty as Supreme Head
of the Church, and Pretogative Royal, his Grace being a Layman, although such
Decrees, Ordinances, and Constitutions were by the Statute made in the 25th
year of his Reign, intended to be utterly abolished, frustrate, etc. but yet
that the contrary thereunto, being not used by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. i. e.
that they had not all that while or since that Statute of the 25th of his Reign
committed the exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to Laymen; did or might
give occasion to some Evil-dispos'd persons to think and little regard the
Proceedings and Censures Ecclesiastical made by his HIGHNESS and his
Uice-gerent, Officials, Commissaries, Judges, and Uisitors being also Lay and
Married men to be of little or none effect, whereby the people gathers heart
and presumption to do evil, and not to have such reverence to your most Godly
Injunctions and Proceedings, as becomes them* etc. So I leave it to you to
consider how the disabling of any subjects by reason of Religionary Heterodoxy
to serve their Prince, did or might give occasion to some evil-disposed Persons
to attempt the disabling of their Prince on the same account, as I before
hinted it to you: and as the popular incogitancy of the Power given by God
extending to all such Persons as should be employ^d under the King, producing
the irreverence of their surmises of the incapacity of the Officials and
Visitors employed by the Vicegerent (and consequently of the incapacity of the
Vicegerent himself) did naturally terminate in their gathering heart and
presumption to do evil, and to surmise the King's being disabled to exercise
all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: and to do that which was directly
repugnant to his Majesty as Supreme Head of the Church, and to his Prerogative
Royal, his Grace being a Layman, how you ought still to preserve a tenderness
in your thoughts for that Prerogative Royal given him by God's Word of
Commanding the Services of all his Subjects by what Laws or Constitutions
soever de facto incapacitated. And by the gradual Proceedings I have now
mentioned, you ought with horror to think of the incapacitating any one Subject
to serve his Prince, as of the first step from a Precipice.


A. You have provided variety of Entertainment for my Consideration, and have
my thanks for it. But suppose I should be so Curious and Inquisitive as to ask
where in God's Word that Power is given to Princes to employ such Persons as
they shall think fit in their service, according to the purport of that Statute?


B. You may likewise suppose that you would then find my Genius so inquisitive
as to ask you where you have been at Church of late years. For you could then
go to no Church in England, Scotland, or Ireland without hearing St. Paul's
Omnis anima spoken of, Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, whether
he be Apostle, or Evangelist, Prophet, Priest, Clergy or Layety, whether he be
of the People diffusive or representative, and the like. And as the well-drawn
Effigies of a man seems to look on every one in the Room, so has the Picture
of the Regal Power drawn by the Divines of the Church of England, appeared to
cast its Eye on every one, and been made as it were Vocal, and saying to every
one, For he is the Minister of God to thee for good. And the good old Book
called God and the King that you have read over and over, has told you, that
the Bond of the King's Subjects Obedience to his Majesty is inviolable, and
cannot be dissolved.

And indeed the thing being so plain by the Law of Nature, which being written
in man's heart is the very same (so far forth as it is yet undefaced) with the
Law of God revealed in the Word, it is not tanti to raise Moot-Points about
this, relating to Scripture.

I doubt not but you remember it in my Lord Herbert's Harry the 8th, that there
being a Rebellion of many of the Commonalty, A. 1536. and the Rebels sending
the King their Grievances, and one whereof was, That his Grace had ill
Counselors, and of mean Birth (among which Cromwell was not forgotten) and the
King sending an Answer penned by himself as to their Grievances, he did therein
upbraid them for meddling in the choice of his Counselors, and command their
acquiescence therein on the grounds of Nature and of his being their Natural
Liege-lord.


A. Well Sir: Let it for the present pass as a datum or concessum, as you will
have it, that the Obedience of Subjects, in serving their Prince is founded on
the grounds both of Nature and Scripture. And I shall moreover allow it to you,
that if you had an Enthusiast to deal with, and such who as you said do outrage
the 13th of the Romans out of the Apocalypse, you might out of Brightman's
Revelation of the Apocalypse, show him out of that part of Holy Scripture
sufficient Authority for the King's particularly making Cromwell his Vicegerent.
For he there on the 14th Chapter, and the 17th, and following Verses, says,
This Angel is Thomas Cromwell who lived in the days of Harry the 8th, that most
mighty King, and was a man of great renown and place in our Kingdoms, being the
Earl of Essex, and Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal, who came out of the Temple,
and being a sincere favourer of pure Religion. He had a Sickle in his hand,
being made the King's Deputy in all Ecclesiastical Matters: and it was a sharp
one, as with which he sets stoutly and deliberately to his work, and yet he had
no Crown or Diadem to grace his head withal, being a Minister rather to put
another Man's Power in Ure, then any that wrought by his own Power and
Authority. And he on Verse the 18th makes the other Angel to be a Martyr: viz.
Tho. Cranmer, and refers the meaning of the words, He cried with a great voice
to him that had the Sickle, to Cranmer, because (says he) in the days of Harry
the 8th, he inflamed the mind of Tho. Cromwell, by his words, with a desire to
make a Vintage.


B. I thank you for diverting me with that passage of Brightman: but I can
refer you to another Writer of our Church, whose Authority will go further with
us then Brightman's, and who has recorded it, that the great figure that
Cromwell made both in the Church and State, and his and Cranmer's acting
together in concert, and by joint Councels both in Church and at the Helm of
State, was so highly fortunate to the Reformation. You may find this observed
by Archbishop Parker in his De Antiquitate Ecclesi^ Britannicoe, p. 530. where
he says, Namque profligato Papa, and suscepta Ecclesioe Anglicanoe defensione,
cura and tutela, Rex excelsi^ing ^ii, and multarum rerum usu peritum, Thomam
Cromwellum Vicarium suum in spiritualibus generalem designavit. Hic cum Thoma
Cranmero Archiepiscopo tanquam in puppi sedit. clavumque Ecclesioe Anglicanoe
tenuit, proramque a papali littore avertit, and in Christianum portum reduxit.


A. Was, Vicar General to the King in Spirituals, Cromwell's style for his
Office, as the Archbishop there termed it.


B. I am apt to think it was not. I never saw any Copy of his Patent or
Commission for it. The Acts of Parliament in H. the 8^h's time style him, The
King's Vicegerent, etc. And the Statute of 37o. H. 8. beforementioned that
speaks of Bishops Vicars-General uses only the Style of Vicegerent for
Cromwell's Office. And I have observed in his Injunctions to the Clergy, that he
styles himself Lord Privy Seal, Uice-gerent to King Henry the 8th, for all his
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical within this Realm, etc.

But the word Vicar being perhaps by the envy of the Monks put on him and his
Office in common Discourse (the word Vicar in the Proper signification of it,
signifying a Servant to a Servant, according to that in Martial, Esse sat est
servum, jam nolo Vicarius esse) the Archbishop speaking Cum vulgo might then
call him the King's Vicar General, and so others since.

I should before have mentioned what he says, p. 323. speaking of Cromwell,
Inter hunc and Cranmerum summam necessitudinem Evangelium conciliavit, ut dum
ille Experientia, hic Doctrina c^nctos ante^elleret, tum utrique Regi intimi
and chari essent. Ex horum Consilio, and impiis atque odiosis Papoe and Wolsoei
Cardinalis Actis summum supplicium, and exitium Romanoe Curioe divinitus
paratum est.


A. You have enough minded me of the King's dispensing with the disabiity
incurred by the Canons both in the C se of Cromwell a Layman intermedling in
Ecclesiastical Matters, and of C^anmer a Clergyman intermedling in secular,
proving so necessary to the Reformation, and accordingly as Queen Elizabeth's
dispensing with disability proved so to the Establishment of the present
Hierarchy of the Church of England. And I shall most seriously consider what
the Act of the 37th of H. the 8th, has in such plain and liquid terms declared
of the Power given to the King by Scripture, and to all such Persons as he
shall appoint, to exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, however incapacitated
so to do by lawful Canons and Constitutions, and which were by that Eminent
Iustitiary you mentioned held Equivalent to Acts of Parliament: and shall grant
that i^ never so many Acts of Parliament had attempted to deprive the King of a
Power inherent in him by Scripture, such attempt would be nugatory, and the
fremuerunt gentes against it, would be but the Peoples imagining a vain thing.
And I shall consider it how far by clear and necessary Consequences, and no
wire-drawn ones, it follows from what is declared by this Act of Parliament, as
to the King's being authorized by Scripture to choose some sorts of Officers to
serve the Crown in Church and State, that he is so authorized to choose others;
in like manner as you mentioned it to me declared by the Scotch Act of
Parliament, that the King by virtue of the Royal Power he holds from God
All-mighty is to have the SOLE choice and appointment of the Officers of the
State, etc. But (I Pray) do not many other Acts of Parliament in Harry the 8ths
time, whereby the Royal Prerogative is so much advanced, and particularly that
of the 25th of Harry the 8th, that sets up the Dispensative Power, seem to make
it depend on Statute Law? And may it not seem to be more than a flaw in the
Diamond of Prerogative, and a great depretiating of it in cutting it out (as it
were) into four, by making its Establishment depend on the King and three
Estates?


B. I shall therefore here once for all tell you, that the occasion of so many
men's mistake in thinking so many of those Acts of Parliament in Harry the 8th's
time prejudicial to Prerogative, as seeming to found it on Statute Law, is
their not considering that such Statutes were but declaratory of old Laws, and
not introductive of new ones. My Lord Primate Bramhal in his Schism guarded, p.
155. says, I profess clearly I do not see what advantage Henry the 8th could
make of his own Laws, which he might not have made of the ancient Laws, except
only a gaudy Title of Head of the English Church which survived him not long,
and the Tenths and firstfruits of the Clergy, etc.

But you may as fully take notice how Harry the 8th throughout his great
Declarative Laws so often declares in effect his Regal Power to be given him by
God. My Lord Coke in his Caudry's Case, instanceth in the famous Statute of 24o
H. 8. c. 12. and calls it declaratory of the ancient Law, and you see how it is
declared there, That the King is by the goodness of God furnished with
Prerogative, etc. And the Statute of 37o H. 8. begins as I showed you with the
three Estates, DECLARING, That the King's Majesty is and has always justly
been Supreme Head in the Earth of the Church of England by the Word of God. You
know too how the style runs in another of his Acts of Parliament, viz. The
Bishop of Rome and See Apostolic, contrary to the great and inviolable Grants
of Jurisdictions by God immediately to Emperors, Kings, and Princes, etc. And
thus tho there are various Statutes in his Reign, and particularly that of the
25th year of his Reign, c. 19. by which it was Enacted, That the King's
Highness shall have Power and Authority to nominate and assign at his pleasure
Two and thirty persons, whereof Sixteen to be of the Clergy, and Sixteen of the
Temporalty of the Upper and Nether House of the Parliament to view, search, and
examine the Canous, Constitutions and Ordinances Provincial, and that such of
them as the King's Highness and the said Two and thirty or the Major part of
them shall deem and adjudge worthy to be continued, kept and obeyed, shall be^
from henceforth kept obeyed and executed within this Realm, so that the Kings
most Royal assent under his Great Seal be first had to the same, etc. and tho
according to the ancient usage of the Realm as well as to those Canons Laymen
were not only incapacitated to make Ecclesiastical Constitutions and Canons,
but Kings, Bishops, or Noblemen who believed that the Decrees of the Bishops of
Rome may be violated or shall suffer them so to be, are in the Canon Law
anathematized, yet as this enacting Clause was made on the Clergy's Petition to
the King (as the Preamble of the Act mentions) that those Constitutions and
Canons may be committed to the Examination and Judgment of his Highness, and of
Two and Thirty persons of the King's Subjects, whereof sixteen were to be of
the Upper and Nether House of the Parliament, of the Temporalty; and all the
said Two and thirty persons to be chosen and appointed by the King's Majesty,
etc. and be empowered to do what I mentioned out of the enacting Clause (and
whereby the King alone was in effect both according to the Clergy's Petition,
and the enacting Clause vested with the jus vitoe and necis of the Canons) so
in a Memorable Epistle of Harry the 8th. Printed before the Reformatio legum
Ecclesiasticarum, and intended as a draught for a Publication or Promulgation
of the King's new Ecclesiastical Laws, after the draught of them had been by
those Clergymen and Laymen prepared for his Royal Consideration, and been by
him established, he there declares his Power of so doing to be pursuant to his
Supreme Headship of the Church of England recognized, quemadmodum divini atque
humani juris tatio postulat, and mentions, the Power granted to him and his
Ancestors ipso jure divino, as recognized, and applies to himself the words
Sapientioe, cap. 7. Audite Reges and intelligite quoniam data est a Domino
potestas vobis, etc. and founding his Power of making Ecclesiastical Laws on
that jus Divinum, he says, En vobis authoritate nostra editas leges damus, etc.

And here I shall tell you that as my Lord Coke in Cawdry's Case calls the Act
of the 24th of H. 8. beforementioned, An Act declaratory of the Ancient Law; so
he likewise does the Act of the 25th of his Reign, c. 21. that so much props up
the Dispensative Power. And I assure you that they look but at a few things in
general, and in that Statute in particular, who think that the Dispensative
Power inherent in the King lost any ground thereby: and he who takes the
Statute altogether, will find that that Power if it seemed in any words to go
back from it self, was but by such retreat to leap the further forward.

For if you will take a glancing view of the intent of that Statute to that
end, you will see that instead of that Law making it self to be the Fountain of
the Dispensative Power, it makes the Dispensative Power to be the very Fountain
of a great part of the Common Law it self: for its style gives you the figure
of our Laws, as either devised, made and obtained within this Realm for the
wealth of the same, or such as by SUFFERANCE of your Grace and your Progenitors
(which is a Dispensation by way of Permission or Connivence) the People of this
your Realm have taken at their free Liberty by their own Consent to be used
among them, and have bound themselves by long use and Custom to the observance
of the same, etc. And the King in his Legislative Capacity having with the
consent of the three Estates superseded the Pope's Dispensative Power that had
so long Usurped on the King's Laws, and having provided that the Money that
should be paid as Fees for Dispensations should be raised and moderated by
their Consent, obtained from them a Clause in the Act containing so great a
deference to the Dispensative Power of the Crown, as that after the Act had
authorized the Archbishop of Canterbury and his Successors to grant such
Dispensations, Licenses and Faculties as were accustomed to be had from the Sea
of Rome, and not grant any others till the King, his Heirs and Successors, or
their Council were first advertised thereof, and determined whether they should
pass: It Provided that if it were thought and determined by the King, his Heirs
and Successors, or their Council, that Dispensations, Faculties, Licenses, or
other Writings in any such Case UNWONT shall pass, that then the said
Archbishop or his Commissary having License of His Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors for the same shall dispense with them accordingly: and in Case of
his refusing to dispense, that any other two Bishops, the King, his Heirs and
Successors should nominate, should be appointed to dispense in such Cases. And
this Act with all the Clauses in it, you find revived by the 1st. of Elizabeth,
c. 1.

The Pope's rehabilitations did customarily extend to Laymen as well as
Clergymen, and that particularly in case of Heterodoxy in Religion, then
called Heresy, which both by ancient usage and Acts of Parliament loaded men
with various incapacities. And his relaxing the incapacities that relate to
Clergymen, any one may see by the Taxa Cameroe and the Fees thereby payable,
viz. in the Age of those who were to take Orders and were defective in some of
their Members, and in the Case of Clergy-mens incapacity incurred by
irregularity. But after this Act of the 25. of H. the 8th, had showed the World
the Authority the King had to rehabilitate and dispense here in his own Country
both as to matters customarily dispensed with at Rome, and such as were not so,
and how small the Fees were for the same, the bringing rehabilitations, and
Perinde valere's from Rome to England, was like carrying Coals to New Castle.


A. I was not satisfied with your extending the King's Power of Dispensing here
as far as the Pope's reached, and it seems you extend it further. I hope you
intend not to bring in here the Tax of the Apostolical Chancery, and which Mr.
Crashaw translating into English in the year 1625. called it, The Rates of the
Pope's Custom-house, and wherein are contained Indulgences for Sins past,
present and to come, and such a kind of Pardoning Power as in The historical
Narration of the first Fourteen years of King James, appeared to that King so
scandalous in the Case of the Draught of the Earl of Somerset's Pardon, and in
which Sir Robert Cotton having been desired by the Earl to find out the largest
Pardon that former Presidents could show, brought him one that was made by the
Pope to Cardinal Wolsey, and by a fac simile after which, the Draught of the
Earls ran for Pardoning all manner of Felonies and Treasons committed and to be
committed.


B. Premising to you that the Christian offices do more call on you to mind
what Sins you dispense with in your self, then what the Pope dispenses with in
others, and that this present Pope has spoiled the Trade of raillery about
Indulgences by spoiling the Trade of them, and damning so great a number of
them, and that in his vast Supplies of Money toward the taking of Buda, the
Souls in Purgatory contributed nothing, and that Sir Paul Ricaut in the Life of
this Pope, having done right to his Virtue, in mentioning his having suppressed
an Office of the Virgin Mary, and a multitude of Indulgences, has further
judiciously observed, That Wisemen at the Council of Trent finding that the
Doctrine of Indulgences was not solid, did but slightly touch it; and tho yet
it was the CHIEF matter for which that Council was assembled, nothing was
determined therein, but only that Indulgences be used with such Moderation as
was approved by the Ancient Custom of the Church, that is, not at all; I say
premising all this, I shall mind you that I have said enough already to let you
see that it is only the ancient Dispensative Jurisdiction of the Crown that I
direct you to prop up, and more particularly with respect to the Case before
you.

While we are considering the Obligation of an Oath, it were pity that the
thoughts of either of us should be embarras'd with Moot-points; and so without
troubling you with a reference to More, f. 463. where all the Power of the Pope
is not given to the King by the 25th of H. the 8th, but is extinct, Hallywel' s
Case; or to the quite contrary in More 542. Armiger's Case, I shall most
consult the ease of your thoughts by directing them to what interpretation my
Lord Coke in Cawdrys Case gives as to the words of the Statute of 1o Eliz. and
where he says, that that Act does not annex any Jurisdiction to the Crown but
what was of right or ought to be by the Ancient Laws of this Realm, parcel of
the King's Jurisdiction, etc. and which lawfully had been or might be exercised
within the Realm. The end of which Jurisdiction, and of all the Proceedings
thereupon, that all things might be done in Causes Ecclesiastical to the
Pleasure of Almighty God, increase of Virtue, and the Conservation of the Peace
and Unity of the Realm, as by diverse places of the Act appears. And therefore
by this Act no pretended Jurisdiction exercised within this Realm being
ungodly, or repugnant to the ancient Law of the Crown, was or could be restored
to the Crown according to the ancient Right and Law of the same.

And here I may tell you, that as the Pope did often dispense with incapacity
incurred by his Positive Laws, and that even in the use of the Power of the
Keys, as by his delegating the Power of Excommunication to Laymen, and to
Abbesses as aforesaid; so our Kings d d anciently by their Letters Patents and
Charters, grant Power to those who were no Bishops, Ordinaries, or
Ecclesiastical Judges or Officers to inflict Ecclesiastical Censures of the
greater Excommunication on Offenders, and that for Causes not merely Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical with Power to Certify them into Chancery, and thereupon to
obtain Writs de Excommunicato Capiendo, as Mr. Prynne tells us in his
Animadversions on the Fourth part of the Institutes, and there cites the
President of Edward the Third, thus empow'ring the Chancellor of the University
of Oxford, tho a Layman so to do, and so to Punish Breakers of the Peace,
Offenders against the Statutes, Privileges and Customs of the University, and
all Forestallers, and Regraters, and Sellers of corrupt Meat and Wine, and to
Excommunicate such who refused to cleanse the Streets from filth, and to Pave
them before their Doors, and this (he says) was confirmed by sundry succeeding
Statutes of our Princes.

In what particulars it is by this Statute of the 25. of H. the 8th. warranted
that the King, his Heirs and Successors may dispense with Persons and in Causes
that the Papacy was never accustomed to dispense in, I shall not trouble you or
my self to enquire: but shall tell you, that Mr. Nigh in his Book called Two
Acts of Parliament, and wherein are contained his Observations on the Oath of
Supremacy, does in p. 164. cite this Statute of 25. H. 8. c. 21. and thereupon
say, the King's Majesty may dispense with any of those Canons or Ecclesiastical
Laws, (meaning the King's Ecclesiastical Laws) indulge the Omission of what is
enjoined by them: make void the Crime and remove the Penalty incurred by breach
of them: yea, and give faculty to do and practice otherwise, any Synodal
Establishment, or long usage to the Contrary notwithstanding, in what offends
not the Holy Scripture and Laws of GOD.

And therefore when our Sovereign in the course of his Ecclesiastical
Supremacy, does only dispense with incapacity, we are sure he goes not to the
height of the Dispensative Power justified in him by that Statute: nothing
having been more customary to the Papacy then rehabilitation.

It was upon the Revival of this Statute of Harry the 8th, by that first of
Queen Eliz. c. 1. that she, according to the Papal custom of dispensing with
the Commutation of Penance, did in her Articles in the Synod began at London,
A. D. 1548. establish one De moderanda solennis Poenitentioe Commutatione,
whereby she orders, that such Commutation shall be but seldom and for weighty
Causes, and when it shall appear to the Bishop that that way is the safer to
reform the guilty Person, and that the CommutationMoney be employed to Pious
uses. And then follows the Title. De Moderandis quibusdam Indulgentus pro
Celebratione Matrimonii absque trinundina denunciatione quam bannos vocant
Matrimoniales, where you will find she makes Faculties and Indulgences all one.

And as I have showed you how she thought it necessary for the safety of her
Subjects Consciences to exercise her Dispensative Power of interpreting, and of
relaxing disabilities occasioned by the very first Statute of her Reign, and
how soon she put the Dispensative Power of those kinds in practice, which by
that Statute were restored and united to her Imperial Crown, so I may observe
to you that shortly after the making of the Second Statute in her Reign, viz.
That for Uniformity of Prayer and Administration of Sacraments, which punishes
with Praemunire, Sequestration, and Deprivation, and Excommunication (which
while it is depending is so variously inclusive of disability) the not using
the Book of Common Prayer as Published in English; she by her Letters Patents
dated the 6th of April in the Second year of her Reign, and A. 1560. allows
the use of Latin Prayers to the Colleges of both Universities, and to Eaton
and Winchester Colleges, with a particular Non-obstante to that Statute: a Copy
of which Letters Patents may be seen in Bishop Sparrow's Collection of
Articles, etc. And I have before acquainted you in general, how in her Letters
Patents for the Consecrating new Bishops, she expressly dispensed with
incapacity.

But what may perhaps seem to you as a new Indication of her being the better
able to dispense with it, is an Instance I shall give you of her making
incapacity by her Supreme Ecclesiastical Power. The instance of her thus making
incapacity, is a thing that Mr. Nigh in his Beams of former Light reflects on as
strange: for he there in p. 201. referring to Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions, A.
1559. Injunct. 29. viz. It is thought very necessary that no manner of Priest
or Deacon shall hereafter take to his Wife any manner of Woman without the
Advice and Allowance first had by the Bishop of the Diocese, and two Justices
of the Peace next to the place of her abode, etc. and if any shall do
otherwise, they shall not be permitted to Preach the Word, or give Sacraments,
nor be Capable of any Ecclesiastical Benefice; says then, Does this seem
strange now? It seemed very necessary in the judgment of our Governors then?


A. I must acknowledge that you have spoke that which is very much for my
Satisfaction concerning the Dispensative Power and the Oath thus supporting one
another. But I wonder that I have not in any of our celebrated Writers of the
Church of England read that the Contents of the Assertory and Promissory parts
of this Oath, and our abjuring foreign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities and
Authorities in the Oath, i. e. those of the Papacy, were intended in order to
the statuminating our Prince's Dispensative Power pursuant to the Statutes of
25. H. 8th, and 1o Eliz. beforementioned.


B. I can easily direct you to such a Writer of our Church who has done the
thing to the universal Satisfaction of the Inquisitive as to this Point, and
that is the Lord Primate Bramhal in his Book of Schism Guarded.

He says there, in p. 330, and 331. As our Grievances, so our Reformation was
only of the abuses of the Roman Court. Their bestowing of Prelacies and
Dignities in England to the Prejudice of the right Patrons; Their Convocating
Synods in England without the King's leave; Their Prohibiting English Prelates
to make their old feudal Oaths to the King, and obliging them to take new Oaths
of Fidelity to the Pope; Their imposing and receiving Tenths and first Fruits,
and other Arbitrary Pensions upon the English Clergy; and lastly, their
Usurping a Legislative Judiciary and Dispensative Power in the exterior Court
by Political Coaction; these are all the branches of Papal Power which we have
rejected. This Reformation is all the Separation that we have made in point of
Discipline. And for Doctrine we have no difference with them about the old
Essentials of Christian Religion: and their new Essentials which they have
patched to the Creed are but their erroneous, or at the best, probable
Opinions; no Articles of Faith. Thus then according to these measures, you see
how much the hinge of the Reformation turns on the Usurpation of the Papacy in
Dispensing: for in all these particulars enumerated, the Pope dispensed with
the King's Laws. And he had before in p. 26. said, This Primacy neither the
Ancients nor we deny to St. Peter, of Order, of Place, of Pre-eminence. If this
first movership would serve his turn, the Controversy were at an end for our
parts. But this Primacy is over-lean; the Court of Rome have no gusto to it.
They thirst after a visible Monarchy on Earth, an absolute Ecclesiastical
Sovereignty; a Power to make Canons, to abolish Canons, to dispense with
Canons: to impose Pensions, to dispose of Dignities, to decide Controversies by
a single Authority. This was that which made the breach; not the Innocent
Primacy of St. Peter. And afterward in p. 149. he says, But I must contract my
Discourse to those Dispensations that are intended in the Laws of Henry the
8th, that is the Power to dispense with English Laws in the exterior Court: Let
him bind or loose inwardly whom he will: whether his Key err or not, we are
not concerned. Secondly, As he is a Prince in his own Territories, he that has
Power to bind, has Power to loose. He that has Power to make Laws has Power
to dispense with his own Laws. Laws are made of Common Events. Those benign
Circumstances that happen rarely, are left to the Dispensative Grace of the
Prince. Thirdly, As he is a Bishop, whatever Dispensative Power the ancient
Ecclesiastical Canons, or Edicts of Christian Emperors give to the Bishop of
Rome within those Territories that were subject to his Jurisdiction by Humane
right, we do not envy him: so he suffer us to enjoy our ancient Privileges and
Immunities freed from his Encroachments and Usurpations. The Chief ground of
the ancient Ecclesiastical Canon was, let the old Customs prevail. A possession
or Prescription of Eleven hundred years is a good ward both in Law and
Conscience against an Human Right, and much more against a New pretense of
Divine Right. For Eleven hundred years our Kings and Bishops enjoyed the sole
Dispensative Power with all English Laws, Civil and Ecclesiastical. In all
which time he is not able to give one instance of a Papal Dispensation in
England, nor any shadow of it when the Church was formed. Where the Bishops of
Rome had no Legislative Power, no Judiciary Power in the exterior Court, by
necessary Consequence they could have no Dispensative Power. He then in p. 169.
mentions the said Statute of 25. H. 8th. and having referred to the Proviso,
there to show, that its intent was not to vary from the Church of Christ in any
other things declared by the Holy Scripture, and the Word of God necessary to
Salvation, he says then follows the scope of our Reformation; only to make
an Ordinance by Policies necessary and convenient to repress Vice, and for good
Conservation of the Realm in Peace, Unity and Tranquillity from ravine, and
spoil, ensuing much the ancient Customs of this Realm in that behalf: not
minding to seek for any relief, succors, or remedies for any worldly things,
and Humane Laws in any cause of necessity, but within this Realm at the hands
of your Highness, your Heirs and Successors Kings of this Realm, which have and
ought to have an Imperial Power and Authority in the same, and not obliged in
worldly Causes to any other Superior.

Thus then you see this Prelates sense of how much the taking away the Pope's
Dispensative Power here, and restoring that Power to the Crown, was the Soul of
the Reformation, and tota in toto of it. And this Act you see revived by the
First of Elizabeth without garbling it in the least; and the Dispensative Power
thereby restored to her, her Heirs and Successors, and a Declaration, that no
Subjects of the Realm need for any worldly things and Humane Laws in any Cause
of Necessity seek for any relief, but within this Realm at the hands of our
Sovereign, as aforesaid. And I shall tell you that the Bishop in the next Page
refers to the Statute of the First of Eliz. and says on his view of both
Statutes, Whatsoever Power our Laws did divest the Pope of, they invested the
King with it. And of this, the Power of Rehabilitating any of his Lay or
Clerical Subjects is a part, as was beforesaid.


A. You have cited somewhat out of this Great Champion for the King's
Supremacy, and for the Church of England, and reputed to be the most clear
Vindicator of it from Schism our Church has had, which has created more
anxiety in my mind about the Assertory part of the Oath then any thing has
done. For the words in the Oath are, I do utterly testify and declare, etc that
no Foreign Prelate or Person has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm, and you have brought in the
Primate granting that the Pope has Power here to bind or loose inwardly, and
asserting that he has here a Spiritual Power.


B. You judge right of the Bishop's Opinion, and which is indeed expressed
throughout his whole Book. He tells us in p. 25. That St. Cyprian made all the
Bishoprics in the World to be but one Mass, whereof every Bishop had an
entire part: And he says in p. 60, and 61. That neither King Harry the 8th,
nor any of our Legislators did ever endeavor to deprive the Bishop of Rome of
the Power of the Keys, or any part thereof; either the Key of Order, or the Key
of Jurisdiction: I mean Jurisdiction purely Spiritual which has place only in
the inner Court of Conscience, and over such Persons as submit willingly: And
in the clearing of which Point he refers to the Proviso aforesaid in the
Statute of the 25th of Harry the 8th, and the 37th Canon of the Church of
England, as rendering the Power by both given to the King to be purely
Political. But in p. 159. he refers by way of Objection to two Statutes of
Harry the 8th, the one an Act for extinguishing the Authority of the Bishop of
Rome, the other an Act for Establishing the Succession, wherein there is an
Oath, that the Bishop of Rome OUGHT not to have any Jurisdiction or Authority
in this Realm; then faith it is declared in the 37th Article of our Church,
that the Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in the Kingdom of England: and in
the Oath ordained by Queen Elizabeth, that no Foreign Preiate has or ought to
have any Jurisdiction or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this
Realm: and he then by way of answer to which, says That those two* Statutes
were long ago repealed by Queen Mary, and never afterward restored, etc. and
that although it were supposed that our Ancestors ^ad over-reached themselves and
the truth in some Expressions, yet that concerns not us* at all, so long as we
keep our selves exactly to the line and level of Apostolical Tradition: and
says, that our Ancestors meant the very same thing that we do. Our only
difference is in the use of the words, Spiritual Authority or Jurisdiction,
which we understand of Jurisdiction purely Spiritual which extends ^o further
then the Court of Conscience. But by Spiritual Authority or Jurisdiction, they
did understand Ecclesiostical Jurisdiction in the exterior Court, which in
truth is partly Spiritual, partly Political. And he in p. 161. takes notice of
the Apostles Dispensative Power, 2 Cor. 2. 10. to whom I forgave any thing for
your sakes, forgave I in the person of Christ: But all this is only in the
interior Court of Conscience.

But the Primate having in p. 73. discoursed of the Act* of 1o Eliz. c. 1.
says, here is no new Power created in the Crown, but only an ancient
Jurisdiction restored; here is no foreign Power abolished, but only that which
is repugnant to the ancient Laws of England, and the Prerogative Royal. In a
word, here is no Power ascribed to our Kings, but merely Political and Coactive
to see that all their Subjects do their Duties in their several Places.
Coactive Power is one of the Keys of the Kingdom of this World; it is none of
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. This might have been expressed in words less
subject to Exc^ption.


A. The Primate has shown an eminent Candor of mind in these Passages of his
you have cited: and if our Ancestors had but over-reached themselves, and the
truth in some Expressions, and in any part of a Statute but that which forms an
Oath, it had not much concerned us, and as long as they had kept exactly to the
line and level of plain Truth in all the words of the Oath: but Oaths being
stricti juris, and being to be taken in truth and in righteousness, and in the
common sense of the words, may I not here to the Assertory Clause of No foreign
Prelate or Person has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, etc. apply those
other words of the Primate, This might have been expressed in words less
subject to Exception? But according to what he cited out of St. Cyprian, it may
be said instead of no foreign Prelate has or ought to have any Jurisdiction,
etc. that Every foreign Prelate has it, and not only the Bishop of Rome as
claiming a Succession under St. Peter, but Thousands of other Bishops in
Christendom; who as the Primate says there, p. 162. do not at all derive their
Holy Orders from S. Peter, or any other Roman Bishop, either mediately, or
immediately (especially in Asia and Africa) but from the other Apostles.

And suitably to what the Primate observed out of S. Cyprian, by which we see
that as there is but one Universal Church, so there is but Episcopatus Unus in
that Church and that undivided, I find it observed in Sir Geffery Palmer's
Reports in the Case of Evans and Kiffin. verse. Ascuith. Trin. 3. Car. B. R.
Whitelock. Evesque ad 3 Powers. Le Primer est Ordinations: and that comes to
him by his Consecration, and not before. By that he can take the resignation of
a Church. He can give Orders and Consecrate Churches: and it belongs not to him
as he is a Bishop of one place or other, mais il est universel sur tout le
monde. And therefore the Archbishop of Spalato when he was here could give
Orders. The Chief Justice agreed with him herein. The second is Potestas
Jurisdictionis which is not Universal, but tied to certain places, as to take
an Oath, to Excommunicate and Punish offenses, and this Power he has by
Confirmation. The third is Administratio rei Familiaris, the Government of his
Revenue, and this is gained by Confirmation. By this you see that the Bishop of
Rome, as every other foreign Bishop, may have some Spiritual Power here, viz.
what the Reporter mentioned as the first. And therefore I could wish that the
37th of our 39 Articles to which the Primate refers for the Interpretations of
this Clause in the Oath, had in those words there the Bishop of Rome has no
Jurisdiction in this Realm, expressed such a distinction of his Jurisdiction as
the Bishop has done: and otherwise that common and trite Rule of Non est
distinguendum ubi lex non distinguit, being here applicable, you know what is
to be thought of an ambiguous Oath; and that as the sagacious Author of the
History of the Council of Trent has told us, p. 187, as one Particular makes
false the contradictory Universal, so one ambiguous Particular, makes the
Universal to be ambiguous.

Moreover tho you will suppose that he might lawfully take the Oath in his
sense of the Pope's Jurisdiction, yet all his great Learning and Reason could
not qualify him to be an Authentical Interpreter of the Oath to me. In some
parts of the Oath that were obvious to doubt, you have already given me
satisfaction, and particularly in making me by virtue of the Canons of King
James a participant with the Clergy in his authentical Interpretation of the
37th Article. And since as Suarez in his learned Book, De Legibus, 4. c. de
Interpretatione humanarum Legum, says that there may be an interpretation of
Law which has the Authority of Law, and that qui in eadem potestate succedit,
semper potest Praedecessotum leges interpretari, I shall account King James his
Interpretation as good as Queen Elizabeth's: and that if he had there declared
his mind about the Pope's spiritual Power in foro interno, being not renounced
by this Clause in the Oath, I should then be content with it. But it is
otherwise: for he there Confirms it in effect as it is in the Article.

Now you know how much Simplicity becomes an Oath, and how requisite it is that
it should be conceived in plain and liquid terms, and taken in the Imposer's
sense and without mental reservations, and that you should Swear therein to no
dogmatical Assertion; and as to which Mr. Nigh says well in his Observations on
that Oath, to swear positively to any dogmatical Assertion is not required. It
would be a taking the Name of God in vain: for if it be a certain and undoubted
truth in it self and to others, as are Principles of Reason and Articles of
Faith, an Oath is vain, for it ends no strife. If doubtful and a question
whether true or not, tho such an Oath puts it out of question that I believe
so, yet not that it is a truth. My belief, tho never so much evidenced and
confirmed, does not make a doubtful matter in it self more credible; nor is one
man's believing an Assertion just ground for another man to believe the same.
Such an Oath therefore is in vain, and not a fit Medium to end such a
Controversy.

Now how far your declaring in your Oath that no foreign Prela^e has nor ought
to have any Jurisdiction Spiritual within this Realm, and the Interpretation of
it pursuant to the 37th Article delivering the Plain words, The Bishop of Rome
has no Jurisdiction, etc. may bring you within the Verge of swearing what is
dogmatical, I leave you to judge: but shall take the liberty to tell you, that
when I see some of our Laws, and particularly this about our Oath girdled with
so many Interpretations like new tender-sided Ships, I shall be apt to take
little pleasure in embarquing my Conscience in such an Oath, and am apt to call
to mind the Censure which Mr. Milton's Character of the Long Parliament of 40.
fulminates against his Countrymen, and by which he so much disables our
understandings as to Political Government; and says, that the Sun which we
want, ripens Wits as well as Fruits, and as Wine and Oil are imported to us
from abroad, so must ripe understanding, etc.


B. But however, tho our Wine and Oil are imported to us from abroad, our
Dispensations are not, and we have no Occasion to send Gold to Rome for Lead:
And I assure you, he who shall consider that the English Virtuosi were the last
that did receive the yokes of the old Imperial and later Papal Power of Rome,
and the first that threw them off, will tho we are Crasso sub aere nati, have
no cause to vilify our understandings, but rather to envy their triumphs over
Infallibility so called. And perhaps when I shall have told you of another
passage of the Bishop, P. 59. in his Schism guarded, you will think the Eyes of
our Ancestors understandings did look out sharp when the two Statutes of the
25th of H. 8. and 1o Eliz. were made; and there he says, Suppose any of our
Reformers have run into any Excesses or Extremes, either in their Expressions,
or perhaps in their Actions (it is a difficult thing in great changes to
observe a just mean) it may be out of Humane Frailty, as Lycurgus out of hatred
to Drunkenness cut down all the Vines about Sparta, or it may be out of Policy,
as men use to bend a Crooked rod as much the contrary way, or as expert Masters
of Music do sometimes draw up their Scholars a Note too high, to bring them to
a just tone, what is that to us as long as we practice the Mean and maintain
the Mean, and guide our selves by the certain line and level of Apostolical and
Primitive Tradition?

There is no doubt but in the framing of the Statute of 1o Eliz. and the Oath
therein, regard was had to the Oath in the 35th of H. 8. c. 1. viz. I having
now the veil of Darkness of the Usurped Power, Authority and Jurisdiction of
the Sea and Bishops of Rome clearly taken away from mine Eyes, do utterly
testify and declare in my Conscience, that neither the Sea nor the Bishop of
Rome, nor any foreign Potentate has nor ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power
or Authority within this Realm, neither by God's Law, nor any other just Law or
means, etc. and that I shall never consent nor agree that the aforesaid See or
Bishop of Rome, or their Successors, shall exercise or have any manner of
Authority, Jurisdiction or Power within this Realm, etc. And this Oath remained
the same all the rest of his Reign, and all Edward the 6th's time: and as to
which Queen Elizabeth changed the Expression of Supreme Head: and both Harry
the 8th, and She having their Eyes on the effect of Papal Excommunications, and
concerned to have the nullity of them believed by their Subjects, might seem
according to the Primate's Expression to bend the crooked rod of the Papal
Jurisdiction overmuch the contrary way in their Oaths, that so it might come to
that just straitness referred to according to the Primate's measures of it.

But after all I shall tell you, that I think no Political respects can
justify the putting doubtful Expressions into an Oath, or the taking of one
with mental reservations of a sense different from the Common one of the words,
and I do therefore join issue with you in the Point, that the Clause in the
Oath, That no foreign Prelate has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, etc.
being the very same in the 37th Article, (and in the Interpretation of which
Article, King James his Canons have, as you said, made you a sharer with the
Clergy) you and all others who take the Oath may be thankful for the benefit of
that King, having further exercised the Dispensative Power of his interpreting
the whole intent of that Oath: And that Interpretation of it which has made
the Coast of the Oath clear to you in this Point, you will find agreeing to
what he has in our Language Published to the World, and dedicated to eternity.
For he having in his Premonition to all Christian Monarchs mentioned how he
caused the House of Commons to Reform a Clause they had put into the Oath of
Allegiance derogatory to the Pope's spiritual Power, viz. That the Pope had no
Power to Excommunicate him, and that he was ready to consent that the Bishop of
Rome should have the first Seat, and be Patriarch of the West, and be Primus
Episcopus inter omnes Episcopos and princeps Episcoporum, so it be no otherwise
but as Peter was, Princeps Apostolorum, takes occasion in his Apology for the
Oath of Allegiance to let the World know his Royal judgment of the intent of
the OATH of SUPREMACT; and there in Confutation of the Pope's Breves, and
Bellarmine's Letter, he says in p. 108. that the rendering Christian Kings
within their own Dominions, Governors of their Church as well as of the rest of
their People, in being Custodes utriusque tabulae, not by making new Articles
of Faith, etc. but by commanding Obedience to be given to the Word of God, by
reforming Religion according to his prescribed Will, by assisting the Spiritual
Power with the Temporal Sword, by reforming Corruptions, by procuring due
Obedience to the Church, by judging and cutting off all frivolous Questions and
Schisms as Constantine did, and finally by making decorum to be observed in
every thing, and establishing Orders to be observed in all indifferent things
for that purpose, is the ONLY intent of the Oath of Supremacy: and whereby as
he effectually confuted the Cardinal, whose Letter charged the Oath of
Supremacy as tending to this end, That the Authority of the Head of the Church
in England may be transferred from the Successor of St. Peter to the Successor
of King Henry the 8th, and to oppose the Primacy of the Apostolic See; so at
the end of his Book he shows that his design of Publishing the same, was to
satisfy all his good and natural Subjects, and likewise Strangers, about the
things therein contained; and whereby the King's Mind was publicly notify'd
that in the right done to the Crown by the Oath of Suprema^y as well as of
Allegiance, there was no wrong intended to St. Peter, or his Successors.


A. I hope you have now put a Period to the History of the Dispensative Power
of the Crown, that was exercised in-the interpreting of any parts of the Oath
of Supremacy, or the 37th Article thereto relating. You have named to me so
many interpretations of the Oath, that according to the wisdom of our State,
and the Lex and Consuetudo Parliamenti making a Bill to be thrice read in each
House of Parliament, and then receiving the Royal Assent to be thought like
Gold seven times purified, may show the interpretation of the Law to be so too.
But tho I will account any good Law to be more precious then Gold, yet if like
Gold it be too far extended by ductile interpretation, it may be drawn to such
a thinness as to lose all its weight and estimation, and retain only a poor
tincture and color that will signify little or nothing. And as Pliny in his
Panegyric on Trajan said, that by reason of the multitudes of suits upon Penal
Laws in Rome, there was danger till Trajan's time, ne Civitas fundata legibus,
legibus everteretur; so a Law whose Obligatoriness is founded on
interpretations may be endangered by the multitudes of them to be destroyed,
and may like the Papal Laws of New Rome by the infinite interpretations of
Casuists in the forum internum (which is their Tribunal) be brought to signify
nothing in either forum, and to be only an Engine to make Perplexities.

You have given me here such a Genealogy of interpretations, that according to
the common Story of Arise Daughter, etc. one may say, Arise Interpretation, and
go to thy Interpretation, etc. I shall therefore be glad now you have been so
largely communicative of your thoughts to me about the assertory part of the
Oath, you will deal as frankly with me in acquainting me with what may in the
Promissory part of the Oath be of importance for me to know in order to the
better discharge of my Duty in the Case before me.


B. I shall therein be most ready to serve you when we meet next: for the
entire Consideration of what according to the Assertory part of the Oath you
are obliged to do, will I see, be as great a load as both our patiences will at
this time bear; and therefore according to the Saying of Must is for the King;
I am to tell you, that let our Kings make never so many interpretations one
after another of this your Oath, you must (finding them all Consistent with one
another) consider them all with all due regar^ (...) thank God and them when
their Consciences being inclined to a tenderness for the doubting of yours,
they interpose their Dispensative Power of that kind. And hereupon I shall tell
you that in the year 1628. King Charles the First did cause the 39 Articles to
be reprinted, and with a Declaration before the same made by him as Supreme
Governor of the Church within his Dominions, that those Articles contain the
true Doctrine of the Church of England, and that if any Difference should arise
about the external Policy concerning Injunctions, Canons or other Constitutions
whatsoever belonging to the Church of England, the Clergy in their Convocation,
is to order and settle them, etc. he approving their said Ordinances, etc. that
the Bishops and Clergy shall have license under the Broad Seal to deliberate
of, and do all such things as being made plain by them and assented to him,
shall concern the settled Continuance of the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England, etc. and then having respect to the Article wherein the
Arminians and Antiarminians were concerned, it is ordered, that no man hereafter
shall either Print or Preach to draw the Article aside any way, etc. But the
first Canon that was afterward ( viz. A. 1640.) made, was that concerning the
Regal Power, which begins with taking notice that sundry Laws, Ordinances, and
Constitutions had been formerly made for the acknowledgment and profession of
the most lawful and independent Authority of our Dread Sovereign Lord the King
over the state Ecclesiastical and Civil, and then enjoins them to be ALL
carefully observed by all persons whom they Concern upon the Penalties in the
said Laws and Constitutions expressed, and then decrees, that the Clergy shall
read the following Explanation of the Regal Power: and where the words, A
Supreme Power is given to this most excellent Order (i. e. of Kings) by God
himself in the Scriptures, which is, that Kings should rule and Command in
their several Dominions all persons of what Rank or Estate soever, whether
Ecclesiastical or Civil, and that they should restrain and punish with the
Temporal Sword all stubborn and wicked doers, show they had then the 37th of
the 39 Articles in their eye: and some other words, viz. for any person or
persons to set up, maintain or avow respectively under any pretense whatsoever,
any independent Coactive Power, either papal, or popular, etc. is to undermine
their great Royal Office, show they had an Eye on that 37th Article, and on
your Oath, and where they did speak out that sense of the Clause, The Bishop of
Rome has no Jurisdiction, etc. and of the words in the Oath, that no foreign
Prelate has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, etc. that is, that the Bishop
of Rome had here no independent Coactive Jurisdiction, the sense in which all
considerate Persons who were Members of the Church of Rome in Harry the 8th's
time, and of the Church of England in Edward the 6th's time, took the old Oath
of Supremacy, and the Members of the Church of England in Queen Elizabeth's
time and ever since took the new one.

As for Non-conformists, who think the Government of Bishops unlawful, this
Clause, that no foreign Bishop has or ought to have any Jurisdiction in the
forum internum wanted no relief in their Case from the Dispensative Power of
interpretation.

Nor did those of the Church of England who conversed with the StatuteBook want
the Crown's interpretation of this Clause in the Oath; for the scope of the
Statute of the 35th of H. the 8th, that enjoined the old Oath of Supremacy (and
from whence this Clause in the New one had its rise) was not to break the
Measures of St. Cyprian about the Unity of Episcopal Power, but in effect to
repress the Usurped independent Coactive Power of the Bishop of Rome, and which
several of the following words in that Oath sufficiently evince, and which did
bind the Swearer to defend and maintain all other Acts and Statutes made or to
be made within this Realm for the Extirpation and Extinguishment of the ururped
and pretended Authority, Power and Jurisdiction of the Sea and Bishop of Rome,
etc. And Queen Elizabeth finding the Oath thus, at her coming to the Throne,
she like a wise Reformer, would not make any breach in the World wider then
necessity required; and probably supposing that men's Allegiance having been
used to the yoke of several words in that Oath that related to the renouncing
and farsaking of foreign Jurisdiction, would draw more quietly in the same, and
that according to the Rule of quod necessario subintelligitur non deest, there
being no solutio continui imagined by any to be designed in the Unity of the
Episcopal Power, when the Clause of utterly testifying and declaring, that
neither the Sea nor Bishop of Rome has nor ought to have any Jurisdiction,
Power or Authority within this Realm, etc. was inserted in the old Oath, it
ought to be judged that nothing derogatory to the order of Bishops could be
intended in the Clause of the new Oath by her introduced. And according to the
Rule of Analogum perse positum, etc. Jurisdiction being to be taken for
Coactive Jurisdiction, the Clause relating to any foreign Prelates having here
no Jurisdiction has been still meant of none Coactive. Mr. Rogers therefore
writing on the 39 Articles, has thus fairly commented on that Clause in the
37th, The Pope has no Jurisdiction, etc. His Jurisdiction has been and is
justly renounced and banished out of England by many Kings and Parliaments, as
by King Edward 1st, 3d, and 6th: by King Richard the 2d, Harry the 4th, 6th,
8th, and by Queen Elizabeth, and by our most noble King James.

But that the Church of England intended no War against the Unity of Episcopacy
by the Canons of 1640. (which yet have the words of Popery's being a gross kind
of Superstition, and of the Mass being Idolatry, and do ininflict a temporary
disability, namely that of Excommunication on Popish Recusants) may appear by
the tenderness there used to the Church of Rome in sparing to impute the
Superstition of Popery to that whole Church by name. And the 6th Canon, having
mentioned the Convocation's being desirous to declare their sincerity and
constancy in the profession of the Doctrine and Discipline Established in the
Church of England (i. e. the Doctrine of the 39 Articles) and to secure all men
against any suspicion of revolt to Popery, or any other Superstition, and
enjoined a new Oath against all innovation of Doctrine or Discipline to be
taken by the Clergy (the assertory part whereof has in it an Approbation of
the Doctrine and Discipline or Government established in the Church of England,
as containing all things necessary for Salvation, and the Promissory part, a
Promise not to endeavor to bring in any Popish Doctrine contrary to that which
is so established, etc. and not to give consent ever to subject it to the
Usurpations and Superstitions of the Sea of Rome) Mr. Bagshaw in his Argument
in Parliament concerning those Canons, took occasion to criticize on the not
subjecting out Church to the Usurpation and Superstitions of the Sea of Rome,
and to call it a Negative Pregnant; that is to say (as his words are) you may
not subject the Church of England to the Sea of Rome, but to the Church of Rome
you may. Now there is as much difference between the Sea of Rome and the Church
of Rome, as betwixt Treason and Trespass, and this appears plainly by the
Statute of 23. Eliz. c. 1. where it is said, that to be reconciled to the Sea
of Rome is Treason: but to be reconciled to the Church of Rome is not Treason;
for then every Papist would be a Traitor, being a Member of the Church, and
therefore reconciled to it. Now the Sea of Rome is nothing else but the Papacy
or Supremacy of the Pope, whereby by virtue of the Canon, unam Sanctam, made by
Pope Boniface the 8th, he challenges a Superiority of Jurisdiction and
Correction over all Kings and Princes upon Earth: and those Persons which take
the juramentum fidei contained in the end of the Council of Trent, which
acknowledges this Supremacy, are said to be reconciled to this See. The Church
of Rome is nothing else but a number of Men within the Pope's Dominions and
elsewhere professing the Religion of Poperty: and that the Clergy had an ill
meaning in leaving this Clause in the Oath thus loose, I have some reason to
imagine when I find it in their late Books, that they say the Church of Rome is
a true Church, and Salvation is to be had in it.

And if it were tanti after having said so much, to say yet any thing more to
prop up the safety of your taking the Oath of Supremacy with the Clause whose
sense has been propp'd up by so many Acts of the Dispensative Power of
interpreting, I could tell you that in Sir John Winter's Observations on the
Oath of Supremacy, Printed A. 1679. he having there considered Queen Elizabeth's
interpretation in the Admonition, and the Confirmation of that Admonition by
her Majesty in Parliament by the Proviso in the Statute of 5o Eliz. c. 1. and
the whole drift of the Statute 1o Eliz. by which the Oath was enacted, and what
Bishop Carleton and the Primate Bramhal writ of the ancient Jurisdiction
restored to the Crown by that Statute, and that on the whole Matter the design
of the Oath was not to invest her with the exercise of the spiritual
Jurisdiction left by Christ to his Apostles and their Successors, but to leave
that entire to them, says at the end of his Book, that it is not the true
meaning of the Oath explained in manner as abovesaid, which makes many of the
Roman Catholics refuse to take it, etc. and then makes the Explanations not
being known to all, and their intricacy, and the constant tendering of the Oath
for so many years without the aforesaid Explanation, likely to give just Cause
of Scandal, and thereupon he wishes that that Oath, and the other of Allegiance
which are required of them under so great Penalties, may be cleared of those
doubtful Expressions in them which cause their scruples, etc. whereby they may
to the entire Satisfaction of His Majesty and the Nation, fully testify the
Allegiance and Fidelity of faithful Subjects and true Patriots, and no longer
remain as they generally now do distrusted, etc. But there was another Book
that year Published by a Roman Catholic, of which the title was A seasonable
Discourse showing how that the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy (as our Laws
interpret them) contain nothing which any good Christian ought to boggle at,
and where the Saying of Tertullian is quoted, Bonae res neminem scandalizant,
ni^ malam mentem, etc. and where having taken notice of the Queen's Admonition,
and the Proviso of the Statute of 5o Eliz. and the 37th Article, and the
Judgments of the Bishops, Bramhal and Carleton, as Sir John Winter had done
(and for the same purpose) gives his Judgment that the taking of those Oaths
gives no Scandal: and he in p. 38. averrs, that Sir John Winter told him many
years ago that he had the Judgment of Sorbouists, Secular Priests, and
Jesuits, that he might take the Oath of Supremacy, declaring the sense which
the Law allows. And I shall here by the way take notice that as to the Oath of
Allegiance, F. Cressy says in his Epistle Apologetical, p. 111. that few Roman
Catholics (if any at all) would refuse that Oath if that unlucky word
heretical were blotted out, etc. or if they might change heretical into,
contrary to the Word of God, which (he says) he verily believes was the sense
intended by King James.

But now after all this said, I shall tell you that according to what is
observed by the generality of Writers, o^ Princes easing their Subjects by
their Dispensative Power of interpreting their Laws, viz. That they take
occasion then to intermix with such interpretation somewhat else that may
advance their Power; there were Fears and Iealousies that some of these
forementioned interpretations, tho lessening the spiritual Power of the Crown
might enlarge its temporal, and particularly such as in the Queen's Admonition
mentioned the Duty, Allegiance and Bond acknowledged to be due to Harry the
Eighth, and Edward the Sixth: and (as I partly before hinted) such as in the
Proviso in the Act of the 5th of the Queen, that ratifying the Admonition has
in it the additional words of acknowledging in her Majesty, her Heirs and
Successors the Authority that was challenged and lately used by Harry the
Eighth, and Edward the Sixth, and such as in the 37th Article explained the
Queen's Power by that given by God himself to all GODLY Princes in Scripture
(and where notwithstanding the Word Godly being put in there to gild the Pill
of the Absolute Power of the Jewish Kings, and to make it be the more easily
swallowed, the real meaning was the Power given to all the Jewish Kings: for
the right of their Power depended not on their Godliness) and such as in the
Canons of King James ipso facto Excommunicate all that do not give the King the
same Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, not only that the Godly Kings had
among the Jews, but what the Christian Emperors had in the Primitive Church.
And there too notwithstanding the word Christian might be for the like reason
put in as that of Godly was, and to cause the owning of that absolute Imperial
Power, which pursuant to the Lex Regia was used by the Christian Emperors as
well as their Heathen Predecessors in punishing Heterodoxy ad libitum, the
meaning of the Canon was not to divest Heathen Emperors of their right of
judging about Matters of Religion, and as to which Grotius in his Letter to the
States Ambassador, having said, neither would Paul have appealed to Nero, had
he judged that no right of Judging in a Case of Religion belonged to him,
adds, Wherefore as Trajan Civilly honest, Nero wicked are equal in the Right
of Government, so Pious Constantine and Impious Nero, are equal in the right of
judging, in aptitude and skill unequal. The Canons therefore of Forty,
enjoining the Explanation or Interpretation of the Regal Power there inserted
to be one Sunday in every Quarter of the Year read by the Clergy to their
Flocks, did well provide for the cautioning them as against the setting up any
independent Coactive Power either Papal or Popular, so against Fears and
Iealousies relating to their Properties in their Goods and Estates: and by that
Explanation they show that Christ came not to Undermine or Disturb, but to
Confirm the Civil Government of Pagan Princes, and that in the first times of
Christ's Church, Christians were ready to submit their very Lives to the very
Laws and Commands of those Princes.


A. But does that Explanation of the Regal Power assert any thing in Defense of
the Dispensative part of it?


B. You see how without wyre-drawing any Consequences, the very first Paragraph
of the Explanation does both strengthen the foundation of the assertory part of
your Oath, we have been so long discussing, and strike out new lights in the
Fabric of the Oath. You see it tells you downright, that A Supreme Power is
given to the Order of Kings by God himself in the Scriptures, which is that
Kings should rule and Command in their several Dominions, all Persons of what
rank or estate soever, etc.

And the Explanation does effectually enough provide by the second Paragraph
that Kings should take care that none in their Dominions but the stubborn and
evil doers may be restrained with the Temporal Sword: for it says, The Care of
God's* Church is so committed to Kings in the Scripture, that they are
commended when the Church keeps the right way, and taxed when it runs amiss:
and therefore her Government belongs in chief to Kings. For otherwise one man
would be Commended for another's Care, and taxed but for another's Negligence,
which is not God's way. And this is an Argument taken ab absurdo, and the
strongest that can be used in Law, and not to be set aside but by the alleging
something as more absurd against it; and amounts to this, that it is absurd
that Kings who are commended, when those who are not stubborn nor evil doers
are not under any restraint by the Temporal Sword (for the Church runs not the
right way, when that Sword is a terror to any but evil doers) and taxed on the
contrary being done, should not be judged to be authorized to exempt those from
all restraint thereby. And when the People are not liable to blame for Kings
erring in their Judgment about the Persons to be so exempted from restraint,
nor to be commended or rewarded for their not erring therein; can any thing be
more absurd, then for the independent Coactive Power of Kings it self to be
restrained to the Punishing such as they shall judge Innocent?

But the two tenderest things in the World are Sovereign Power and Conscience,
and both of them were made with a Godly Jealousy and tenderness to support one
another; and that Tender-Conscienced Prince who confirmed this Canon, did in it
variously dispensare in lege, as I may properly say with Allusion to Suarez de
Legibus, where in stead of using the Common Expression of dispensing WITH Laws
he so frequently mentions that of dispensing IN them, and thereby does seem to
take off somewhat of the harshness of Questions about Popes or Princes
dispensing WITH Laws. For when Sovereigns do dispensare in lege, they really
distribute their Sovereign Power throughout the Body of their respective Laws
for their Preservation, and as the heart does dispense or distribute Blood in
and throughout the Bodynatural, and the Brain Animal Spirits throughout the
genus nervosum all the Body over. And here the King having a tender regard to
the firm and infirm Consciences of his People respectively, and to their
various Capacities of understanding, and he being as Zealous for all their
keeping their Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, as any Prince could be for
their taking them, does in the beginning of the Canon, let such as you know
(who have been brought up to Study, and who have a tenacious Memory, and could
remember more interpretations of the Oath then I have recounted to you if they
had been given by our Princes) that whereas sundry Laws, Ordinances and
Constitutions have been formerly made for the acknowledgment and profession of
the most lawful and independent Authority of our Dread Sovereign Lord the
King's most Excellent Majesty over the State Ecclesiastical and Civil, etc he
does enjoin them all to be carefully observed by all such Persons whom they
concern upon the Penalties in the said Laws express.

Here then the Acts of Parliament beforementioned, and the Oaths, and
Articles, and Canons, and Authentic interpretations appear to look you in the
face, and the Articles particularly do so to the Clergy as having subscribed
them. But that Pious Prince as their Sovereign Pastor, being desirous that his
Clergy should gently allure the Layety with Line upon Line, and Precept upon
Precept to keep their Faith to God, and Loyalty to himself, rather then by
Interpretation upon Interpretation of their Oaths, would not in this Canon have
them frighted with the sight of the Oaths themselves, and which are there not
named: and all Archbishops, Bishops, and inferior Priests are moreover by the
Canon required to Preach, Teach, and Exhort their people to obey, honor, and
serve their King, and that they presume not to speak of his Majesty's Power any
other way then in this Canon is exoress'd; but which Canon gives them a very
fair license to speak to their People of and for the King's Power of disabling
and of rehabilitating his Subjects. For it disables the public Ab^ttors of any
Position contrary to the Explications of the Regal Power therein, by
Excommunicating them till they repent, and for the first Offense suspends them
two years from the Profits of their Benefices, and for the second deprives them
of all their spiritual Promotions: and it was in the Canon before said, That if
any Parson, Uicar, Curate or Preacher, shall neglect his Duty in Publishing the
said Explications, etc. he shall be suspended by his Ordinary, till such time
as upon his Penitence he shall give sufficient assurance or Evidence of his
amendment, and in case he be of any EXEMPT Jurisdiction, he shall be
censureable by His Majesty's Commissioners for Causes Ecclesiastical. And the
Canon makes any Offenders against it in the Universities, as being exempt
Jurisdictions, there censureable, or before His Majesty's Commissioners for
Ecclesiastical Causes; and so you have the Canon likewise by securing the
Rights of exempt Jurisdictions asserting the Dispensative Power.

But if you will take Mr. Bagshaw's word in his first Argument in Parliament
concerning the Canons, he there tells you that that very Canon of the
Convocation containing the Explanation of the Regal Power, did necessarily
imply their declared sense of the Laws being dispensed with: For says he, in
making Determinations concerning Royal Power, they have done against Law, and
have meddled with things of which they have no Conusance: for the Exposition of
them belongs to the Judges of the Land, and they have no more right to expound
them, then the Judges have to expound Texts of Scripture.

And we know that our Laws have been so careful of preserving the Judges right
of interpreting them, that they allow not the Bishops and their Officials Power
to interpret any Acts of Parliament, tho made about Matters of their
Jurisdiction, and Matters merely Spiritual: as appears out of Hobart. 84.
Spenloe's Case, and Coke 3. Inst. where he says, that an Act of Parliament
made about things merely Spiritual shall be construed by the Common Law (...)
Judges.

But how far the disabling by the Power of His Majesty's Commissioners for
Ecclesiastical Causes such who explained not the Regal Power according to that
Canon might appear as an Instance of the Prerogative of Disabling and of
occasional re-ennabling; Mr. Bagshaw's second Argument in effect exposes it to
Consideration, by mentioning that the last Letters Patents of the High
Commission were Mich. 9. Car. in which are contained all things, wherein the
Commissioners were to meddle, and that therefore the Punishing of any there on
the account of this new Canon made not a year ago, could not be pursuant to
those Letters Patents.

His first Argument likewise wherein he gives his Judgment, that by Law that
Convocation was dissolved by the Dissolution of the Parliament, may let us see
how far they in making any Canon depended on the Dispensative Power of
Prerogative.

But any one who hates Faction will find that that Author did needlessly inflame
the minds of that Parliament of Forty against those Canons and particularly
with the forementioned Exception against the first on the Account of the
Explanation of the Regal Power having not been made by the Judges, and where
the Exception does through the sides of the Convocation strike at the honor of
that King by whom those Canons were Confirmed.

His Majesty in his memorable Speech at the Prorogation of the Parliament on
the 20th of October 1628. occasionally said, I Command and all you that are
here, to take notice of what I granted you in your Petition (i. e. the Petition
of Right) but especially you my Lords the Judges, for to you only under me
belongs the interpretation of the Laws: for none of the Houses of Parliament
joint or separate, have any Power either to make or declare a Law without my
Consent. Nor will any one wonder at the tenderness of any Crowned heads in
preserving their Right, as to the interpretation of their Laws, who has
considered that the usage of the ancient Romans in making their Civil Law to be
among the things Sacred and Ceremonies of their Gods preserved in the Collegium
Pontificum, and appropriating the interpretation of it to their Pontifices, did
induce Augustus to be inaugurated Pontifex Maximus, and likewise all the Roman
Emperors from Augustus to Gratian to assume that title: and that the Christian
Emperors, tho as one says, a fucris Romanorum and hoc Pontificis nomine
abhorrebant, in suis tamen Elogiis and nummis passim se Pontifices maximos dici
passi sunt, quod ad hodiernum diem r^dera. Romana inspicientibus satis consta^

Nor yet will any one find Cause to reflect on the memory of that our Prince
for want of consulting his Judges in the interpretation of his Laws in general:
nor even of this his Ecclesiastical Law in particular about the Explanation of
the Regal Power. For Heylin in his History of Archbishop Laud, says, that so
tender was His Majesty, that before he gave his Consent that the Canons of
1640. should be tendered to the Clergy, to be subscribed, ^e caused them to be
publicly read in Council, and before the Judges there, and by all whom they
were approved, etc. And if Mr. Bagshaw had considered what himself had said of
the Judges having no Right to Expound texts of Scripture, and how the
Convocation in that Canon did introduce the Supreme Power given to Kings by God
himself in the Scripture, and explained by Regal Power, Kings ruling and
commanding in their several Dominions all Persons of what rank, or estate
soever, and that they should restrain and punish with the Temporal Sword all
stubborn and evil doers; and likewise what was before mentioned in the Second
Paragraph of the Explanation, viz. of the Care of God's Church committed to
Kings in the Scripture, he would have found the Interpretation of the Regal
Supremacy as built on the Scriptures by that Ca^ (and approved too by the
Judges of the Land) to have not been exorbitant.

The words in the 13th of the Romans, of the Higher Powers being the Ordinance
of God, and of bearing not the Sword in vain, and of being the Minister of God,
and a revenger to execute wrath on him that does Evil, and of rendering
therefore to all their dues, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor; and the
words in S. Peter of submitting our selves to every Ordinance of man for the
Lord's sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto
them that are sent by him for the Punishment of evil doers, and for the Praise
of them that do well, and other passages in Scripture, and particularly in the
Old Testament, were in the eye of the Convocation in their so explaining the
Regal Power, and you may if you please have them now in your eye, while you are
considering the Case before you, and see how far you are bound to submit to all
Governors who shall be employed by the King in the executive Power of his Laws
against evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well; and how you are
not to disparage such Governors who are so sent for such praise.

But it is not to be wondered at that the Judges approved of the Contents of
that Explanation of the Regal Supremacy, and particularly of the Power of
punishing evil doers as inherent in the Crown, since the same has been
declared so by so many Acts of Parliament, and of which I shall name one to you
that I have not yet referred to, viz. that of 1o Mariae, c. 1. Sess. 2. of the
Second Parliament, of which the title is, The Regal Power is in the Queens
Majesty as fully as it has been in any her Progenitors, and where it is said
that For as much as the Imperial Crown of this Realm with all Dignities,
Honors, Prerogatives, Jurisdictions and Preheminences thereunto annexed,
united and belonging, by the Divine Providence of Almighty God is most lawfully
and rightfully descended and come to the Queen's Highness that now is, etc. and
invested in her Royal Person according to the Laws of this Realm, and by force
and virtue of the same all Regal Power, Dignity, Honor, Authority,
Pre-eminence does appertain and of right ought to appertain and belong unto her
Highness as to the Sovereign Supreme Governor and Queen of this Realm and the
Dominions thereof in as full large and ample manner as it has done heretofore
to any other her most noble Progenitors Kings of this Realm, (the ample manner
of Harry the 8th's Power is not therein excepted) Nevertheless the most ancient
Statutes of this Realm being made by Kings then reigning, do not only attribute
and refer all Prerogative, Pre-eminence, Power and Jurisdiction Royal unto the
name of King, but also do give, assign and appoint the Correction and
Punishment of all Offenders against the Regality and Dignity of the Crown, and
the Laws of this Realm unto the King, etc.

And considering that a Popish Parliament of Queen Mary's did give this their
august Declarative sense of the executive Power, of punishing all Offenders
against the Regality and Dignity of the Crown (which is the great Offense taken
at Popery) and the Laws of the Realm, as belonging to or inherent in our Kings
by virtue of their being Supreme Governors of the Realm, and that this Supreme
Power was Committed to her and her Progenitors by the Divine Providence of
Almighty God, shall your acknowledgments of such Supreme Power of your Prince
be narrower then any of Papists?

You know how wary and careful our English Princes have always been that their
Subjects might see them hold the reins of the Executive Power of the Law in
their hands, and that none but the stubborn and evil doers need fear the being
overrun by it.

And while I happen to think of the memorable Expression of a Loyal Lord in a
Speech in a late Parliament of the unreasonableness of any ones suffering
merely by the word Proditorie being put into the charge of a thing that was not
in its self Evil, and as if it were said that such an one did traitorously pass
over the Thames in a Boat: I likewise think of the reasonableness of our Laws
in providing for the common Safety by the Prince being allowed to hold the Sail
of the Executive Power in his own hands, and which otherwise if tied fast about
the Boat might cause it upon any sudden gust of wind to be overset.

You know therefore how King James the First in his Apology for the Oath of
Allegiance, in Answer to the Pope's first Breve, thought himself obliged in
justice for the maintenance of that Executive Power of the Crown to say as to
the Pope's expressing his sorrow for that Persecution which the Catholics
sustain for the Faiths sake, wherein beside the main untruth whereby I am so
injuriously used (as if he had thought it a personal injury to himself that any
one in his Realm should be persecuted for Religion) I must ever avow and
maintain as the truth is, according to mine own knowledge, that the late QUEEN
of famous Memory never PUNISHED any Papist for Religion. He does not say, her
Laws, and Ministers, but SHE never punished, etc. He well knew that if Papists
had been Punished for their Religion in her Reign by Judges, and Iuries, and
Sheriffs, that it was she had punished them. And accordingly he in his
Premonition to Christian Monarchs does more regio, and with a style of Majesty
relating to his Executive Power, thus tell them, viz. And yet so far has both
my Heart and Government been from any bitterness, as almost never one of those
sharp Additions to former Laws has ever yet been put in execution.

Well, Sir, In fine I leave it to you to consider on the whole matter how far
the Contents of that Canon, and particularly what is declared therein about the
care of God's Church being so committed to Kings in the Scripture, that they
are commended when the Church keeps the right way, and blamed when it runs
amiss, and therefore her Government belongs in chief to Kings, etc. do show
that Kings not only may, but ought out of a regard to their own Souls to
provide that where the safety of their Subjects Souls is concerned, their
Dispensative Power by the interpretation of their Laws, and the relaxation of
their Rigor in particular Cases may be exerted.

I doubt not but you have observed many more Cases wherein the Royal Martyr to
prevent imminent peril of Soul was put to it to exert such his Power.


A. I remember not to have read of more.


B. No? If you had read the 39 Articles Printed in the Edition that I have
done, with his Declaration prefixed thereunto, you would find that there being
a high ferment about the Arminian Controversy in the Church of England, and
the Arminian and Anti-Arminian Divines (who both had subscribed the Articles)
appropriating the sense of them to both their Persuasions, and too many drawing
then the sense of them too much aside, and all of them professing themselves
bound in Conscience by the Laws that required their Subscription to the
Articles, and that their Subscription to them, was to be taken in the Imposers
sense, and that as to the Article of the King's being Supreme Governor of the
Church of England, it being supposed (as the words in the Declaration are) Some
differences might arise concerning the External Polity, Injunctions, Canons, or
other Constitutions thereto belonging; His Majesty by his Declaration again
ratifying the Articles, and particularly publishing that he was Supreme
Governor of the Church of England, did notify his Pleasure, that as to any such
Differences arising as aforesaid, the Clergy in their Convocation should order
and settle them, he approving their Ordinances, etc. and to the end they might
not trouble themselves or the Church by putting their own interpretations on
the Articles, he Requires their taking the Articles in the Literal and
Grammatical sense, and notifies that literal sense as restrained to the way of
the general Expressions in the Articles, and such as the Divines of the several
Persuasions took as making for them: so that now by His Majesty's thus
interpreting that sense, they might warrantably continue so to do. And
according to what has been said of Manna, that it was that to every man's
taste wherewith it was pleased most, men's sense of the Articles might be so
too, by means of the declared Complaisance of His Majesty therewith.


A. One would then the less wonder at the Complaisance of the Clergy with that
King's Power of Dispensing in his Laws by Interpreting or Declaring.


B. I could tell you of another passage in his Reign that will show you how our
Bishops made use of that Power as their Sheat Anchor to preserve the Hierarchy
in the Storms it met with: and how then the Bishops issuing out the Processes
of their Ecclesiastical Courts in their own Names, was by the Artifice of the
Faction improved as an occasion of making a very great ferment in Church and
State, and such a one as nothing but the Royal Power of Interpretation, or of
declaring the Law, could settle.

And therefore Archbishop Laud in his Epistle to the King before his famous
Star Chamber Speech, did in the Name of the Church of England then think
himself obliged to apply to the King in a most pathetical and solemn manner to
exert that great Power in that Conjuncture: viz. I do humbly in the Churches
name desire of your Majesty, that it may be resolved by all the Reverend Judges
of England, and then Published by your Majesty, that our keeping Courts and
issuing Process in our own Names, and the like Exceptions formerly taken and
now renewed, are not against the Laws of the Realm (as it is most certain they
are not) that so the Church Governors may go on cheerfully in their Duty, and
the Peoples minds be quieted by this assurance, that neither the Law, nor their
liberty as Subjects is infringed thereby.

The many Pamphleteers of the Faction who attacqued the Hierarchy, ^eproached
them with the Non-observance of Humane Laws, and charged their Proceedings with
Illegality, because by the Statute of 1o E. 6. c. 2. that required Processes
Ecclesiastical to be in the King's name, it was declared, That the Bishops
sending out their Process in their own Names was contrary to the Form and Order
of the Summons and Process of the Common Law used in this Realm. And therefore
as Heylin tells us in the Life of Archbishop Laud, p. 321. in A. 1637. the King
accordingly issued out his Proclamation declaring, That the Bishops holding
their Courts, and issuing Process in their own Names were not against the Laws
of the Realm, and the Judges Resolutions were therein notify'd to that purpose.
And upon all motions afterward for Prohibitions to the Ecclesiastical Court
upon the pretense of their Processes not issuing out in the King's Name
according to that Statute of E. the 6th, the current Law has still been in
Westminster Hall for keeping up the sense of His Majesty declared in his
Proclamation as to that Point.

According to the manner then of praising the Bridge we go over; the Church of
England having in Queen Elizabeth's time been preserved by the Regal Power of
interpreting expressed in her Admonition, and by the like Power in the time of
King Charles the First, and the salus animae having been at stake as to the
Oath in her time, and as to the avowed Principle of the Church of England about
Humane Laws binding the Conscience in his time; the use of that Dispensative
Power being like a Bridge that kept them from falling into the Pit of
Perdition, deserved their Praise.

That eminent Divine Mr. John Ley in his Learned Book called Defensive Doubts
and Reasons for refusal of the Oath imposed by the Sixth Canon of the late
Synod, (i. e. that in the year 1640.) says there, p. 99. and 100, etc. There
are some of our Brethren, who (in good will to themselves and us) have
undertaken to expound the Oath so as that they and we without scruple may take
it. And we take kindly their good intention, and in good will to them again
request them to consider, that a Private Interpretation of a Public Act can
give no satisfaction unless it be either expressly or virtually allowed by the
highest Authority that does impose it: and then it is made Public, etc. But
the Authority of Interpretation of any doubt in such a Public Act, belongs
properly not to private but public Persons, etc. For private Men tho Learned,
if they take upon them the Interpretation of public Dictates, may be more like
to light on mutual Contradictions of each other, then on the true and proper
Construction of the Text they interpret. So did Vega and Soto, Soto and
Catherinus, who wrote against each other contrary Comments on the Council of
Trent. In which respect it was a wise advice given to the Pope by the Bishop of
Bestice, viz. to appoint a Congregation for the expounding of the Council: and
well followed by him when he forbade all sorts of Persons, Clerks or Laics
(being private Men) to make any Commentaries, Glosses, Annotations, or any
Interpretation whatsoever on the Decrees of that Council. Dr. Burgess indeed
made an Interpretation of his own Subscription, but there had been no validity
in it (as we conceive) unless it had been allowed by the Superior Powers. And
so it was: for (as he says). It was accepted by King James: and the Archbishop
of Canterbury affirmed it to be the true sense and meaning of the Church of
England. He refers there to Dr. Burgess in his Answer to a much applauded
Pamphlet, Praefat. p. 26.


A. Your mentioning that of Dr. Burgess his Interpretation of his Subscription
minds me of what I have read at the end of his Book called No Sacrilege nor Sin
to alienate or purchase Cathedral Lands, viz. in his Postscript to Dr. Pearson,
and his No Necessity of Reformation of the Public Doctrine of the Church of
England, Printed A. 1660. where he says, As touching the Regal Supremacy, we
own and will assert it as far as you do or dare. Only we had reason to take
notice of the improper Expression in the 37th Article that the Queen's Majesty
has the Supreme Power. For if the Declaration fathered on the late King, and
prefixed to the Articles, had so much Power with his Printer, that he durst not
alter the word Queen into King even in the year 1642, and those Articles must
be read Verbatim without Alteration or Explanation, then we say again there is
a Necessity of Reforming that Article in the expression of it: and not to talk
at random what was indeed the meaning, unless we may have leave when we read it
(Regia declaratione non-obstante) to declare the sense which the Declaration
allows us not to do.

But the truth is, that exception of the Doctor to the Articles may well pass
for a Scruple, or rather a Cavil: and at this rate we should be put to it to
say, O King interpret for ever.


B. You say right. Dr. Pierson in that Judicious Book of his, called No
Necessity of Reforming the Doctrine of the Church of England, well observes
that the 37th Article has express reference to the Queen's Injunctions set
forth in the year 1559. and those Injunctions take particular care, that no
other Duty, Allegiance, or Bond should be required to the Queen, then was
acknowledged to be due to the most noble Kings of famous Memory, King Henry the
8th her Majesty's Father, or King Edward the 6th, her Majesty's Brother. The
words of the Article declare that the Doctrine contained in it, concerns all
the Kings as Kings. The title in General is of the Civil Magistrates, and the
words run thus., where we attribute to the Queen's Majesty the chief Government
we give not to our Princes, etc. showing that what they gave to* her, they gave
to all the Kings of England. Which will appear more plainly out of the first
Latin Copy Printed in the time of Queen Eliz. in the year 1563. read and
approved by the Queen, the words where^f are these, Cum Regiae Majestati summam
gubernationem tribuimus, quibus titulis intelligimus animos quorundam
Calumniatorum offendi, non damus Regibus nostris aut verbi Dei aut
Sacramentorum administrationem, etc. Being therefore the Article expressly
mentions and concerns the Kings of England, as they are the Kings of
England, the mention of the Queen's Majesty in the Article can make the
Doctrine no more doubtful then it does our Allegiance in that Oath which was
made 1o Eliz. where the Heirs and Successors of the Queen are to appoint who
shall accept the Oath, the words of which are that the Queen's Highness is the
only Supreme Governor of this Realm. But I hope the Heirs and Successors of
Queen Elizabeth did never appoint that Oath to be taken in the Name of the
Queen's Highness, but in their own.

It may be supposed that some such like Cavilling or Scrupling humor possessed
the fancies of some in the beginning of the Reign of King James the First: and
that some occasion was thereby given to that Prince in those his Canons,
expressly therein maintaining the 39 Articles, and the Subscription thereunto,
and particularly in the 36th Canon there to enjoin a Subscription to three
Articles in such manner and sort as is there appointed, and of which the first
is, That the King's Majesty under God is the only Supreme Governor of this
Realm, and of all other his Highness Dominions, etc. and that no foreign
Prince, Person, Prelate, HAVE or OUGHT to have any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Pre-eminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, etc. and
in which the words have or OUGHT to have, might possibly be inserted out of a
Royal Complaisance with the Desires of some Scruplers in whose behalf the
Famous Dr. Rainolds moved the King at the Hampton Court Conference that to the
Position in the 37th Article, viz. The Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in
this Realm of England, might be added nor OUGHT to have: but which motion the
King then rejected as a thing superfluous, and saying, Habemus quod jure
habemus.

You may find an Account of this two^old Subscription in Coke 4. Inst. c. 74.
and where he says, Subscription required by the Clergy is twofold: One by
force both of an Act of Parliament CONFIRMING and Establishing the 39 Articles
of Religion agreed upon at a Convocation of the Church of England, and ratified
by Queen Eliz. (13. Eliz. c. 12.) Another by Canens made at a Convocation of
the Church of England, and ratified by King James.


A. I had thought you told me that the 39 Articles owed no Confirmation nor
Authority to that Act of the 13th of Eliz.


B. I did tell you so: and do think that when my Lord Coke used the word
Confirming, he spoke cum vulgo, or as the word is taken minus proprie and as it
is taken in declarative Acts of Parliament sometime to mean declared, and as I
and others may in Discourse sometimes use the word. But (speaking properly) to
confirm being firmum facere, i. e. what was not so before, you are not to think
that the Parliament in 13o Eliz. did so. They Enacted what was by the Queen
before authorized, and as the words there are about the Articles, viz. Put
forth by the Queen's Authority. And you may too for this purpose Consult the
style of the Act 23o Eliz. c. 1. Entitled, An Act for retaining the Queen's
Subjects in their due Obedience, and where it is made Treason for any to
withdraw any Subjects from their Natural Obedience to her Majesty, or to
withdraw them for that intent from the Religion now by her Highness Authority
establish^d within her Dominions.

Thus too as to the Queen's disabling several of the Roman Catholic Bishops
and Deans by her Ecclesiastical Commissioners in the beginning of her Reign,
pursuant to the Act of 1o Eliz. c. 1. for restoring to the Crown the Ancient
Jurisdiction; the Act of Parliament 35o Eliz. c. 8. entitled, Every
Deprivation of any Bishop or Dean made in the beginning of the Queen's Reign
shall be good: and Archbishops, Bishops and Deans made by the Queen shall be
adjudged lawful; begins with acknowledging that the former were justly
deprived, and it is therefore Declared and Enacted by Authority of this
Parliament, that all and every Deprivation, etc. and all and every Sentence of
Deprivation, etc. had, pronounced and given, etc. shall be adjudged, deemed,
and taken good and sufficient in Law, etc. and as to the latter, viz. That all
such Archbishops, Bishops and Deans as were ordained or made by the Authority
or License of the Queen's Majesty, etc. shall be taken and adjudged to be
lawful, etc. They confirmed not what the Queen did in disabling the former, and
enabling the latter, but only declared and enacted the validity of what the
Queen had done. And here you have again the Judgment of Parliament for
approving the Queen's Power of Enabling and Disabling.

And here too (by the way) I am to tell you, that you have another judgment of
Parliament suitable to that in 8o Eliz. and for the adjudging and taking to be
Lawful the making and ordaining of the Archbishops and Bishops by the Authority
or License of the Queen's Majesty, etc. any ambiguity or question in that
behalf heretofore made to the contrary notwithstanding, and which QUESTION
before made in the Case, I have before showed to be disability.


A. But I suppose you have read of that TWOFOLD Subscription my Lord Coke
speaks of, represented as a Gravamen by some.


B. I have so: and the last Book I read that so represents it is, the Answer to
Dr. Stillingfleet' s Sermon by some Non-Conformists, etc. Printed A. 1680. and
where in p. 29. they thus express their desires, viz. That all New devised
Oaths, Subscriptions and Declarations, together with the Canonical Oath, and
the Subscription in the Canons be suspended for the time to come. If that be
too much, we shall consent our selves with a modester motion, that whatsoever
these Declarations be that are required to be made, subscribed, or sworn, they
may be imposed only as to the matter and end, leaving the takers but free to
the use of their own Expressions. And this expedient we gather from the Lord
Coke, who has providently (as it were) against such a Season laid in this
Observation, The form of the Subscription set down in the Canons ratified by
King James, was not expressed in the Act of the 13th of Eliz. 4. Inst. c. 74.
And consequently if the Clergy enjoyed this freedom till then, in reference to
the particulars therein contained, what binders why they might not have the
same restored in reference also to others?

It was the second Article enjoined by that Canon to be subscribed, viz. That
the Book of Common Prayer, etc. contains in it nothing contrary to the Word
of God, and that it may lawfully be used, etc. at which they took so much
offense, and to which the Act of Parliament required not their Subscription.


A. I perceive then my Lord Coke does not reflect on the form of Subscription,
as enjoined by the 36th Canon of King James, and by his Regal Authority out of
Parliament as illegal, notwithstanding what had been enacted in the 13th of
Queen Elizabeth.


B. He does not. And he there further faith, By the Statute of 13. Eliz. the
Delinquent is disabled and deprived ipso facto: but the Delinquent against the
Canon of King James is to be proceeded withal by the Censures of the Church.
And I heard Wray Chief Justice in the King's Bench, Pasch. 23. El. report, That
where one Smith subscribed to the said 39 Articles of Religion with this
addition, so far forth as the same were agreeable to the Word o^ God, that it
was resolved by him and a^l the Judges of England, that this Subscription was
not according to the Statute of 13. Eliz. because this Statute required an
absolute Subscription, etc. Besides this Subscription when any Clerk is
admitted and instituted to any Benefice, he is sworn to Canonical Obedience to
his Di^cesan.

But as to his saying that the Delinquent against this Canon is to be proceeded
withal by the Censures of the Church; I shall observe that the beginning of
the Canon does incapacitate any to be received into the Ministry who does not
subscribe the three Articles in it, and that the Canon does afterward put some
temporary Disabilities on Bishops who shall Ordain, Admit or License any one,
except he first have subscribed in manner and form there appointed: and it is
the Universities if offending that the Canon leaves to the Danger of the Law
and His Majesty's Censure.

Here then you see King James the First did out of Parliament add a new
Subscription to what was required by the Act of Parliament, and did likewise
out of Parliament make incapacity to be the Punishment of refusing such new
Subscription.

And I need not tell you that that Power so exercised by that Prince out of
Parliament has been approved not only by all the Bishops of the Church of
England, as putting the Form of Subscription required by that Canon in
execution ever since and to this day in lieu of the form required by the 13th
of Eliz. but (as I may say) virtually and tacitly by all our Kings and
Parliaments ever since, who have acquiesced in the same. But what if I should
tell you that the Authority of the King in thus making that Canon about
Subscription, has been since expressly approved in Parliament?


A. I should be most ready to hear it.


B. You may therefore please to consult the Act for Uniformity 16o Car. 2. and
in the latter end of it you will see that in a Proviso referring to the 39
Articles as agreed on by the Archbishops, etc. A. 1562. and particularly to the
36th therein about the Book of Consecration of Archbishops, etc. set forth in
the time of Edward the 6th, as containing all things necessary to such
Consecration and Ordering, etc. It is Enacted, etc. that all Subscriptions
hereafter to be had or made to the said Articles by any Deacon, Priest, etc. or
other person whatsoever, who by this Act or any OTHER LAW now in force is
required to subscribe unto the said Articles shall be construed and taken to
extend and shall be applied (for and touching the said 36th Article) to the
Book containing the form and manner of making, ordaining, and consecrating of
Bishops, Priests, etc. in this Act mentioned in such sort and manner as the
same did heretofore extend to the Book set forth in the time of King Edward the
6th mentioned in the said 36th Article, any thing in the said Article, or in
any Statute, Act, or Canon heretofore had or made to the Contrary hereof in any
wise notwithstanding.

It is clear that the Parliament had then their Eye on the Act of 13. Eliz. and
on that Canon of King James, and which you may take as referred to by the
words, or any other Law now in force (for so they then knew it to be, and as it
still is, tho with the interpretation extended by the Act to it) and afterward
by the word Canon.

But one may guess that by the Authority of some of the Lords the Bishops there
was before the making of this Canon of King James, and after the Act of 13.
Eliz. in her Reign, some Subscription under disabling Penalties required of
Ministers beyond what that Statute required, by what the Author of Certain
Considerations tending to promote Peace mentions, in p. 4. viz. That in the
30th year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, the House of Commons presented to
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal a Petition containing diverse particulars, for
the redress whereof they desire, that no Oath or Subscription might be tendered
to any at their entrance into the Ministry, but such as is expressly prescribed
by the Statutes of the Realm, except the Oath against Corrupt entering, that
they may not be troubled for the omission of some Rites, or Portions prescribed
in the Book of Common Prayer: that such as had been suspended for no other
Offense, but only for not subscribing might be restored.


A. It seems those Bishops then did as your Expression was, Dispensare in lege,
and were (as I may say) Non-conformists to it, by going beyond it. For they
were obliged sapere ad Regulam; and all Conformity is respectu regulae, and he
who does over-shoot, or who over-does what is enjoined, is a Nonconformist.


B. You here put me in mind how some of our Bishops and Clergy have been thus
Non-conformists in over-shooting their mark, at the same time that they have
with undistinguishing severity executed the rigor of the Laws against all who
did shoot short. The Royal Martyr in his Declaration to all his Loving
Subjects, Published with the Advice of his Privy Council, A. 1641. refers to
some Ceremonies in our Church which have been used without any legal Warrant or
Injunction, and which already are, or speedily may be abolished.


A. But I a little wonder that a House of Commons should Petition for the
Dispensing with some legal Rites, and required both by Injunctions and Canons,
and by Acts of Parliament.


B. I do not wonder at it at all. For Conjunctures having happened when some
Non-conformists having been tender of the Peace of the Government, you need not
wonder at any tenderness in it for them. For as in the Conjuncture of the
Resteration of King Charles the Second, very many of the Presbyterians and of
other Sects then showing their Loyalty (the Author I lately cited taking notice
thus of the Declaration, A. 1660. viz. in which his Majesty says Our present
Consideration and work is to gratify the private Cosciences of those who are
grieved with some Ceremonies, by indulging to and dispensing with the omitting
of those Ceremonies. A Member of the House of Commons in an Epistle to His
Majesty uses these words, viz. which Indulgent Declaration so ravished the
hearts of all your Loving Subjects, that your whole House of Commons, their
Representatives then assembled in Parliament, immediately after the
Publication, October 8th. 1660, repaired in a Body to White Hall, and there by
their Speaker's Oration in the BanquettingHouse, expressed their extraordinary
great Joy, and presented their general Thanks to your Majesty for this your
Majesty's most gracious Declaration and Dispensation with their Consciences in
Matters not being of the substance or essence of Religion, which gave abundant
satisfaction to all peaceable sob rminded Men, and such as are truly Religious,
in which return of their Thanks they were all unanimous, Nemine Contradicente,
then Ordering a Bill in Pursuance of your Majesty's Declaration: Note, that
this was that House of Commons, which together with the House of Lords brought
His Majesty to the Throne) so long before, namely in the first year of King
Charles the First, and A. 1625. both Houses presented a Petition to the King,
wherein they desire that His Majesty would please to advise the Bishops by
fatherly entreaty and tender us^ge to reduce to the peaceable and orderly
Service of the Church such able Ministers as have been formerly SILENCED, etc.
and which is in effect, all one, such able Ministers as have been formerly
disabled.


A. I am highly pleased with your further bringing any thing to me like
Judgment of Parliament that may strengthen the Regal Power of interpreting, or
of dispensing with disability. We have discoursed of the Subject a pretty while
together at this Meeting, and I must acknowledge you have entertained me with
an account of many Statutes that have propp'd up the Regal Power of dispensing
with disability: and that too (tho you observed it not to me) not only in their
Preambles, but in their enacting parts, the which I account more momentous. Nor
can I forbear observing it to you, that in the late Printed Books of some who
asserted this dispensative Power, nothing like Judgment of Parliament has been
cited in the case for it, but that out of Rot. Parl. 1. H. 5. 11. 22. out of
Roll Tit. Prerogative le Roy, fol. 180. viz. The Commons prayed that the
Statutes for voiding of Aliens out of the Kingdom might be executed, to which
the King agreed saving his Prerogative, that he might dispense with such as he
pleased. And upon this the Commons answered, that their intention was no other,
nor ever should be, by the help of God.

But this was only the judgment of a House of Commons; and that is short of the
Authority of a House of Lords concurring with them, tho but in a Petitionary
manner, that the Regal Dispensative Power might be exerted: and which latter is
far short of the Authority of an Act of Parliament. And among the many
Parliamentary Recognitions of the Dispensative Power you have mention^d to me,
that which you told me at our first meeting of the Act of Uniformity 16o Car.
2. leaving Aliens or Foreigners of the Reformed Churches that were then allowed
or tolerated by the King's Majesty, or that should be allowed by him, his Heirs
and Successors, to be secured under the Wing of Prerogative from all the
Penalties in that Act, was a greater President of a Parliament's deference to
the Dispensative Power.

But here it falls in my way to ask you if the Parliament in that Act,
interpreting and expounding the Sulscription to the 36th Article (as you before
mentioned) did not show some want of tenderness to the Regal Power of
interpreting?


B. Not in the least. The King thought fit in his Legislative Capacity, and
with the Concurrence of the three Estates to issue forth such interpretation,
to the end it might be perpetuated. But you will find that they were so tender
of that branch of Prerogative, namely of the Regal Power of interpreting out of
Parliament, that having referred to the King's Declaration of the 25th of
October, 1660. ( i. e. that concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs we spoke of
before) and mentioned that according to that he had granted his Commission to
several Bishops and other Divines to review the Book of Common Prayer, and to
prepare such Alterations and Additions as they thought fit to offer, and that
afterward the Convocations of both the Provinces of Canterbury and York, being
by His Majesty called, etc. His Majesty has been pleased to Authorize the
Presidents of the said Convocation, and other the Bishops and Clergy of the
same to review the Book of Common Prayer, and the Book of the form and manner
of the making and consecrating of Bishops, Priests, etc. and that they should
make such Additions and Alterations in the said Books as to them should seem
meet, and should present the same to His Majesty for his further Allowance or
Confirmation, and then setting forth that the same was accordingly done, and
that some alterations were inserted into those Books by the Convocations, and
by them Presented to His Majesty, and all which His Majesty having considered
has fully approved, it then follows, that His Majesty has recommended to this
present Parliament that the Books of Common Prayer, etc. with the Alterations
and Additions which have been so made and presented to His Majesty by the said
Convocations, be the Book which shall be appointed to be used, etc. in all
Parish Churches and Chapels, etc. And it is upon the foundation of what His
Majesty did as beforementioned, that the following enacting Clauses with their
Sanctions and Penalties are built.

And you may if you will take notice of a Proviso toward the end of the Act,
being very tender of not hurting what King James by his Prerogative did in
Uniting the Prebendship to the Professor of Law in Oxon for the time being, and
whereby that King dispensed with the incapacity of Laymen, as to the enjoyment
of such Prebendship: but the Act and the Proviso takes care to perpetuate the
King's Professor's enjoying the same, and leaves the Prerogative at liberty to
dispense with such disability in the Case.

In short, you see how tender that Parliament was of Prerogative, and tho they
thought it not fit to give such loud Applauses to his late Majesty's
Declaration of October the 25th, A. 1660. beforementioned, wherein so much of
the Dispensative Power was exerted, yet you find they refer to it with respect.


A. I have almost forgot the particulars of the Dispensative Power therein
exerted.


B. I shall tell you that the King having there mentioned (and what the Act
takes notice of) his saying that he would appoint some Divines to review the
Common Prayer Book, and to make such Alterations as shall be thought most
necessary, etc. it then says, Out Will and Pleasure is, that none be punished
or troubled for not using it until it be reviewed, and effectually reformed. He
there speaks several times of Dispensing with Ceremonies, that were by Law
established. It is there likewise said, Because some men otherwise Pious and
Learned say, They cannot conform unto the Subscription required by the Canon,
nor take the Oath of Canonical Obedience, we are Content, and it is Out Will
and Pleasure (so they take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy) that they
shall receive ordination, institution and induction, and shall be permitted to
exercise their Function, and to enjoy the Profits of their Livings without the
said Subscription or Oath of Canonical Obedience, etc.


A. I see here is King James the First's incapacitating Canon dispensed with,
and indeed suspended.


B. The Declaration goes on with taking care that None be Judged to forfeit
his Presentation, or Benefice, or be deprived of it upon the Statute of the
13th of Elizabeth, c. 12. so he read and declare his Assent to all the Articles
of Religion, which only contain the Confession of the true Christian Faith, and
the Doctrine of the Sacraments comprised in the Book of Articles in the said
Statute mentioned. And this Declaration had before expressed His Majesty's
mindfulness of his Declaration from Bredagh, and his saying, We published in
our Declaration from Bredagh, a Liberty to tender Consciences, and that no man
should be disquieted or called in Question for Differences of Opinion in
Matters of Religion, which do not disturb the Peace of the Kingdom, and that we
shall be ready to consent to such an Act of Parliament as upon mature
deliberation shall be offered us for the full granting that Indulgence. Here
was a Liberty of Conscience granted and published, and Heterodoxy about the
very Articles of Religion tolerated, and a throwing off of Penal Laws, and for
which Declaration I should have told you, that Baker's History, p. 703.
mentions, that the House of Lords ordered Thanks to be given to the Messenger
who brought that gracious Declaration.


A. And yet you say the Declaration October 25. 1660 thus dispensing with
disability incurred by the Canon, and the 13th of Eliz* and by Queen
Elizabeth's Act of Uniformity, was both approved and applauded by the former
Parliament. I have not heard of the like in the kind of it.


B. No doubt but the Author there referred to the Declaration of October. 25. A.
1660. for which the House of Commons so expressed their thanks: however by the
supposed carelessness of the Printer, the Publication is said to be October
8th. 1660. For the words by him cited as said by his Majesty, viz. Our present
Consideration and work is to gratify, etc. are in that Declaration, p. 15. and
16.

But if it were not for cloying you with other like Instances, I could tell you
of the like in the beginning of the Reign of King James the First.


A. I pray speak not of cloying. My Patience may be soon surfeited with two or
three such things as some call Presidents. But this thing called Judgment of
Parliament carries with it so much weight as well as Veneration, that you can
no way more oblige me then by going on to entertain me with Instances of that
kind.


B. Why, then I can tell you if you will at any time turn to your Collection of
Proclamations in the time of King James the First, you will find that in his
Proclamation of March the 5th, the first year of his Reign, he intimates that
with the Consent of the Bishops present in the Hampton Court Conference he
thought meet that some small things might rather be explained then changed in
the Book of Common Prayer, and for that end gave forth his Commission under the
Great Seal of England, according to the Form which the Laws of this Realm in
like Case prescribed to be used to make the said Explanation, and to cause the
whole Book of Common Prayer with the same Explanation to be newly Printed,
which being done and established, anew after so serious a Deliberation, etc. we
have thought it necessary to make known by Proclamation our authorizing of the
same, and to require and enjoin all men, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal to
Conform themselves to it, as the only public Form of serving God, established
and allowed to be in this Realm. And the rather for that all the Learned Men
who were there present, as well of the Bishops as others, promised their
Conformity in the practice of it, only making suit to us that some few might be
born with for a time. Wherefore we require all Archbishops, Bishops, and all
other public Ministers, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, to do their Duties in
causing the same to be obeyed, and in punishing the Offenders according to the
Laws of the Realm heretofore established for the Authorizing the said Book of
Common Prayer.

You see there that all the Bishops and the great Parade of the literati
present at that famous Conference, did implore the King for the exercise of his
Dispensative Power for a while to some few.

But what is more considerable is, that the King here does make a general
relaxation of the Bond of Queen Elizabeth's Act of Uniformity in some things;
and instead of inserting an express Clause of discharging from the Penalties of
that Act, all that use the Common Prayer Book with the King's Alterations or
Explanations, as Queen Elizabeth's Admonition did in relation to those who took
the Oath of Supremacy in the sense of her Interpretation, (a thing indeed not
necessary for either of them to have done when they had loosened the bond of
the Observance of the Law) he enjoins the uniform usage of the Book of Common
Prayer, as by him interpreted or explained (the title of the Proclamation being
A Proclamation for the authorizing an Uniformity of the Book of Common Prayer
to be used throughout the Realm) under the disabling Punishments of Queen
Elizabeth's Act of Uniformity; the Bishops all this while being ministerial to
the King in his Power of thus interpreting, and explaining an Act of
Parliament, and the loosening of its Obligation both as to themselves and
others.

I am to tell you, that in that Proclamation of March the fifth, the King
refers to a Proclamation he had before Published on the 24th of October then
last past, wherein he gave the Puritan Divines an intimation of the Conference
he intended to have: and in which he reflects on the heat of their Spirits as
tending rather to Combustion then Reformation, which (says he) if there be
Cause to make, is more in our hearts then theirs, etc. and afterward says, we
are not ignorant that time may have brought in some. Corruptions, which may
deserve a review and amendment, which if by the Assembly intended by us, we
shall find to be so indeed, we will therein proceed according to the Laws and
Customs of this Realm by Advice of our Council, or in our High Court of
Parliament, or by Convocation of our Clergy, as we shall find reason to lead
us: not doubting but that in such an orderly proceeding, we shall have the
Prelates and others of our Clergy no less willing and far more able to afford
us their Duty and Service, then any other whose zeal does go so fast before
their discretion.

And the Proclamation in March following showed you how the King's reason lead
him in his Proceeding in the Affair according to the Laws and Customs of this
Realm, and how loyally his Bishops and Clergy acquiesced therein.


A. I remember I have read both these Proclamations: and I doubt not but that
Hampton Court Conference made a great ferment in the Body of the People, tho
none in the Orthodox Clergy. But I should be glad to know whether it made any
fermentation in the Body of the People Representative, and what was the Result
of it? Did the Parliament acquiesce in what the King had done as aforesaid? For
if so; they had done as Queen Elizabeth's Parliament in publicly approving
what she by her own Ecclesiastical Supremacy did in discharging the disabling
Penalties in her first Act of Parliament, and in relaxing by her
interpretation, the vinculum for its observance in that sense that many had
before put on it.


B. King James his Parliament did in effect, the very self-same thing. And I
shall give you the account of it out of his Proclamation of the 16th of July,
A. 1604. in the Second year of his Reign: for there having spoke of that
Conference and of his having Published by Proclamation what was the issue of
it, and his hoping that when the same should be made known all reasonable Men
would have rested satisfied with that which had been done, and not have moved
further trouble of Speech of Matters whereof so solemn and advised deliberation
had been made, His Majesty's following words are, Notwithstanding at the late
Assembly of our Parliament, there wanted not many who renewed with no little
earnestness the Questions before determined, and many more as well about the
Book of Common Prayer, as other Matters of Church Government, and importuned us
for our assent to many Alterations therein: but yet with such Success, as when
they heard both our own Speeches made to them at sundry times, showing the
Reasons of our former Proceedings in those Matters, and likewise had had
Conference with some Bishops, and other Lords of the Upper House about the
same, they desisted from further Prosecution thereof, finding that of all
things that might any way tend to the furtherance of Religion and of
Establishment of a Ministry fit for the same, we had before with the Advice of
our Council, had such Consideration as the present state of things would bear,
and taken order how the same should be prosecuted by such means as might be
used without any public disturbance or innovation.

And in how vigorous a State the Dispensative Power as to the Nonconformists
afterward continued in the Reign of that Prince appears by what I have before
cited of an Application made to him by the House of Commons for the exercise of
the same to the Non-conformists, in the 10th year of his Reign.

Moreover how by Tacit Dispensation he dispensed with the Disabilities that
Roman Catholic Physicians and Lawyers had incurred by his Acts of Parliament,
I have told you. But what if I should now tell you how afterward he did take
care as it were una litura, to delete the Execution of ^ll the Penal Laws,
disabling ones, and others, against the Roman Catholics; and that as to what
he did therein, the most zealous Protestants among his Bishops, and the Lords
Temporal and others of his Privy Council, did concur with him in so doing?


A. I think you would tell me of that which was very strange.


B. As in the Happy future State of England it was with an intent to detect the
Degeneracy and Vanity of the Politic and Protestant-would-be's of the Age who
pretended to Advance Religion by Excluding the next Heir, in p. 219. shown that
one of the general and public Articles sent by King James the First to his
Ambassador in Spain, in Order to the Match with the Infanta was, that the
Children of this Marriage shall no way be compelled or constrained in point of
Conscience or Religion, wherefore there is no doubt that their title shall be
prejudiced in case it should please God that they turned Catholics, and that
it was afterward sent as an additional Article offered from England, that the
King of Great Britain and Prince of Wales should bind themselves by Oath for
the Observance of the Articles, and that the Privy Council should sign the same
under their Hands, and that accordingly the Articles were signed by Archbishop
Abbot, John Bishop of Lincoln, Keeper of the Great Seal, Lionel Earl of
Middlesex, Lord high Treasurer of England, Henry Viscount Mandevile, Lord
President of the Council, Edward Earl of Worcester, Lord Privy Seal, Lewis Duke
of Richmond and Lennox Lord high Steward of the Household, James Marquess of
Hamilton, James Earl of Carlisle, Lancelot Bishop of Winchester, Oliver
Viscount Grandison, Arthur Baron Chichester of Belfast, Lord Treasurer of
Ireland, Sir Thomas Edmonds Knight, Treasurer of the Household, Sir John
Suckling, Comptroller of the Household, Sir George Calvert, and Sir Edward
Conway, Principal Secretaries of State, Sir Richard Weston, Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Sir Julius Caesar, Mr. of the Rolls; and for the truth of which
Facts, reference is there made to Mr. Prynne's Introduction to the Archbishop
of Canterbury's Trial, p. 43: so you may there read it in p. 44. that some
private Articles were agreed on, and probably were Sworn to by the same Persons
that the other general ones were: and of which private ones, the first was in
short, That none of the Penal Laws against Roman Catholics should at any time
hereafter be put in Execution.

But you may thus see it at large: viz. That particular Laws made against Roman
Catholics, under which other Subjects of our Realms are not comprehended, and
to whose Observation all generally are not obliged, as likewise general Laws,
under which all are equally Comprised; if so be they are such as are repugnant
to the Romish Religion, shall not at any time hereafter by any means or chance
whatsoever directly or indirectly, be commanded to be put in Execution against
the said Roman Catholics. And we will cause that our Council shall take the
same Oath, as far as it pertains to them, and belongs to the Execution which by
the hands of them and their Ministers is to be exercised.

The 2d was, That no other Laws shall hereafter be made anew against the said
Roman Catholics; but that there shall be a perpetual Toleration of the Roman
Catholic Religion within Private Houses throughout all our Realms and
Dominions, which we will have to be understood, as well of our Kingdom of
Scotland and Ireland, as in England, etc.

And the 4th was, That we will interpose our Authority, and will do as much as
in us shall lie, that the Parliament shall approve, confirm and ratify all and
singular Articles in favor of the Roman Catholics, capitulated between the
most renowned Kings, by reason of this Marriage; and that the said Parliament
shall revoke and abrogate the particular Laws made against the said
Roman Catholics, etc.

And the Conclusion there is, viz. That we will interpose our Authority, and
will do as much as in us shall lie, that the Parliament shall approve, confirm
and ratify all and singular Articles in favor of the Roman Catholics,
capitulated between the most renowned Kings, by reason of this Marriage; and
that the said Parliament shall revoke and abrogate the particular Laws made
against the said Roman Catholics, to whose observance also: the rest of our
Subjects and Vassals are not obliged; as likewise the general Laws under which
all are equally comprehended, to wit, ^s to the Roman Catholics, if they be
such as is aforesaid, which are repugnant to the Roman Catholic Religion: and
that hereafter we will not consent, that the said Parliament should ever at any
time Enact or Write any other new Laws against Roman Catholics. We accounting
all and singular the preceding Articles, ratified and accepted, out of certain
Knowledge, as far as they concern us, our Heirs or Successors, approve,
ratify, applaud, and promise, bon^ fide, and in the word of a King by these
Presents inviolably, firmly, well and faithfully to keep, observe, and fulfill
the same, and to cause them to be kept, observed and fulfilled without any
Exception or Contradiction, and do confirm the same by Oath upon the holy
Evangelists, notwithstanding any Opinions, Sentences or Laws whatsoever to the
contrary: In the presence of the most Illustrious Don John de Mendoza, Marquess
of Inojosa, and Don Charles Coloma. Extraordinary Ambassadors of the Catholic
King, of George Calvert Knight, one of our Chief Secretaries, of Edward Conway
Knight another of our Chief Secretaries, of Francis Cottington Baronet, of the
Privy Council to our Son the Prince, of Francis de Corondelet, Apostolical (or
the Pope's) Prothonotary, and Archdeacon of Cambray. Dated at our Palace at
Westminster, the 20 day of July, 1623. in the English style.

Jacobus, Rex.
A Compared and true Copy. George Calvert, Chief Secretary.



The Form of the Oath which the Lords of the Council took to the former
Articles is this which follows, (found among the Lord Cottington's Papers.)

Formula Juramenti a Consiliariis Praestandi.
Ego N. Iuro me debite pleneque observaturum, quantum ad me spectat, omnes and
singulos Articulos, qui in tractatu Matrimonii, inter Serenissimum Carolum,
Walliae Principem, and Serenissimam Dominam Do^nam Mariam Hispaniarum I^fantem,
continentur. IURO ETIAM, Quod neque per me, nec per Ministrum aliquem
inferiorem mihi inservientem, legem ullam contra quemcunque Catholicum Romanum
conscriptum executioni mandabo, aut mandari faciam, Poenamve ullam ab earum
aliqua irrogatam exigam. Sed in omnibus quae ad me pertinent, Ordines a
Majestate sua ex ea part constitutos fideliter observabo.

Thus far Mr. Prynne; who verifies the Facts abovementioned, not only from my
Lord Cottington's Papers, but from the Mercure Francois, Tom. 9. A. 1624. p.
25, 26, 27. and on which Author he in p. 47. bestows the Character of one of
the truest Historians of this latter Age: and whom Mr. Prynne had before in p.
40. cited for the truth of the general Articles referring to Tom 9. p. 11. and
28. And I shall here observe to you, that what Mr. Prynne has set down as
aforesaid, to be the Form of the Oath took by the Lords of the Council to the
former Articles, does appear to be referred by him to both sorts of Articles,
viz. both the general and the private ones. For tho toward the end of the
general Articles it appeared only that the King and Prince were to be Sworn
that all the Privy Counselors should sign those Articles under their hands,
and that the King Subscribed those Articles, and was sworn to them in the
presence of those Bishops and other Privy Counselors before named; yet the
first of the private Articles agreeing that the Council should take the Oath as
far as pertain'd to them, and belonged to the Execution which by the hands of
them and their Ministers is to be exercised, that the Penal Laws should not be
executed against Roman Catholics, I account it appears according to Mr. Prynne
that the Privy Counselors were Sworn to both Articles together: and that by
the words of IURO ETIAM, etc. the private Articles were referred to; and the
which will appear the more manifest, if you consider that the general Articles
had not one word therein for the tolerating of more Papists then those of the
Infanta's Family, and such who particularly belonged to her. Nor was there any
thing more as to the Privy Counselors agreed to in the general Articles, then
their signing them. And both the general and private Articles bearing the same
Date, it may be the rather supposed that pursuant to the first private Article,
containing the King's Covenant for the Privy Councel's being sworn to them,
that the Bishops and the other Privy Counselors might then be sworn to them,
as well as their having then particularly signed or subscribed the general
Articles appears: for so Mr. Prynne's words are, p. 44. The King and the
Ambassadors went to the Councel-Chamber, where all the Lords of the Council
sealed and subscribed the general Articles of the Marriage, etc.

A. But I account you are not ignorant how much it has been observed that Mr.
Prynne, who was so voluminous a Writer, did too much take his Quotations on
trust; and that therefore what he had as out of the Mercure Francois might not
be rightly cited.


B. Admitting that Mr. Prynne being so infinite in his Quotations might often
err that way, I shall tell you, that I engaging a Learned Man of the
University of Oxford to consult Mr. Prynne's Quotations out of the Mercure (of
which the Tomes are in the Bodleian Library) he returned me word, that they
exactly agreed with the Author in the places cited by Mr. Prynne.


A. But one would scarce think that Archbishop Abbot should swear to these
private Articles; for there went about a Letter of his in that Conjuncture, by
the warm name of his Remonstrance to His Majesty against the Match, and the
toleration of the Roman Catholics.


B. I grant that there did: and Mr. Prynne in p. 39. and 40. sets down the
Letter; and he calls it A Remonstrance: and the Archbishop is there brought in,
saying thus, viz. This Toleration which you endeavor to s^t up by your
Proclamation, cannot be done without an Act of Parliament, etc. But Heylin in
his History of the Presbyterians, represents this as a Sham-Letter, and put
upon the Archbishop: and says, that the Archbishop could not be so ill a
Statesman (having been long a Privy Councellor) as not to know that he who sits
at Helm, must steer his Course according to Wind and Weather, and that there
was a great difference between such Personal Indulgences as the King had
granted in the Case to his Popish Subjects, and any such Public exercise of
their Superstitions as the word Toleration does import. And so he gives
Judgment, that Abbot was only the reputed Author of this Bastard Letter, and
not the natural Parent of it.

In the various Editions of this Letter, I have observed no date to it: and it
is in that Book of Mr. Prynne before his mention of the general or private
Articles, and before the Match was resolved on by the King. And if
notwithstanding that Letter, the Archbishop was afterward Sworn to the
Articles, his altering his judgment on grounds of Reason, was both commendable,
and exemplary: and worthy of that mutual Confidence between the King and him
and the other Bishops in the Council, and his Privy Council in general; and
which was such, that in a lawful Matter the King could stipulate for their
Obedience in the first private Article as was before mentioned.


A. Your having showed me out of the Copy of the Public Instruments found by
Mr. Prynne among my Lord Cottington's Papers what concerns the Toleration, has
given me much satisfaction in the truth of that Fact. For otherwise what a late
Book writ for The King's Right in dispensing with the Penal Laws directed me to
in Rushworth of The Declaration touching the Pardons, Suspensions, and
Dispensations of the Roman Catholics, signed by the Lord Conway and others,
Aug. the 7th. A. 1623. would have left the Matter to me full of doubt and
mystery.

But I see by those Copies of Articles found among the Papers of my Lord
Cottington, the Toleration of Papists had been revera about a Fortnight before
the date of that Paper sworn to by all the Privy Counselors of King James. And
tho King Charles the First did fall as a Martyr for the Protestant Religion,
and was a Confessor of it in Spain, as Archbishop Laud sets forth in his
Star Chamber Speech, and as likewise the Earl of Bristol shows in his Learned
and Loyal Apology, Printed, A. 1657. (which if you have not read, is highly
worth your most serious perusal; and where having spoke of the Papal
Dispensation for the Marriage on the Articles formerly agreed on in point of
Religion, and of the Civil Letters that passed between that King, then Prince,
and the Pope, he said that those Letters were Published and Translated into
several Languages (referring there, I suppose, to the Mercure Francois) which
tho he could not say corruptly, yet strained as much as might be to his
disadvantage, and that it is probable that the like Letters of Compliance m^
have been procured in the Treaty of the Match with France, wherein the Pope's
Dispensation was likewise held necessary) yet I shall tell you, that Mr. Prynne
in p. 46, 47. after he had mentioned the Oath taken by the Privy Counselors,
says, His Majesty called an Assembly of Divines to Consult with, what he ought
to do for the discharge of his Consc^ence in this regard, and their Resolution
was first that the Prince of Wales should promise on ^is Oath to perform the
Conditions, and that the King his Father should do the like: Secondly, That the
Promises of Marriage should be presently made, etc. but that the Consummation
of the Marriage should not at all be executed till the Month of May in the
following year 1624. to the end that they might experiment^lly see if the
aforesaid Conditions required by his Holiness should be faithfully
accomplished, etc. As to the first, the Prince of Wales took an Oath to His
Majesty to observe the foresaid Conditions, and signed them with his Hand, and
he likewise swore and signed this by way of Overplus, to permit at all times,
that Any should freely propose to him the Arguments of the Catholick-Religion
without giving any impediment, and that he would never directly nor indirectly
permit any to speak to the Infanta against the same.

But I shall here en passant observe to you out of the general Articles, namely
that in the 16th Article (notwithstanding my Lord Coke's Opinion
beforementioned, that a new Oath cannot be introduced nor an old one altered
but by Act of Parliament) there is a new Oath of fealty agreed to by the King
to be tendered both to Foreigners and Subjects of England who were to serve the
Infanta, and care taken that no Clause or word therein shall contradict the
Roman Religion, or Consciences of the Roman Catholics: and that by the 24th
Article for the Security that every thing that was agreed to, should be
fulfilled, the King and Prince were to be bound by Oath, that all the Privy
Counselors should sign the Agreement, And I need not tell you that their being
sworn to the private Articles was a new Oath.


A. Was nothing of the King's mind about the Suspending ALL the Penal Laws,
both the disabling ones and others against the Papists, notify'd to his Privy
Council before the year 1623?


B. Mr. Prynne there in p. 30. says, that for the hastening the Pope's
Dispensation for the Match, King James ( as the French Mercure, Tom. 9. records
it, and as he had CREDIBLY been informed of from others) assembling his Privy
Council together, Febr. 25. 1622. made a long Oration to them (which he recites
at large) the sum whereof was this, That the Roman Catholics in England had
sustained great and intolerable surcharges imposed on their Goods, Bodies,
Consciences during Queen Elizabeth's Reign, of which they hoped to be relieved
in his, etc. That now he had maturely considered the Penury and Calamities of
the Roman Catholics who were in the number of his faithful Subjects, and was
resolved to relieve them, and therefore did from thenceforth take all his
Roman Catholic Subjects into his Protection, permitting them the Liberty and
entire Exercise of their Religion, etc. without any Inquisition, Process, or
Molestation from that day forward; and likewise will and ordain, that they
shall be restored to all their Estates, Lands, Fees and Seignories, and
reestablished in them: Commanding all his Magistrates, Justices, and other
Officers whatsoever in this behalf to hold their hands, and for what Cause
soever it be, not to attempt hereafter to grieve or molest the said Catholics,
neither in public nor private in the liberty of the exercise of their
Religion, upon pain of being reputed Guilty of High Treason, and Disturbers of
the Kingdoms peace and repose: this being his will and definitive Sentence.


A. But still I cannot forbear wondering about what Considerations made our
Divines, and our Great Champions of the Church of England-Protestancy in the
State as well as Church, afterward thus inclinable to act their Parts about
Toleration, as Mr. Prynne has mentioned.


B. They had cause enough to apprehend that the Hierarchy of England could not
be supported without the Monarchy, and that by reason of the various growth of
the Potency of foreign Princes and States, and of intestine Factions, the
Monarchy could not be then sufficiently secure without a foreign Alliance by
inter-marriage; and that where such Alliance was to be with the Famili^s of
Roman Catholic Princes, there could be no expectation of the Pope's relaxing
his Laws by dispensing, without our Princes doing something of that kind as to
theirs.

I might here observe to you, that we are told in The Regal Apology (that the
Oxford*Antiquities mentioned to have been writ by Dr. Bate) that A particular
Toleration had a former President even in Queen Elizabeth in those Articles of
Marriage which were consented to with the Duke of Anjou: and if it were true
that an Universal Toleration was agreed on by King James, it was intuitu
majoris boni. The Palatinate was to be restored again, and the Protestants of
Germany to be re-enstated in their Possessions on that Condition.

But to punish being a kind of Punishment, and it being irreligious to punish
Men for Religion, and the highest tide of Anger being naturally succeeded by
the lowest ebb of it, and the thoughts of rigorous Severity in Princes toward
their Subjects being like such in the Head toward the Members of the same Body,
and King James having found that the general abhorrence of the
Gun-Powder-Treason had blown up the credit of those fiery Doctrines that
produced it, and he being then within Prospect of his end and being unwilling
that the Sun of his Life should go down in his wrath, and finding, as appears
by his long Proclamation of four sheets of Paper, declaring his. Pleasure
concerning the Dissolving of the Parliament, A. 16^1. that they were not the
Papists who made his later breath so uneasy to him, and he being of opinion
that the reason of the severe Laws was much abated, it may abate of our wonder
that in that Conjuncture he put a Period to their Execution.

Mr. Prynne for this purpose in p. 14. of that Book Prints a Letter of the Lord
Keeper Williams to the I^dges in the year following, to acquaint them that His
Majesty having resolved (out of deep Reasons of State, and in expectation of
like Correspondence from foreign Princes to the Professors of our Religion) to
grant some Grace and Convenience to the imprisoned Papists of this Kingdom; had
Commanded him to pass some Writs under the Broad Seal for that purpose, and
that he had accordingly done so; and tells them, that it is His Majesty's
Pleasure that they shall make no niceness or difficulty to extend that his
Princely favor to all Papists imprisoned for any Church Recusancy whatsoever,
or refusing the Oath of Supremacy, or hearing of Mass, or any other point of
Recusancy which does touch or concern Religion only, and not matters of State,
which shall appear to you to be totally Civil and Political.


A. You lately ment^on'd to me that the Earl of Bristol hinted it that there
was afterward somewhat of Compliance with the Pope in the Match with France of
that nature, as was in the Spanish. What account does Mr. Prynne give of that?


B. He tells you there, p. 69. that the French Ma^ch was soon Concluded in the
life of King James, the Articles concerning Religion being the same almost
Verbatim with those formerly agreed on in the Spanish Treaty. And he there
refers to Rot. Tractationis and Ratificationis Matrimon^ inter Dom. Carolum
Regem and Dom. Henret. Mariam Sororem Regis Franc. 1o Cat. in the Rolls: and
then in p. 71. says, Besides these general Articles of the Match, these
particular ones were concluded and agreed on in favor of the Roman Catholics,
the same in Substance with those of Spain, and where he says the Second is to
this effect, that the English Catholics should be no more searched after (or
molested) for their Religion.

But Mr. Prynne there particularly sets down only three short Articles, and
those comprised in about six lines: and the words [or mol^ted] in the second
Article are Printed in a different Character from the others, as if he thereby
intended them as his own Explication of the word searched.


A. You just now mentioned King James his having in the year 1622. ordered all
the Popish Recusants who were in Prison on the account of their Religion to be
set at liberty: and you told me how he tacitly dispensed with the Disability
that Popish Physicians and Lawyers had incurred by Act of Parliament. Was that
all the favor he showed Roman Catholics?


B. No: He allowed them to make a very Considerable figure in the Government,
as you may find if you consult the Iournals of Parliament, as referred to by
Mr. Prynne, p. 66. and Seq. of that Book: For he there mentions, that in the
year 1624. The Commons sent a Petition to the Lords, desiring their Concurrence
with them in presenting it to His Majesty, for removing Popish Recusants, and
those whose Wives were Papists, from Offices of Trust, which by Law they were
DISABLED to execute, which the Lords took into their Consideration, and which
Mr. Prynne says, was entered in their Iournal in this manner, Die Jovis viz.
Vicessimo die Maii 1624. The Lord Archbishop of Canterbury reported, that at
the meeting this Day with the Commons, they Presented an humble Petition to the
King, desiring this House to join therein with them. The which Petition was
read in haec verba, etc.

In short, the Commons in their Petition take notice of the Growth of the
Number of Popish Recusants in this Kingdom, and of their insolency in all the
Parts thereof, and that many of them, contrary to the Laws, were g^t into
Offices and Places of Government and Authority under the King: And the Prayer
of the Petition is, That the Lords and Gentlemen there undernamed, may be
removed from all His Majesty's Commissions of great Charge and Trust,
Commissions of Lieutenancy, Oyer and Terminer, and of the Peace, and from all
other Offices and Places of Trust. And they in their first Sched^le there name
11 Lords and 18 Knights.

And in their second they name many Persons of Quality who were in Places of
Charge and Trust in their several Counties, and had married Popish Wives, and
whose Children and Servants were bred up to Popery.


A. Does any Act of Parliament disable a man from bearing Office because his
Wife is a Papist, or because his Children or Servants are bred up to be Papists?


B. Yes, the Act of the Third of King James the First, cap. 5. does it, as you
will see if you consult it; for it is there Enacted, That no Popish Recusant
Convict, nor any having a Wife being a Popish Recusant Convict, shall at any
time after this Session of Parliament, or any Popish Recusant hereafter to be
Convict, or having a Wife which hereafter shall be a Recusant Convict, at any
time after his or her Conviction, shall exercise any public Office or Charge
in the Commonwealth, but shall be utterly DISABLED to exercise the same by
himself or his Deputy, except such Husband himself and his Children which shall
be above the age of Nine years abiding with him, and his Servants in Household
shall once every Month in the least, repair to some Church usual for Divine
Service, and there hear Divine Service, and the said Husband, and such his
Children and Servants as are of meet Age receive the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, and do bring up his said Children in true Religion.


A. Now have you set me a longing to know what the House of Lords did in the
Case of that Petition about removing those disabled Persons from serving the
King in those great Stations. And since the Judgment of Parliament was always
had in such great veneration, I think if the result of the desire of the House
of Commons was that the Lords had joined with them in the Petition, and had
urged that the King could not dispense with that Act of Parliament and Pardon
Disability, it may make a notable President in the Case we have been discussing.


B. You will find that the Commons urged nothing to the prejudice of
Prerogative in the Prayer of their Petition. Their style there was, We humbly
beseech your Majesty graciously to vouchsafe that the said Lords and Gentlemen
here under-named for this important Reason, and for the greater Safety of your
Majesty and of your Realm, may be removed from all your Majesty's Commissions
of great Charge and Trust, Commissions of Lieutenancy, etc. And the important
reason did refer to the great Countenance hereby given to Popery, the great
grief and offense to all his best affected and true loving Subjects by putting
the Power of Arms into such men's hands as by former Acts of His Majesty's
Council are adjudged Persons justly to be suspected, etc.

But to let you see what the House of Lords did hereupon, Mr. Prynne tells you,
p. 69. That this Petition being read, the House did defer the Debate thereof at
this time, for that the day was far spent. And answer was given to the Commons
(who attended for the same in the Painted Chamber) that the Lords will send
them an Answer of this Petition, hereafter when they are resolved thereof.
Whereupon Mr. Prynne concludes his account of this Transaction thus, Whether
any of these were displaced upon this Petition, I find not in any Memorials; it
being certain some of them were not, but continued still in these Offices of
Trust.


A. How have you here disappointed my Curiosity in making that ferment then in
the Government about the Disability of the Papists being dispensed with, thus
silently to go off through the House of Lords forbearing to join with the House
of Commons in their Petition!


B. I shall here afford your Curiosity a recompense by observing it to you with
allusion to some of the words of the Royal Martyr in his Answer to the 19
Propositions, That the ancient, equal, happy, well poysed, and never enough
commended Constitution of the Government of this Kingdom having made this
Nation so famous and happy to a great degree of Envy, etc. and the Lords being
trusted with a Iudicatory Power are an excellent Screen and Bank between the
Prince and the People, to assist each against any Encroachment of the other,
etc. that the Wisdom of that House in acting as it has done, in many
Conjunctures has put an end to many ferments accidentally occasioned by others
mistakes about Prerogative, and whereby that august Assembly did sometimes
Cunctando restituere rem, and by its forbearing out of tender^ess for
Prerogative to give judgment about it, has often to the Satisfaction both of
the Prince and People, left the Regal Rights in their ancient quiet Estate.

I shall for this purpose observe to you, that I once reading to the late Earl
of Anglesy when he was Lord Privy Seal, what I had in a Manuscript of mine set
down, as the Fact of what had passed between the late King and the House of
Commons concerning his Declaration of Indulgence on March the 15th, 1671. and
the Penal Laws being thereby suspended (and the suspension of which the Commons
then urged could not be but by Act of Parliament, and whereupon they applied to
the King for the Vacating that Declaration) his Lordship did dictate to me in
order to my Completing the state of that Fact, and which I writ from his
Mouth, as follows, viz. But it is to be observed upon this whole Transaction
between the King and the House of Commons, that the Lords had no hand in the
Address to the King about this great Point; although it be uncontroverted that the
Lords are the only Iudicatory that can determine any controverted Point without
an Act of Parliament, and either the King or the Commons might in a particular
Case have had this Point brought by Appeal to the Lords, if they had pleased,
and consequently might have effected the judicial decision of the same.


A. In your State of that part of the Fact that concerned the Commons, did they
Address against the Dispensing with Acts of Parliament*


B. No, but only against the Suspending them, which are things of a different
Nature. The same House of Commons by having July the 10th, 1663. resolved, That
His Majesty be humbly desired to issue forth his Proclamation for the punctual
and effectual Execution and Observance of the Act of Navigation without any
Dispensation whatsoever, whereby the Act may be in the least violated, and to
recall such Dispensations as are already granted, etc. did virtually show a
Deference to His Majesty's right of Dispensing. Nay, let me tell you, that the
very many Acts of Parliaments which expressly provide against the Crown's
dispensing by Non-obstante in some particular Cases, may all be cited as
Presidents or Judgments of Parliaments for the propping up the Dispensative
Power, and of Parliaments having admitted that Power in our Kings, the exercise
of which they provide against and desire to take away in such particular Cases.

But by referring to the Fact of the intercourse between the late King and the
House of Commons about the suspending the Penal Laws, I have took occasion to
point out to you the Wisdom of the Government in then passing that affair over
without a judicial decision. And I can give you an instance of the Prudential
measures formerly observed by Persons who made a great figure in the
Administration of the Ecclesiastical Government of the Church of England, and
who at the Consecration of Bishop Manwaring when on the usual Process at
Consecrations to call all Persons to appear to show cause why the Elect should
not be Confirmed, some then appeared and objected against him, that upon his
being Impeached 3o Car. 1. by the Commons, the Lords had given Judgment against
him to disable him from all Preferment in the Church; forbore to consider the
merits of the Exception, and throwing them off by a Pretense of their being
defective in some Formalities of Law, went on in the Confirmation.

And which is more, I can tell you that long afterward, viz. A. 1640. the Lords
highly resenting both the Pardon and Bishopric he had obtained, and calling to
mind the Sentence they had pronounced against him, did on the 18th of April
that year, refer the Consideration thereof to their Grand Committee for
Privileges, it being also moved, that what can be alleged on the Lord Bishop
of St. David' s part, either by Pardon, License or otherwise, may be produced
and seen at the Sitting of the Lords Committees for their full and clear
understanding, and better expedition in the business: and on the 21st of April
that year, ordered, that on the following Monday, the Records be brought into
the House, that the House might determine the Cause, and on the 27th of April
following, ordered the Cause to be heard the next day, and upon which day some
such fatal Sentence being expected against the Bishop, as, And his Bishopric
let another man take, by reason of his having been judicially disabled; His
Majesty commanded that Bishop not to Sit in Parliament, nor send any Proxy
thither: and the serment of the debate went off without any Judgment given by
the Lords that might touch Prerogative in the Point.

And if in the year 1640. when the air of men's fancies was so much infected
with the Pestilence of Faction, so much tenderness was shown to Prerogative
(and that too in the Case of a Criminal whom the Commons had for so many years
made the great object of their anger, as one whom they looked on as a Proditor
or Betrayer of his Country, and Betrayer of their Properties) the Loyal may
well say quid non speremus, as to any future ferment that can rise in
Parliament, being allayed without Prejudice to the Crown.

The Iournals of Parliament in the Beginning of the Reign of King Charles the
First do tell us of the great ferment about the Pardon of Bishop Montague, whom
the Commons had impeached before the Lords, and who after the Parliament was
Prorogued to the 4th year of the reign of that Prince, had obtained his Pardon
in the time of the Prorogation, and that such Pardon was by the Commons
questioned, and that such questioning soon evaporated.

But according to that Great Saying of Sir Harry Martin in his Speech at a
Conference between both Houses (as you will find it in R^shworth) after he had
mentioned the inconvenience of nice debates about the Original, Latitude and
Bounds of Sovereign Power, viz. I have ever been of opinion that it is then
best with Sovereign Power when it is had in tacit veneration, and not when it
is profaned by Public Hearings and Examinations, you will find that it has
been the usual Practice of our great Loyal Patriots, in many Critical
Conjunctures of time to prevent the popular Criticizing on Controverted Points
of Prerogative, and to provide for the ease both of Prince and People by giving
no other rule in the Cause then the putting it off in longissimum diem.


A. I suppose that excellent Political remark of Sir Harry Martin's was so made
by him in the Conjuncture of the Petition of Right. I have read of the great
ferment the Petition of Right made in the beginning of the Reign of the Royal
Martyr: and I shall be glad to know if the dispensing with the Penal Laws, and
particularly such as are inclusive of disability made any part of the
fermentation.


B. No doubt if the Dispensative Power of the Crown as to any Penal religionary
^aws, had then appeared any considerable gravamen to any of the three Estates,
they would then have cried out of it: But which they did not. Yet I shall tell
you that they had a fair occas^on then given them to do it if they had thought
it tanti. For in the first year of his Reign there was a ferment in Parliament
about the Penal Laws against the Papists, and particularly the disabling ones,
but which soon went off (as I may say) by insensible Perspiration.

It s^ems that Mr. Prynne in p. 74. and 77. says both Houses that year having
presented a Petition to that Prince wherein they took notice that his Majesty
had in his Princely Wisdom taken order that none of his natural born Subjects
not professing the true Religion and by Law established, shall be admitted into
the Service of his Royal Co^sort, and having further desired that his Majesty
would be pleased to remove from all Places of Authority all such Persons, as
are either Popish Recusants, or according to direction of former Acts of State
to be justly suspected, and that his Majesty said he would give order for it,
yet that that Parliament being unhappily dissolved in discontent, his Majesty
thought not fit to show such severity to Recusants as he intended. And in p.
76. Mr. Prynne had mentioned that Sir John Winter, Mr. Walter Mountague, Sir
Maurice Drummond, and other Papists, were admitted in her Majesty's Service.
But by what appears from Mr. Prynne in p. 80. in the following Parliament in
the Second year of that King, the House of Commons took diverse Examinations
concerning Recusants that were in Office, and at last agreed on a Petition
against Recusants in Office, and to present their Names therewith to the King
to the end they might be removed: and He then says, that Martis 6. Iunii 2.
Car. Regis. The Petition against Recusants in Authority was engrossed, read and
allowed to be presented to his Majesty, and this to be done by the
Privy-Councel of the House, and Sir John F^llerton, which was done accordingly:
but with what real success, I can give no exact account.

But that the disabling and other Laws against the Papists had been dispensed
with by the Royal Martyr as well as his Father, any one will conclude who reads
what there follows, viz. In this Parliament these ensuing Articles against
Popish Recusants were Consulted of in the House of Commons, with an Intent to
draw them into an Act; and of which the 9th is, No Recusant to bear Office of
Justice of Peace or otherwise, or any man whose Wife shall be a Recusant, or
practice Law, Common, or Civil, or Physic, nor have Command in War, etc. And I
should first have told you that the Third was, A New Oath with more Additions
to be taken concerning the Supremacy.


A. Good God! A new Oath with more Additions about the Supremacy!


B. You may suppose it would have been seemingly a New Oath by that
Parliament's approving all the Authentic Regal Interpretations of the old one,
as Queen Elizabeth's Interpretation was approved by her Parliament.

But you may here observe, that tho the Disabling and other Penal Laws were by
this Pious Prince tacitly and often dispensed with, and the time of the doing
of it caused some temporary ferments to arise in the Minds of his Subjects in
Parliament, yet their animosities have soon tacitly evaporated, and the Regal
Power of Dispensing then came to no question. The Puritan Dissenters and
scruplers of Ceremonies, knew they wanted the benefit of that Power as well as
the Papists: and the exercise of that Power was in the Petition of both Houses
before mentioned implored as to the disabled or silenced Ministers. And
therefore you will not wonder at it when I tell you that during all the great
Patriotly efforts that were made for the removing all Grievances by the
Petition of Right, there was no offense taken at the Right of the Dispensative
Power.


A. I thank you for that observation.


B. The thought is too obvious to deserve thanks: and I assure you it is a kind
of Proverbial Saying in the Canon Law, that Dispensationum modus nulli
Sapientum displicuit.

But even in the Conjuncture of the Petition of Right, to show you that the
Dispensative Power did not in the least contribute to the ferment, I shall let
you see out of Rushworth how Mr. Glanvile (who made so great a figure of a
Patriot then in Parliament) did with the greatest popular applause appear as an
Assertor of that Power, and when in his Speech in a full Committee of both
Houses (May 23. A. 1628.) he inter alia said, There is a Trust inseparably
reposed in the Persons of the Kings of England; but that Trust is regulated by
Law: For example, when Statutes are made to Prohibit things not mala in se, but
only mala quia Prohibita, under certain Forfeitures and Penalties to accrue to
the King and to the Informers that shall sue for the breach of them, the
Commons must and ever will acknowledge a Regal and Sovereign Prerogative in the
King touching such Statutes, that it is in his Majesty's absolute and undoubted
Power to grant Dispensations to particular Persons, with the Clauses of
Non-obstante to do as they might have done before those Statutes, wherein his
Majesty conferring Grace and Favor upon some, does not do wrong to others. But
there is a difference between those Statutes and the Laws and Statutes whereon
the Petition is grounded. By those Statutes the Subject has no interest in the
Penalties which are all the fruit such Statutes can produce, until by Suit or
Information he become entitled to the particular Forfeitures; whereas the Laws
and Statutes mentioned in our Petition are of another Nature. There shall your
Lordships find us to rely upon the good old Statute called Magna Charta, which
declares and confirms the ancient Common Laws of the Liberties of England:
and there he speaks afterward of other Statute Laws not inflicting Penalties
upon Offenders in malis prohibitis, but Laws declarative or positive,
conferring or confirming ipso facto an inherent Right and Interest of liberty
and freedom in the Subjects of this Realm, as their Birthrights and
Inheritances descendable to their Heirs and Posterities, the Statutes
incorporate into the Body of the Common Law; over which (with reverence be it
spoken) there is no Trust reposed in the King's Sovereign Power or Prerogative
Royal to enable him to dispense with them, or to take from his Subjects the
Birthright which they have in their Liberties, by virtue of the Common Law.

So then according to the sense of this loyal Patriot, if the King shall by his
Prerogative dispense with the Disabilities or Premunires or other Penalties
incurred by Popish Recusants pursuant to any Statutes; as for example, those of
Queen Elizabeth or King James, and even that of 3o Iac. c. 5. whereby Convicted
Recusants are disabled from Military Offices, and Offices in the Navy, and in
the Law, and f^m the Practice of Physic, and any public Office and Charge in
the Commonwealth, or the Test-Act 25o Car. 2. No question is to be made of the
King's absolute and undoubted Power of dispensing with particular persons in
such a Case.

And during the ferment about the Laws and Statutes whereon the Petition of
Right was founded (and which were of another Nature, as Mr. Glanvile's words
are) you will not forget that there was a tenderness for Prerogative avowed by
both Houses, while you remember those words of the Royal Martyr in his Speech
at the Prorogation of the Parliament the 20th of October, A. 1628. viz. That
the Profession of both Houses at the time of hammering the P^tition of Right
was no way to entrench upon his Prer^gative; and their saying that they had
neither intention no^ power to hurt it, etc.

You may too call to mind that as during the f^rment that the suspending the
Penal Laws by His late Majesty's Declaration of Indulgence* his Power of
Dispensing in them came not in question, so the heat about his Preregative to
SUSPEND them was soon over.

The Opinion of that loyal Patriot and learned and upright Iustitiary Sir
William Ellis delivered in his Argument about Thomas and Sorrells Case I told
you of namely that the King may SUSPEND an Act of Parliament till next Session
(which was a fl^ght beyond what was moved for or adjudged in the late Case of
G^dden and Hales) did never meet with any angry reflection (that I have heard
of) from any Person either of the People diffusive or representative, tho yet
that Argument of his containing such Opinion was both after the Votes of the
House of Commons about the illegality of the suspending of Penal Laws in
Matters Eccle^iastical otherwise then by Act of Parliament, and after the Act
for the Test.

And how near the Prerogative of Dispensing as allowed by my Lord Chief Justice
Vaughan in his Argument in Thomas and Sorrell's Case, (and who argued after Sir
W. Ellis) came up to SUSPENDING, you may see there by what he says, p. 347*
Where the King can dispense with particular Persons, he is not confined to
number or place, but may Lice^s, as many, and in such Places as he thinks fit.

But further to show you to how quiet and temperate a State that ferment of the
Prince's suspending all the Religionary Penal Laws without an Act of Parliament
was grown, I shall let you see that several years after the late King's
Declaration of Indulgence and the Act for the Test, the late Earl of S^aftsbury
appeared in Print as owning the legality of the King's Prer^gative in that
kind, and without his Lordship's being in the least censured for it by any of
that num^rous Party he was then the Head of.

And here I am to tell you, that in a Book called A Letter from a Person of
Quality to his Friend in the Country, Printed in the year 1675. the Earl of
Shaftsbury is by Mr. Marvel the supposed Author of the Book, introduced as
owning that the Power of the King's Supremacy (meaning in Matters
Ecclesiastical) was of another Nature then that he had in Civils, and had been
exercised without exception in this very Case (i. e. as in the Declaration of
Indulgence) by his Father, Grandfather, and Queen Elizabeth, under the Great
Seal to foreign Protestants become Subjects of England, etc.


A. Did the Earl of Shaftsbury then in the year 1675. own the Prerogative of
suspending Penal Laws in Matters Ecclesiastical when the King had long before
quitted it, and when his Lordship was Embarked with those Men to whom nothing
could once seem more unpopular then the owning of any such Prerogative?


B. I refer you to the Book it self, and where you will see that that Great
Statesman did then assert the extent of Prerogative in that Point, with as much
strength of Wit and Reason, as if he had been then fitting at the Helm of
State: and where he further shows the Necessity of a standing Supreme executive
Power to mitigate or wholly to SUSPEND the execution of any Penal Laws, etc. But
I shall best entertain you with his Lordship's own words as so great a Narrator
as Mr. Marvel relates them, and who (as he says) telling his Lordship that
the Declaration of Indulgence assumed a Power to repeal and SUSPEND all our
Laws, his Lordship ^eplyed, that he wondered at his Objection, there being not
one of these in the Case. For the King assumed no Power of repealing Laws, or
suspending them contrary to the will of his Parliament, or People; and not to
argue with me at that time the Power of the King's Supremacy, which was of
another Nature then that he had in Civils, and had been exercised without
exception in this very Case by his Father, Grandfather, and Queen Elizabeth,
under the Great Seal to foreign Protestants become Subjects of England, nor to
instance in the SUSPENDING the execution of the two Acts of Navigation, and
Trade during both this and the last Dutch War, in the same words and upon the
same necessity, and as yet without clamor that ever we heard. But to pass by
all that, this is certain, a Government could not be supposed whether
Monarchical, or other of any sort, without a standing Supreme executive Power
fully enabled to mitigate, or WHOLT to SUSPEND the execution of any Penal Law
in the intervals of the Legislative Power: which when assembled there was no
doubt, but wherever there lies a Negative in passing of a Law, there the
Address or sense known of either of them to the Contrary (as for instance of
either of our two Houses of Parliament in England) ought to determine that
Indulgence, and restore the Law to its full execution. For without this the
Laws were to no purpose made, if the Prince could annul them at pleasure, and
so on the other hand without a Power always in being of dispensing on occasion,
was to suppose a Constitution extremely imperfect, and impracticable, and to
Cure those with a Legislative Power always in being, is when considered no
other then a perfect Tyranny.


A. I find that his Lordship does not in the least distinguish between the
Right of Prerogative in suspending the Disabling or incapacitating Penal Laws,
and others. And he by giving the Power of suspending all the Penal Laws to the
Prince during the Intervals of Parliament, and till an Address should be thence
made to the Prince to revoke such suspension, has given his Prince this Power
in effect during life. For it is obvious to consider by how many accidents a
suspension of Penal Laws revocable on an Address from the Parliament, may
happen to be not so revoked.


B. You say right. The King may thus according to his Lordship's Opinion
suspend all Penal Disabilities as well as other Penalties incurred by Acts of
Parliament, and particularly by the Test-Act of 25o Car. 2. and hereby to the
Great figure he made in the framing of that Act, any who are displeased with
the Act, may apply the Una eademque manus, etc.


A. But I suppose his Lordship there has nothing that may favor the repealing
of the Test, or any of the Penal Laws against the Papists.


B. None would expect from him anything to be moved for the repealing of the
Test; however he allowed Prerogative to suspend it. But at that time that all
People of narrow Souls and ignoble Thoughts were with so much clamor hunting
down all Roman Catholics without distinction, and when the most devout among
them by being (as it were) ad bestias damnati and devoured by Informers,
appeared as a spectacle of delight to many inhumane Protestants, his Lordship's
humanity was so great as to incline him in p. 6. there to give them somewhat
like a Quietus from all Pecuniary Laws. And the truth is when I consider how
little Wool the fleecing of Roman Catholics and Quakers or any Heterodox
Religionaries at home or abroad has brought to the Exchequer of any Prince or
State, and only to Informers, and that the Consciences of peaceable Men have
been burdened by Men of no Conscience, and by the turba gravis paci who are
indeed burdens of the Earth, I tremble to think what occasion may have been
taken by Malcontents to say in their Hearts as to any such Prince or State,
according to those words of the Psalmist, Thou sellest thy People for naught,
and do not increase thy Wealth by their Price, or and take no Money for
them. I shall at some other time of our meeting give you some account cut of
the Records of the Exchequer of the inconsiderable Sums of Money, that have for
several years been brought to it by the severe Prosecutions of Roman Catholics
and Quakers.

But there is another thing very well worth your reading in that Book, and
which is the more proper for our Consideration as suiting some great Points we
have been discoursing that concern our Oath, and that is this; H^s ^ate
Majesty's Ministers in that year 1675. having brought in a Bill in Parliament
for a TEST extending to Protestants (and which as the Book says, was called by
one of His Majesty's Ministers, A moderate Security to the Church and Crown)
you will there in p. 15. see it mentioned how as to the Assertory Parts of the
Oath in that Test, It was worthy the Consideration of the Bishops whether
Assertory Oaths which were properly appointed to give Testimony of a Matter of
Fact w^ereof a man is capable to be fully assured by the evidence of his Senses
be lawfully to be made use of to confirm or invalidate Doc^inal Propositions,
and whether that Legislative Power which imposes such an Oath, does not
necessarily assume to it seif an Infallibility? And as for promissory Oaths, it
was desired that those learned Prelates would consider the Opinion of Grotius
De Jure Belli and Pacis, l. 2. c. 13. who seems to make it plain that those
kind of Oaths are forbidden by our Savior Christ, Matthew. 5. 34, 37. and
whether it would not become the Fathers of the Church when they have well
wei^h'd that and other places of the New Testament, to be more tender in
multiplying Oaths then hitherto the great Men of the Church have been? It is
there toward the end of the page mentioned how some of the Lords d^sired that
it might be clearly known whether it were meant all for an Oath, or some of it
a Declaration, and some an Oath? If the latter, then it was desired it might be
distinctly parted, and that the declaratory part should be subscribed by it
self and not sworn. There was no small pains taken by the Lord Keeper and the
Bishops to prove that it was brought in; the two first Parts were only a
Declaration, and not an Oath: and tho it was replied, that to declare upon ones
Oath, or to abhor upon ones Oath, is the same thing with, I do Swear, yet there
was some difficulty to obtain the dividing of them, and that the declaratory
part should be only Subscribed, and the re^t sworn to.


A. But have you mentioned these things, as if you would incline me to concur
in opinion with that Lord as to the King's Power of suspending the Penalties
incurred by Acts of Parliament, and to agree with the Measures of some other
Lords then about Oaths assertory and promissory, as referred to?


B. If I were of the same opinion about the King's Power in that Matter, as
that Lord and Sir William Ellis were, I would however forbear troubling you
with it at this time while we are considering the Obligation of our Oath of
Supremacy in order to our assistance and defense of the Pre-eminence of the
Dispensative Power. And therefore I shall not in the least endeavor to incline
you now to imbibe the persuasion of any nice Controverted point of Law or
Theology, and wherein there seems probab lis causa litigandi. And if when we
are parted, you on your recollection of our Discourse at this or our first
meeting, should have the least trouble by calling to mind any thing I have
occasionally mentioned that is matter of Controversy, you may with all my
heart put it off with a temporary transeat from your thoughts.

But one of my aims in referring to that Opinion of his Lordship was, That
knowing you to be much concerned for the ease and quiet of your Prince and
Country, I might Console you with an Instance of a great ferment about the
Regal Power, suddenly going off: and as that Book too showed you that another
did in the Government that was occasioned by the new Test-Bill then introduced.

And I must tell you that another of my aims in my pointing you to his
Lordship's Observation of the Suspensions of the Penal Statutes in the late
Reigns, was occasionally to direct you to a tenderness for the Regal Rights in
general, and for the undoubted Right of the Dispensative Power in Particular.
The same thing likewise has been my aim in the several Presidents I have given
you of the Ecclesiastical Power by Queen Elizabeth* King James, and King
Charles the First exercised in suspending Penal Laws.

The expression of tenderness for the Rights of our Princes has been much used
by the loyal Patriot'y Writers in the late Reigns: And here I shall a propos
apply it, as the Resuscitatio, Part. 1. p. 37. mentions it as used by my Lord
Bacon in a Speech in the House of Commons in the Reign of King James the First,
to the Question now before us in the Reign of King James the Second. His
Lordships words are, Since therefore we have a Prince of so excellent Wisdom
and Moderation, of whose Authority we ought to be TENDER as he is likewise of
our Liberty, let us enter into a true and indifferent Consideration how far
forth the Case in question may touch his Authority, and how far forth our
Liberty. And to speak clearly, in my opinion, it concerns his Authority much,
and our Liberty nothing at all.

That Expression concerning tenderness for the Regal Rights was very acceptable
to the House of Commons, when his late Majesty in his Letter to them from
Bredagh, April 14. 1660, thus made use of it, viz. We have not the least doubt
but you will be as TENDER in and jealous of any thing that may infringe our
Honor and Authority, as of your own Liberty and Property, which is best
preserved by preserving the other.

Remember therefore that your tenderness for Property is best preserved by your
tenderness for the Regal Authority: and if you would have your thoughts adorned
by a constant Idea of true English Loyalty like a noble Picture retained there,
let me direct you to a Saying, which like an Original drawn by a great Master,
may be fit for you to Copy after, viz. that Saying of the Lord Keeper Coventry
in a Speech in the House of Lords, viz. Some would have the King's Prerogative
rather tall then great; others e contra. But none can be truly loyal, but he
that is a good Patriot, and none can be a good Patriot, but he that is truly
loyal.

Nor need it be further insinuated to you, that without your keeping up a
tenderness for the Regal Rights, you cannot maintain your tenderness for Oaths.
And here I must take occasion to tell you that one of my aims in entertaining
you with the Queries relating to Oaths out of that Book, was to lay before your
thoughts a tenderness as to Oaths in general, both in keeping the lawful ones
you have taken, and in not imposing unlawful, doubtful, unnecessary, or
inexpedient ones on others; and on such as our Prince considering the several
Constitutions of their minds both as to firmness and infirmness, has thought
fit to exempt from taking such strong Physic.

Moreover if you will think that another of my aims was to mind you that the
same Queries might have been as ingeniously and ingenuously put in the year
1673. before the passing of the Test-Act, as they were in debating the
Test-Bill in the year 1675, I shall allow you so to do.

You may too (if you will) here occasionally consider how soon God in the
course of his Providence does sometimes turn the Tables, and make such who were
lately so active in imposing on others Oaths that seemed doubtful and
oppressive to them, to be in danger of suffering by the like Impositions. Mr.
Burrough's a Pious Independent Divine (who lived in the late times) referring
in his Irenicum to the Impositions and Persecution designed by the
Presbyterians against those of his Persuasion, says there, but the Tables may
turn one day, wherein the Sufferers shall have the greatest Ease, and the
Inflicters the sorest Burden. But God forbid that their Brethren should lay it
upon them, tho it were put into their Power to do it. And you may take notice
that the Book we before spoke of, owns the Activity of the Roman Catholic
Lords then in hindering that Test's being brought on Protestants: the
Consideration whereof may (I think) justly incline all, who account it their
Happiness to have been freed from that designed Oath, not to grudge at the
favor that has been extended by the Di^pensative Power to particular
Roman Catholics excused from taking other Oaths: or at any just favor if ever
happening to be afforded them by the Authentic Interpretation of what in the
Statute-Oaths seems doubtful to them.

So tender was the Government in the time of Edward the 6th, about the not
making the Consciences of the People uneasy by Oaths, that you will find it in
the Reformation of the Ecclesiastical Laws begun in Harry the 8th's Reign, and
carried on in his, that the Magna nomina who were employed to make a New Body
of Laws, did in Compassion to the Consciences of those who took the usual
Promissory Oaths for the observance of the Statutes of Universities, Collegiate
Churches, and such like Societies and Corporations, order this Clause to be
added to the Oaths, viz. Haec omnibus partibus servabo, ^uibus cum sacra
Scriptura, cum legibus civilibus, and Ecclesiasticis hujus Regni consentient,
and quantum vires meae patientur.

The Schoolmen (says one) would be thought most tender and most curious in
the point of Oaths. They mince them out so fine, that a whol^ Million of Oaths
may stand (as some speak of Angels) on the point of a sharp need^e. I have
therefore not wondered at it when I have seen men standing on this sharp point
of Oaths, so often inconsistent with themselves.

Notwithstanding what I told you out of my Lord Coke, that an Oath cannot be
ministered to any unless the same be allowed by the Common Law, or by some Act
of Parliament* neither can any Oath allowed by the Common Law or by Act of
Parliament, be altered, but by Act of Parliament; yet as you know that the
House of Commons in the 30th year of Queen Elizabeth desiring that no Oath or
Subscription might be tendered to any at their entrance into the Ministry, but
such as is expressly prescribed by the Statutes of this Realm, except the Oath
against Corrupt entering, did thereby however approve of the tendering of that
Oath, so my Lord Coke likewise, Inst. 3. c. 71. viz. Of Simony seems to approve
of that Oath, in saying that Simony is the more odious, because it is
accompanied with Perjury, for the Presentee, etc. is Sworn to commit no Simony,
referring there to Lynwood, and had before in that Chapter referred to Canon
40. 1 Iacobi 1603. The Oath against Simony.

You may too remember what I so lately told you of my Lord Coke's having with
some approbation, or fair respect mentioned the Clergy's Oath of Canonical
obedience.

And I can tell you that I lately looking on the Charter of the Corporation of
Shipwrights, granted by King James the First in the Tenth year of his Reign,
observed therein that Thomas Lord Ellesmere Lord Chancellor of England, Sir
Thomas Flemming Lord Chief Justice of England, Sir Edward Coke Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, did pursuant to the Statute in the 19th year of
Henry the 7th allow and approve under their Ha ds and Seals diverse Articles,
Acts, and Ordinances for the better Order, Rule, and Government of the Art or
Mystery of Shipwrights exhibited to them by the Corporation, and did moreover
o^in the form of three new Oaths to be taken by the Officers and Freemen of
that Corporation, and did DISABLE the Refusers of such Oath to be Members of
the Corporation.

But I may here occasionally by the way tell you what you will find in Croke
3d. Sir Edward Coke Sheriff of Buckingham's Case, viz. That upon several
Exceptions there mentioned as by him taken to the Oath tendered to him as
Sheriff, on the account of several Additions alleged by him to be in the Oath
that were not in the Ancient Oath in the Register, and afterward Confirmed and
Appointed by the Statute of 18 Edw. the Third; and all the Judges being
Consulted as to the allowance of the same, tho they allowed of his first
exception namely as to his suppressing all Errors and Heresies commonly called
LOLLARIES, and being assistant to Commissaries and Ordinaries in
Church Matters, etc. and that that Clause was fit to be omitted out of the
Oath, because it is appointed by Statutes that are repealed, and was intended
against the Religion now Established, yet as to his second Addition complained
of, the greater part of the Judges were of opinion that an Oath in this Point
may be well enjoined by the King and Order of State without Parliament, and
that it may well be imposed on the Sheriff to take, being for the public
Benefit and Execution of the Laws. And as to his Fourth Addition complained of,
namely, That he should Cause the Statute of Winton and the Statutes against
Rogues and Vagabonds to be put in execution, whereunto he excepted, because the
Statute of Winton was altered, and the Statutes against Rogues and Vagabonds
are appointed to be executed by the Justices of the Peace, and not by the
Sheriff: to this the Judges said, that this Fourth Addition rests on the former
reason, that this Oath being appointed and continued diverse years by direction
of the State, although without the express Authority of any Statute Law, yet may
he well be continued for the public benefit in repressing such Persons, etc.


A. What a terrible thing was it that that Clause about suppressing Lollaries,
etc. should continue in the Oath so long after the Reformation: and that Sir
Edward Coke should be the first Protestant Sheriff we have heard of whose
Conscience was so delicate as to refuse to swallow that poisonous Clause?


B. You may too as justly say what a terrible thing is it that so many
Protestants who have formerly by the frequent swallowing the Poison of
Contradictory Oaths, habituated themselves to the quiet concocting of all Oaths
(as the King of Pontus brought himself at last to digest all Poisons) will yet
be so ready to endeavor to compel the Consciences of others to swallow such
Oaths that they believe or suspect to be poisonous; a thing that has probably
tended to make so many among us to Nauseate the use of all Oaths as unlawful.


A. Whom do you mean by those?


B. The Quakers. And here I shall freely tell you that Providence having
permitted so numerous a Sect as that of the Quakers among us to bear their
Testimony against the lawfulness of Oaths in general, I shall be well content
if the event of the bending the Crooked stick the contrary way (as my Lord
Primate's Expression was) may be an universal tenderness as to Oaths, as I just
now described it; and the want of which has (as I showed you at our last
meeting) been so scandalous to our Country, and brought an opprobrium both on
Protestancy and Christianity it self.

Alexander ab Alexandro, l. 5. tells us, that there was no use of Oaths among
the Phrygians. And tho Grotius says in his De jure Belli and Pacis, that jure
gentium testi injurato non creditur, yet it was by Polybius observed that in
the better and simpler Ages of the World Oaths were seldom used in Iudicatures.
The Athenians would not suffer Xenocrates a Person of known Probity to take his
Oath at the Altar, as a thing below his reputation. Gellius, l. 10. c. 15.
says, Verba Proetoris ex edicto perpetuo de Flamine Di^li and de Sacerdote
Vestoe adscripsi. Sacerdotem Vestalem, and Plaminem Dial^m in omni mea
jurisdictione jurare non cogam. And Livy has it, that among the Romans the
Flamen Dialis was not in any case allowed to swear, least at any time he should
forswear, which in him was held as the most heinous thing. I have too somewhere
read Plutarch cited for justifying to this purpose the reasonableness of their
not swearing; for that an Oath was a kind of torture to a free man: and that it
was absurd not to credit their words: and for that an Oath draws after it an
Imprecation or Curse in Case they should be forsworn, which seems to be a
detestable omination toward the Priests of God.

Josephus relates it, that the Essenes Word was as sure as an Oath. So great
likewise was the reputation of the Christians in the Ancient times for truth in
Matters asserted or promised by them, that the Saying of Christianus sum did
frequently pass current for the Cautio Iuratoria. And I shall always with
reverence think of Bellarmine's Tutissimum, and of S. Austin's Nullum
Iuramentum tutum.

A late ingenious Writer applied to the Clergy's obtaining Canons for their not
Marrying, the Observation that they always knew what was good for themselves;
but I shall think it more applicable to what I read of in the Book of Mr. Ley
beforementioned, p. 112. that as S. Basil was very zealous in behalf of Bishops
that they might not be put to swear in respect of the Peril of an Oath, so he
prevailed so far as to free them from that Peril: and that the Council of
Challons, Can. 18. was thus favorable to Presbyters: and that the Triburiensian
Council favored them with this Constitution, that a Presbyter should not be
compelled to swear, but instead of an Oath, he should be questioned upon his
Holy Consecration in verbo sacerdotis: because (as the reason is there rendered)
Our Lord forbad his Disciples to Swear.

And I shall tell you, that if you will allow Lawyers to know what is good for
themselves, you will find them of all sorts of men to have the greatest
aversion against being Witnesses.

The Jesuits too, who are by all reputed wise in their Generation, are by Dr.
Done in his Pseudo-Martyr, p. 350. referred to as having so extraordinary an
aversion against Oaths, that he cites the Spongia pro Jesuit, p. 79. for their
out-doing the Essenes in hyperbolical Detestations of Oaths.

I account it for the honor of the Age that any one does fall under the
Character of bipedum nequissimus who being sued by a Quaker at Common Law for a
just Debt, would obstruct such Debt by an Injunction out of Chancery, till the
Quaker has there answered a Shamming Bill upon his Oath.

And as by the Clemency of His Majesty's Government, Quakers there making
Answer upon their Oath to Captious Bills has been to the general Satisfaction
of the compassionate Just (as it were) tacitly dispensed with, and as likewise
their Promissory Oaths of Allegiance have been, I doubt not but his express or
tacit dispensing with other Loyal and Conscientious particular Persons doubting
of the lawfulness or expedience of some Promissory Oaths, will be as generally
grateful.

I wish there were no greater Superstition in the World then the Quakers so
much restraining to their epitomes of speech in Commerce the interpretation of
those words in S. Matthew, But let your Communication be Yea, yea, Nay, nay,
etc. which were pursuant to the Proverbial Saying among the Jews, Iustorum
etiam est etiam, and non est non. And as King Athelstan's Charter to his
Tenants the Inhabitants of Rippon I have elsewhere mentioned, viz. Quod homines
sui Riponienses sint credendi per suum Ya and per su^m Nay, in omnibus qu^lis
and curiis, etc. has been by none that I have heard of looked on with an evil
eye, so neither by me should the like Dispensation granted by our Prince to any
others he repined at.


A. Your having (as it were) diverted me by the thought of that Superstition of
the Quakers, brings to my mind the pleasant Entertainment you once gave me by
lending me a Book writ long ago, called A brief Treatise of Oaths exacted by
Ordinaries and Ecclesiastical Judges to answer generally to all such Articles
or Interrogarories as pleases them to propound: and of their forced and
Constrained Oaths ex officio, wherein is proved that the same are unlawful. And
I remember much of the matter in that Author being dull, I came to somewhat at
last recited by him, that had in it some Sales, or what I may call some drops
of Spirit of Vitriol, and which were but necessary to give a grateful acidity
to his Apozeme, when he toward the end of that Book of Oaths, in p. 56. and 57.
thus brings in a RATIONALE of the Ceremonious manner of giving an Oath, and of
the Manufacture of it as some men do fidem facere by it, viz. For in this
matter of an Oath they have devised according to their toying fantasy a
certain foolish figurative Ceremony in the ministering thereof. For the Deponent
for sooth must lay his three middle Fingers stretched outright upon the Book in
signification of the Holy Trinity and Catholic Faith, and his Thumb and little
Finger he must put downward under the Book, in token of Damnation both of Body
and Soul, if he say not the truth. The Thumb belike as the greater,
representing the heavy mass of the Body: and the little Finger the light and
incorpo^eal substance of the Soul. How superstitious also they were concerning
this Ceremony of the Book (little regarding the true use and end of an Oath) as
appears by the Allegorical Exposition curiously set forth by one of their
Personate and Counterfeit Prelates, who says that the Circumstances in the Act
of an Oath are very great and weighty, inasmuch as he that Swears by a Book
does three things: First as tho he should say, Let that which is written in the
Book never do me good, neither the new nor the old Law if I lie in this mine
Oath. Secondly, he puts his Hand on the Book, as tho he should say, Nor the
good work which I have done profit me ought before the face of Christ, except I
say the truth which is founded in Christ. Thirdly, he kisseth the Book, as tho
he should say, Let never the Prayers and Petitions which by my mouth I have
uttered, avail me any thing to my Soul's health, if I say not truly in this
mine Oath. Yet you must take this as meant only by this Reverend Father where
Lay men, or the baser sort of the Clergy take an Oath. For that blessed Bonner
not long since has taught us this trick of his Law, that a Bishop may Swear
(such is his Privilege) inspectis Evangeliis and non tactis; bare sight of the
Book without touch or kiss, will well enough serve his Lordship's turn.


B. Well Sir, throwing out of our thoughts the minutioe of all formal trifling*
let us not at the same time try to make men laugh and weep by imposing Oaths on
them. And let the Consideration of this, namely that the Noble Morals enjoined
by the Christian Doctrine have not prevailed all this while to secure
Christians against one another without the Garranty of Oaths, or by the
Christianus sum not being still judged oequi-ponderous with an Oath, impress a
solemn grief on our Minds. And considering that both the Verbum Regium, and the
verbum Sacerdotis have been so much allowed equal to Oaths, and that all
Christians ought to value themselves on being A Royal Priesthood, and on their
great Chief having made them Kings and Priests to God and his Father, let us
bemoan the present State of Christianity and Christians, having (as it were)
Decreed it that they cannot take one another words. And let the thought
likewise of the insufficiency of the Security of Oaths themselves to keep up
Governments, work in us such a serious Mortification and Profound sense of the
degeneracy of Mankind, and such an inclination to place our chief Confidence in
somewhat above the words, or Oaths of men, as becomes us.

But I shall give you an instance of this at home too pregnant with horror. Our
thoughts have had a long melancholy walk in the Peristyllium of the many
Interpretations that supported our Great Oath of Supremacy, and as to which
Oath it being probable that a vulgar Error having prevailed among many of the
Faction for some time before the year 1640. namely that the Oath of Supremacy
was intended to bind only in opposition to Popery, occasion was thereby given
to the Fathers of our Church to procure the last Authentic Interpretation of
the Assertory part of the Oath in the Canons of 1640. and cautioning us there
in the first Canon against any Independent Coactive Power whether Papal or
Popular. But after our view of the orderly and necessary placing of all these
polished and strong Pillars of Interpretation erected between the time of Primo
Elizabethoe and the year 1640, and after Providence so ordering it at last,
that the Consciences of the Loyal who were then reserved as Lions to guard the
Throne, had then a clear Oath to guard their Loyalty, and after their having
then cause to say Tantoe molis erat to render the Oath both acceptable to
Conscience and adequate to its first reasonable intention, the Land was
punished with a dreadful Rebellion, and the sacred Obligations of the Oath and
all its Interpretations could no more quench the raging Flames of the Civil War
then the sprinkling of a little Holy Water could save a Town on fire.

You may therefore here again more particularly take it into your thoughts,
that there is somewhat beside or beyond Oaths necessary to incline Heaven to
Preserve States and Kingdoms and Ecclesiastical Polities therein, namely the
trusting in God, and offering to him what the 51. Psalm calls the Sacrifices of
God; and without which the thought of the tantoe molis and the endeavored
piling Interpretation upon Interpretation, or Oath upon Oath as high as Heaven,
and thereby designing to keep men together embodied and united in the external
Profession of any StateReligion, will prove as insignificant as did the old
Politics I shall refer you to in the Sacred Story, and when the whole Earth
was of one Language, and of one Speech, and the Vogue was, Let us build a City
and Tower whose top may reach to Heaven, and let us make us a Name, least we be
scattered abroad on the face of the whole Earth. But Heaven confounded their
Language, and their City was called Babel, and their feared Dissipation was
their Punishment. They were so diffident of the Divine Promise whose garranty
they had, that they were resolved by their own hands to provide against all
Dangers of a future Deluge, and having built their Tower with Brick, they
thought 'twould defend them from the Power of Fire, concerning which they had
heard the Tradition that a general Destruction of the World should proceed from
the fury of that Element; and they vainly endeavored to secure themselves
against the anger of Heaven rather by a lofty Pile, then by lowly Minds.


A. That wretched vulgar Error you referred to, did show that the line of
Confusion was stretched forth on Men's understandings as well as on the Realm
in that Conjuncture: and I have observed that that vulgar Error did last to the
very time of the ferment about the Exclusion, and long before which time as
well as then some have talked and writ at this rate, viz. That the Oath of
Supremacy was expressly made (as the title of it shows) to shut out the
Usurpation of foreign Powers and Potentates, and was not meant to provide
against any popular Usurpations or Diminutions of the King's Supreme Authority.


B. O God! But to speak or write at that rate to Conscience, is Chicanerie. And
I have elsewhere mentioned what one whom I cannot too often mention to be as
fair a dealer with Conscience as any the Age has had, told us in his sixth
Lecture of Oaths, about the Oath of Supremacy binding in this Case. You know I
mean Bishop Sanderson, who there shows, that tho Popes Usurpations or
arrogating to themselves the Supreme Jurisdiction in spiritualibus throughout
this Kingdom, was the Cause of the Oath of Supremacy, yet the Oath is
obligatory according to the express words in the Utmost Latitude: the reason
is, that the intention of a Law is general to provide against all future
inconveniences of the like kind, or nature.

Moreover the words in Queen Elizabeth's Admonition referring to the Persons
called to Ecclesiastical Ministry in the Church, as the doubters, and the
tenor of all the subsequent Interpretations as speaking them principally
occasioned by the doubters in the Church of England, do further show the Vanity
of that Objection.

And if you will more particularly think of the Queen's Authentic
Interpretation of that Oath and approved in Parliament, you will find the Oath
of Supremacy to be an Oath of Allegiance, and that it may be so-likewise
properly termed. For in the beginning of the Admonition you will thus find it,
viz. The Queen's Majesty being informed that in certain places of this Realm,
sundry of her native Subjects being called to Ministry in the Church, be by
sinister Persuasion and perverse Construction, induced to find some scruple in
the form of an Oath, which by an Act of the last Parliament is prescribed to be
required of diverse Persons for the recognition of their ALLEGIANCE to her
Majesty, etc.


A. As one may perceive by what the Queen's Interpretation in the Admonition
refers to, that there was a great ferment in the Kingdom about the sense of the
Oath, so suitably to what you mentioned of the Prudence of our Ancestors that
caused various ferments to go off so insensibly, the next Parliament in
approving her Interpretation without troubling themselves to question the
Authentickness of it, does corroborate your observation of the Excellence of
the English understandings.


B. It does so. The fermentation in the minds of the People you speak of had
been Epidemical. And tho one might fancy by the Proem of the Admonition that
the Interpretation as well as the Dispensing with Disability had an eye but on
an inconsiderable number of People there referred to in the forementioned words
of sundry of her Majesty's Native Subjects in certain places of this Realm,
etc. yet any one who knows the History of those times will find the
Interpretation and Dispensation (as I may say) Calculated for the Meridian of
all England, and the Interpretation having an eye on all Christendom.

There was then in the Morning of that Queen's Reign, and of the restoration of
the Reformed Religion, such a thick mist of causeless Fears and Iealousies that
had generally overspread the minds of Protestants and Papists shortly after the
Birth of the Statute of 1o Eliz. c. 1o. that nothing but the Supremacy both of
Power and Reason that shone in her authentic Interpretation of that Statute
could disperse, and that too not suddenly. For as Mr. Nigh in his Book of Two
Acts of Parliament, or Observations on that Oath, tells us, It is mentioned in
the Admonition that the Queen's Ecclesiastical Power is the same that was
challenged and used, by Henry the 8th, etc. which is supposed by some to be the
same that was in the Pope, the Person only and not the Power changed: so that
our Princes are but secular Popes. This Objection was strengthened by the
subtlety of Gardener abroad: and at home by a Sermon Preached at Paul's Cross
in the year 1588. by Dr. Bancroft, who calls Q. Eliz. a Petty Pope, and tells
us her Ecclesiastical Authority is the same which the Pope's was formerly: and
in the Margin opposite to what he had said of the subtlety of Gardener,
strengthening the Objection abroad, has these words, viz. Whom Calvin terms
Imposterille. And Mr. Nigh afterward goes on to show how the 37th Article did
remove the Objection sufficiently.

The Author of The true Grounds of Ecclesiastical Regiment, Printed in London,
A. 1641. does in p. 53. mention some men's objecting it against the
Ecclesiastical Supremacy of our Monarchs, that it may descend to Infants under
Age, as it did to King Edward the 6th, or to Women as to Queen Mary and Queen
Elizabeth, and that whatsoever we may allow to men, such as Henry the 8th; yet
it seems unreasonable to allow it Women and Children. The Papists think this
Objection of great moment, and therefore Bellarmine in great disdain casts it
out, that in England they had a certain Woman for their Bishop; meaning Queen
Elizabeth: and she knowing what an odium that word would draw on her both among
Papists and many Protestants also, Consults her Bishops about it, and by their
advice sets forth a Declaration, certifying the World thereby, that she claimed
no other Headship in the Church, but such as might exclude all dependency on
foreign Headships, and secure her from all danger of being deposed, etc. The
Bishops in this did as warily provide for their own Claim as the Queen's. And
the Roman Catholic Author of the Advocate for Conscience Liberty, discoursing
of the Oath of Supremacy in p. 181. and seq. says, That Luther, Calvin, Knox,
Gilby disliked it: and mentions that a Jurisdiction purely spiritual was
communicated to H. the 8th by his Supremacy, and assumed by him, and that he
wanted his Spiritual Bytitle of Supremacy to justify his Divorce, and his
taking the Church Revenue into his hands: and that the Protectorship in E the
6th's time by virtue of the Oath of Supremacy continued to make new
Church-Laws, Institutions, etc. and that Queen Elizabeth reassumed this
Jurisdiction, having a greater necessity for it then her Brother, because her
Marriage was declared null by the Pope. So then the state of Protestancy abroad
and at home called on the Queen to distribute or dispense her Supreme Power in
her Law by her Interpretation making a change not of it, but in the body of it:
and which had it been changed by a repeal in Parliament for another, would have
seemed to blemish her figure of semper Eadem, and have reflected on the
Understandings and Consciences of those who had before took the Oath.

There was then in that Conjuncture an universal outcry of Conscience that Sin
lies at the door, a thing worse then Hannibal ad Portas; a burden that has
caused all the Groans of the Creation that ever happened. And where there is
Periculum animae there is always Periculum in mora, and which the Queen's
authentic Interpretation did remove, and which was approved by the next
Parliament: and no noise made or complaining heard in our streets about any
seeming Alteration made in the Law or Oath it self, by the Prerogative of
interpretation or acquittal from the disabling Punishments then exercised. And
it is but congruous to humane Nature and common Policy in men when they see any
thing not ill in it self done that has eminently conduced to make the World
easy, not to embarass such thing with litigious scruples about the fieri non
debuit, nor to adventure to trouble the World again when it is inclined to and
resolved upon its rest. Some thoughts of this Nature probably inclined my Lord
Coke to show the Complaisance he did, not only to King James his incapacitating
Canon about the double Subscription, but as to the Oath against Simony and that
of Canonical obedience, and which inclined Judge Croke to be pleased with the
Canons of 1640. tho containing the Oath with an Et caetera, and which made the
Judges so apt to overruled some of Sir E. Coke's Exceptions to the Sheriffs
Oath, as I have mentioned.

You may indeed find that some among the Puritans in some Conjunctures in Queen
Elizabeth's time, did presume to reproach the Government of the Church with her
having dispensed with the disability of some Persons incurred by Act of
Parliament. The Author of the famous Book published in her Reign, called, An
Abstract of certain Acts of Parliament, has in the Conclusion these two
factious Queries, viz. Whether a mere Layman, no Doctor of the Civil Law, may
be a Bishop's Chancellor, and so may Excommunicate? Whether a mere Layman no
Doctor of the Civil Law, may be a Bishop's Register, contrary to an Act of
Parliament? The Author intends there to referr to the Statute of 37o. H. 8.
c. 17. and as he had before expressly done in p. 196. and Seq. and of which
Statute we have so much discoursed; and he in p. 201. instanceth in many
Laymen who were not Doctors of the Civil Law, and yet then exercised
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. He had too in p. 196. took notice that as that
Statute established and confirmed to the King and his Successors, and so unto
our most Gracious Sovereign the Queen's Majesty that now is, lawful
Pre-eminence, Power, Superiority and Lordship over all Persons within her
Dominions of what state or Condition soever, touching Punishments for any
Heresies, Errors, Vices, Schisms, Abuses, Idolatries, Hypocrisies and
Superstitions springing or growing by means of any her disobedient and disloyal
Subjects; so has her Majesty by her Injunctions published, that her Highness
did never pretend any Title or challenge any Authority to punish any of her
Subjects for any of the said Offenses by Censure Ecclesiastical in right
belonging to her Royal Person; but that her Highness meaning and intent is and
always has been to commit the execution thereof always to the Ecclesiastical
State of her time: and he then sets down her Interpretation in the Admonition.

But had that Author considered how it was declared by that Statute, that by
Holy Scripture all Authority and Power is given to His Majesty, and all such
Persons as His Majesty shall appoint to hear and determine all manner of Causes
Ecclesiastical, and to correct Uice and Sin whatsoever; and that this Statute
was revived by the 1st of Eliz. he would not have wondered at the Queen's
allowing that Statute to be dispensed with as it was. Nor would any one
therefore wonder at the Royal Martyr in the 12th and 13th Canons of A. 1640.
Condescending to humor the Complaints of the Puritans by an equal
Interpretation of that Statute of 37o H. 8. and by dispensing with it as he
did; and that so far as to the disabling LayChancellors to proceed in such
Censures as they were enabled by that Statute to do.

Mr. Bagshaw in his first Argument in Parliament concerning the Canons thus
reflects on the Clergy for those two Canons, viz. Concerning the 12th and 13th
Canons touching the freeing and discharging of Chancellors and Officials from
executing any Excommunication in their own Person, or any Censure against the
Clergy, because they are Laymen; I say, that in doing and enacting this they
have done quite contrary to an Act of Parliament still in force, in taking from
them this Power of exercising the Censures of the Church which that Statute
gives them: which I did look when some Civilians now in the House should have
maintained. And although it were to be wished that only Clergymen should have this
Power of Excommunication, and other Censures of the Church; yet seeing an Act
of Parliament has given this Power to Laymen, it is high Presumption to make
Canons against it.

But he well knew that after the stamp of the Royal Authority put on these
Canons as well as before, Laymen in the Court of Delegates did Excommunicate,
and as they did in the high Commission. And you may observe it, that in the
Commission granted Primo Elizabethae to her Commissioners pursuant to the
Statute of that year, there were but two Clergymen (and those Bishops) and 17
Laymen.

My Lord* Coke, Inst. 4. c. 74. writing of the High Commission in Causes
Ecclesiastical, says, There is no question but the Commissioners for such
Causes as are committed to them by force of this Act, may, if the Commissioners
be Competent, proceed to deprivation of the Popish Clergy which was the main
object of the Act, or to punish them by Ecclesiastical Censures, etc. And
without question if the Commissioners be COMPETENT, that is, if they be
spiritual men, they may proceed to Sentence of Excommunication, which may right
well be Certify'd as well as Excommunication before Commissioners Delegates:
both of these Authorities being under the Great Seal, etc. And Excommunication
certify'd ly Commissioners Del gates has been allowed as it appears in 23.
Eliz. Dyer. 371. And in many Cases Acts of Parliament have adjudged men
Excommunicate ipso facto. But if they be mere Laymen, the fault is not in the
Statute or in the Law, but in the Nomination: and upon Certificate made of the
Excommunication according to Law, a Significavit, or Cap. Excom. shall be
awarded out of the Chancery, for the taking and imprisoning the Bodies of such
Excommunicate Persons. But had his Lordship (as I said in the Case of the other
Author) considered how by the Statute of 37. H. 8. it was declared that by Holy
Scripture all Authority and Power is given to His Majesty, and to all such
Persons as he shall appoint to hear and determine all manner of Causes
Ecclesiastical, and to correct Uice and Sin whatsoever, he would not (I
believe) have thought Laymen incompetent or incapable Persons so to have acted
in the high Commission, or Delegacy, or have said there was any fault in the
Nomination of Laymen.

And yet you see my Lord Coke shows you how the Government then acquiesced in
such Nomination; and assisted the execution of the Sentences given by such as
he thought incompetent.

Nor are we therefore to wonder at what Mr. Bagshaw mentions of the Civilians
in the House of Commons not objecting that the King had done contrary to an Act
of Parliament in taking from Bishops, Chancellors and Officials the Power of
exercising Church Censures given them by the Act: and which by the Power
declared in that Act to be given him by Holy Scriptures, he might have either
continued to them, or abridged or taken away the exercise thereof from them, if
he had pleased. And considering that the Lex Scandali does equally oblige Kings
as well as Subjects in Point of Conscience, it is not to be wondered that that
Tender-conscienced King did in that Conjuncture think himself obliged so
equitably to make his Interpretation of that Statute as in complaisance with
some of his Subjects who had took offense at Lay-Chancellors Power of
Excommunicating, to disable them to it.

I told you before how that Pious Prince did in complaisance with the Fathers
of our Church think himself obliged to exercise his Regal Power of interpreting
or declaring, and when in A. 1637. he issued out his Proclamation Declaring
that the Bishops holding their Courts and issuing Process in their own Names
were not against the Laws of the Realm, and that the Judges resolutions were
notify'd therein to that purpose, and that the ferment about that Point was
settled, and the Bishops issuing out their Processes, was settled too; the which
Proclamation too you will find Mr. Bagshaw mentions in his second Argument,
where p. 40. he tells you of the Bishop's having procured a Proclamation, A.
1637. declaring the Opinions of the Judges, that the Statute of 1o Edw. 6. c.
2. is repealed and of no force at this day, and that Bishops may keep Courts in
their own Names. And I shall now tell you, that as in the year 1637. the
Bishops were in so full and peaceable possession of their Privilege of issuing
out of their Processes in their own names, by means of what His Majesty had
declared pursuant to the Resolutions unanimously given by all the Judges and
the Barons of the Exchequer (and of which Sir E. Coke says, Inst. 2. that they
are for Matters of Law of highest Authority next to the Court of Parliament) so
by Judgment of Parliament the settlement of that Controversy by virtue of His
Majesty's Declarative Power so exercised, was afterward approved.


A. That is a thing I would gladly hear of; for one would think that the
exercise of the Regal Power of Declaring or Interpreting what relates to an Act
of Parliament might occasionally heighten a ferment in stead of abating it.


B. You will find little or no cause if you consult our ancient English Story
(and there see how the mutual Confidence between King and People has in
several Ages supported the Government) to fancy that Declaratory Proclamations
relating to Acts of Parliament did make any ferment. The Interpretation of the
Statutes has in all Causes between Party and Party, and wherein meum and tuum
and Property are concerned, been by ancient usage under our Kings still left to
the Judges: and the Proclamations of our Princes on great emergent occasions in
the State declaring or interpreting their Laws pursuant to the Supreme Power
committed to them by God for the good of their People, has still been observed
to tend both to the good of the People and the Laws too. If you will look on
all the Declaratory Proclamations in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King
James, of which you have a Collection, you will (I believe) find none but what
were acceptable among all their Loyal Subjects.

But as to this Declaratory Proclamation of King Charles the First
beforementioned, you will find it (as I told you) approved in Parliament. And
if you will please to consult in your Statute-Book the Act of 13o Car. 2. c.
12. of which the title is Explanation of a Clause contained in an Act of
Parliament made in the 17th year of the late King Charles, Entitled an Act for
repeal of a branch of a Statute 1o Elizabethae, Concerning Commissioners for
Causes Ecclesiastical, you will there find that this Act of the late King's
loyal long Parliament, viz. 13o Car. 2. has in it three Proviso's. The first
is concerning the High Commission-Court: the second Proviso is concerning the
taking away the Oath ex officio. And the third Proviso is, to limit and confine
the Power of Ecclesiastical Judges in all their Proceedings to what WAS and by
Law might be used before the year 1639, which plainly includes, allows and
approves King Charles the First's Proclamation in the year 1637.

In the time of a former disloyal long Parliament, the Regal Power of
Interpreting or declaring was by them represented as a Gravamen, and while yet
they usurped that Power themselves. If you will look on the Declaration of the
Lords and Commons, in Husband's Collections, p. 686. you will there find they
say, It is high time for the whole Kingdom now to understand that His Majesty's
Authority is more in his Courts without his Person then in his Person without
his Courts, when the Power of DECLARING Law shall be denied to the whole Court
of Parliament in particular Causes before them, ( for we have claimed it, we
have exercised it no otherwise to be obligatory as a judicial Declaration of
the Law) and shall be attributed to His Majesty to do it in general by his
Proclamation without relation to a particular Case, and making his
Interpretation of the Law to be a rule in all Cases, as in diverse late
Proclamations he has done. And if you will look on His Majesty's Answer to the
Declaration of b^th Houses of Parliament of July 1. 1642. you will find there
very many Profound Observations and Presidents, and Authorities of Law, and
wherein he several times refers to the happy times of that good Queen
Elizabeth, as well as to ancient Times, and he thence taking his measures,
says in p. 15. The King caused Proclamations to be made; for in such Cases
Proclamations declaratory were not conceived in those times to be illegal* etc.

And you may easily imagine this Power of authentic Interpretation very well
Consistent with the just Power of the House of Lords in declaring the Law in a
particular Case: of which I occasionally mentioned to you the late Earl of
Anglesy's opinion. But how not only the Lords, but the House of Commons did
often during the late Rebellion encroach on the Regal Power of declaring, and
by Ordinances without and against the King's consent, I shall some other time
show you at large.


A. Can you readily now at this time give any instance of the House of Commons
th^n doing any thing of that Nature?


B. Yes: and I can refer ^ou for the fact of it to The Declaration of King
Charles the First, of August 12. 1642. to all his l^ving Subjects; and who
there mention^* That after several in imations of Treasons, PLOTS, and
Conspiracies (...) the Papists, of great Provisions of Arms by them, and
training Men underground, and many other false Reports created, spread and
countenanced by themselves upon some general Apprehensions of Designs against
them, a Protestation is made in the House of Commons for Union and Consent
among themselves to perform those Duties which (if they had meant no more then
they had expressed) had been sufficiently provided for by the Oaths they had
already taken, and which their former Duties obliged them to. Hereupon a
Protestation is framed, and being put into such words as no honest man could
believe himself obliged by it to any unlawful Action, was voluntarily taken by
all the Members of the House of Commons, and presently recommended to the House
of Lords, where it received the same Countenance: that is was looked upon as
containing nothing in it self unlawful, tho some Members of that House refused
to take it as being voluntary, and not imposed by any lawful Authority. Then
it is recommended to the City of London, and over all the Kingdom by Order from
the House of Commons (a strange and unheard of Usurpation) to be taken by all
Persons. But within very few days, upon Conference among themselves, and among
those Clergymen who daily solicit their unlawful and unwarrantable Designs
with the People, they find they were by this Protestation so far from having
drawn People into their Combination, that in truth all men conceived that they
were even engaged by it against their main Design, by promising to defend the
true Reformed Protestant Religion expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of
England:

And thereupon some Persons of that Faction prevailed, that after the Members
of the Houses had taken it, a Declaration was set forth by the House of
Commons, that by those words The Doctrine of the Church of England, was
intended only so far as it was opposite to Popery, and Popish innovations, and
that the words were not to be extended to the maintenance of the Discipline and
Government, etc. and so under this Explication and Declaration published only
by the House of Commons, and never assented to by the House of Peers, this
Protestation was directed to be generally taken throughout England. And to that
purpose a Bill is drawn, passed the House of Commons, and sent up to the House
of Lords, who at the second Reading finding many particulars in it unfit to be
so severely imposed upon the Subjects absolutely rejected.

You see here again an Instance of the Prudence of the great Consiliarii Na^i,
His Majesty's great Council, in not aiding the Faction against Prerogative in
that Point. For tho on the account of His Majesty's tacit Dispensation by way
of Connivence presumed in that Conjuncture, many of the Loyal of the Church of
England did take that Protestation and concur in the recommendation (His
Majesty not having Prohibited the taking of it, as he did a^terward by a
Proclamation forbid the taking of the Covenant) ^et when it was visible that
such an Interpretation so encroaching on the Church of England, and on
Prerogative, was designed without and against His Majesty's Approbation to be
imposed on the People; it is not to be wondered that the Lords (as things then
were) rejected a Bill of that Nature.

But it follows then in His Majesty's Declaration, Yet of this we took no
notice, but pressed still the Disbanding of the Armies, etc. so that the
ferment about the Protestation, and the trouble it gave the Kingdom by the
Super-induced Interpretation, were in a short time over.


A. You having from the occasion given you by Queen Elizabeth's Power of
interpreting, and by her dispensing with disability in all who took the Oath of
Supremacy according to the sense notify'd in The Admonition, referred my
thoughts often to the Regal Power of interpreting, and having in the beginning
of our Discourse this meeting, left it to me t^ consider how much the Power of
Dispensing with any Law may be thought ^o-incident with interpreting, and
promised me that you would some other time show me at large that the Dispensing
with Laws is in effect the equitable interpreting that in such and such Cases
and Circumstances they were not intended and ought not to bind, but ought to be
relaxed, I shall be glad if before we part, you would do it.


B. I had rather do it at our next meeting. And if in the mean time you please
to entertain your self with Bishop Taylor's Ductor Dubitantium, you will there
find much learnedly writ of this subject. And he there in l. 3. c. 6.
particularly tells us, that the Interpretation of Laws made by Judges, is
matter of Fidelity, and nothing of Empire and Power: and it is a good probable
warranty of Conscience, ^ut no final Determination in case any doubt happen to
oppose it. No man is to ask favor of the Judge, but of the Prince he may. And
he had before said, That when the Power that made the Law does interpret it,
the Interpretation is authentical and ^bligeth Conscience as much as the Law,
and can release the Bond of Conscience as far forth as the Interpretation
extends, as if the Law were abrogated, and that whether it be by declaring the
meaning of the Law, or by abating the rigor, or by dispensing in the Case, or
enlarging the Favor, or restraining the Severity, it is all one as to the
event of the Obligation of Conscience.


A. But it seems then that he makes the declaring or interpreting the meaning
of a Law, and dispensing to be different things.


B. He had an excellent Metaphysical head: and his Method of writing in that
Chapter, Of the Several ways of the changing of Humane Laws, was partly after
the Example of Suarez in his Book De Legibus, and who was a voluminous Writer
of Metaphysics, and writing of any Subject could not recedere ab art sua in
that Learning that is so infinitely prolifick of Artificial distinctions
without Natural differences.

I mentioned the Bishop's but PARTLY writing after the way of Suarez; for he
was far from crumbling the weightier Points of the Law into the Minutiae of
Metaphysics as the other did; and he in his excellent Preface does very
passionately complain of Moral Theology, having been made an Art of the
Schools, and that what God had made plain, Men have intricated; and for that
purpose says, There is a Rule among the Lawyers, which very much relates to
the Conscience of those Men who are engaged in Suits and Sentences of Law in
all Countries which are ruled by the Civil Law, in quolibet Actu requiritur
Citatio: of this Rule Porcius brings an hundred and sixteen Ampliations, and an
hundred and twenty four Limitations, etc. And thus Suarez in his 6th Book De
Legibus, (and the Title of which Book is, The Interpretation, Cessation and
change of Humane Laws) has there Twenty seven Chapters concerning the same:
and where his first Chapter is, Of the way of rightly Interpreting an Humane
Law: his 2d, Of the Extension in them by Interpretation of them: and his 3d, Of
the Extension to a Case not Comprehended: his 4th, Doubts of the Extension of
Laws: his 5th, Of the Restriction by Interpretation: his 6th, Of the Ceasing of
the Obligation of a Law in particular Contrary to its words: his 7th, Of the
Excusing of a Law by Equity: his 8th, Of the Use of Equity without recourse to
the Prince: his 9th, Of the Ceasing of a Law upon its Cause ceasing: his 10th,
Of Dispensation in an Humane Law: his 11th, Of the Effects of Dispensation: his
12th, Of the Material Cause of Dispensation: his 13th, Of the form of
Dispensation; and so on in the others with much Metaphysical subtlety.

But the Bishop in his beforementioned Third Book and 6th Chapter, viz. Of the
Interpretation, Diminution and Abrogation of Humane Laws, brings in but seven
ways of the changing of humane Laws, so that the Obligation of Conscience is
also changed; whereof his first is by Equity. His second is by Interpretation.
His third, by a Contrary, or a ceasing reason. And his fourth by Dispensation,
etc. and of which latter he says, If we use the word improperly, Dispensation
can signify a Declaration made by the Superior that the Subject in certain
Cases is not obliged, that the Lawgiver did not intend it, etc. but when
Dispensation signifies Properly, it means an Act of mere Grace and Favor
proceeding from an extrinsick Cause; that is, not the Nature of the thing, or
the merit of the Cause, but either the merit of the Person, or some degrees of
reasonableness in the thing, which not being of it self enough to procure the
favor of the Law, is of it self enough to make a man capable of the Favor of
the Prince, etc.

But as here in this nice distinction, he is enforced to make him who does
dispensare to do that which the Canonists make the ratio nominis of it, namely
diversa pensare, and in the Scales of Equity to weigh and interpret the degrees
of the reasonableness of the thing, so in his handling of the Prince's Power of
interpreting, he makes Equity Co-incident with it, and refers to the Law in the
Code, viz. Inter aequitatem jusque interpositam interpretationem nobis solis
and oportet and licet inspicere: and his instances of that Power of
Interpretation are referred to the favors showed by it to Persons, and
particularly to Solomon's absolving Abiathar from the Sentence of Death,
because he had formerly done worthily to the Interests of his Father David. And
then says, Now this Power tho it may be done by Interpretation, yet when it is
administered by the Prince, it is most commonly by way of Pardon, absolute Power
and Prerogative. When a Law determines that under such an Age a Person shall be
INCAPABLE of being the General of an Army, the Supreme Power can declare the
meaning of the Law to be, unless a great excellency of Courage and maturity of
Judgment supply the want of years: in which very Case, Scipio Africanus said
wisely, when he desired to be employed in the Punick War, Se sat annorum
habiturum si populus Romanus voluerit. Thus Tiberius put Nero into the Senate
at Fifteen years of Age, and so did Augustus the like to Tiberius and his
Brother: and the People declared or dispensed with the Law in Pompey' s Case,
and allowed him a triumph before he had been Consul or Praetor. And he had
before said, When the Lawgiver interprets his Law, he does not take off the
Obligation of his Law, (i. e. meaning the Obligation of his Law in general) but
declares that in such a Case it was not intended to oblige. Tacitus tells of a
Roman Knight, who having sworn to his Wife that he would never be divorced from
her, was by Tiberius dispensed with, when he had taken her in the unchaste
Embraces of his Son-in-Law. The Emperor then declared, that the Knight had only
obliged himself not to be divorced, unless a great Cause should intervene.

And thus Suarez himself in his said 10th Chapter, De Dispensatione in lege
humana makes Dispensation applied to signify an act quo quis ab obligatione
legis eximitur, and says, quia unus modus esse potest per Interpretationem,
ideo potuit etiam in ea significatione usurpari: tamen in hac etiam
significatione sumpta, non quamcunque interpretationem legis, sed illam solam
quae in casu dubio, and per potestatem superioris datur ad liberandum subditum
ab obligatione legis significat: quia haec tantum est Actus administrationis
and potestatis ADEO Commissae. Et illa tantum tollit aliquo modo onus legis,
quod sine tali potestate auferri non posset: and so (says he) it is agreed on
by all that Dispensation is an Act of Jurisdiction: but it is drawn into the Law
to signify the taking away the vinculum of the Law in particular Cases, and so
we generally use it.


A. But Metaphysics apart. I shall not trouble my self about what is what, but
what is my Duty by virtue of my Oath. And I observe, that what you cited out of
the Bishop, viz. That when the Power that made the Law does interpret, the
Interpretation is authentical, etc. may render him no favourer of an
Interpretation not made in Parliament by the Legislative Power.


B. I shall sometime at our meeting again observe to you what the Bishop has
there asserted, l. 3. c. 3. that Kings have a Legislative Power in the Affairs
of Religion and the Church, and where he says, that the LEAST part of this
Power is to permit the free exercise of it, and to remove all Impediments, and
to give it Advantages of free Assemblies, and Competent maintenance, and
Public Encouragements, etc. And shall then show you what Power Circa Sacra the
Church of England with great Prudence and Justice allowed our Princes in the
introducing the Reformation, (and which its Constitutions and Canons have since
owned) and from the allowance of which Power, our great Churchmen then knew
there could be vestigia nulla retrorsum in the Case of a Prince of any other
Religion coming to the Crown.

But I shall at present tell you that as to what I have mentioned to you out of
Suarez and that Bishop, although you need neither now nor at any time to charge
your memory with the subtlety of Distinctions, and of the Proprie and minus
Proprie when you are in eager pursuit of the substance of things; you will find
in both those Authors what is very substantial about the Doctrine of
Dispensing: and what I have cited of their rendering Dispensing and Interpreting
thus Co-incident is a propos, and may mind you of Princes being both empow'red
and obliged in Justice in their administration of the executive Power of their
Laws to declare or interpret their Religionary Penal Laws as dispensable in
relation to particular times and Persons. And you may therefore here call to
mind that passage in the Council of Trent, viz. That on Friar Adrian' s
vociferating there about the Pope's dispensing being an Arbitrary favor,
Verdune the famous French Divine took him down with saying, that it is a fond
Persuasion that Dispensing is a mere favor: for it is as good distribute
Justice as what is most so. And the Priest sins if he gives it not; for it is
nothing else but a right Interpretation of Law. You may very well suppose that
thoughts arising from those words in the Ordination of Bishops, viz. That you
have your Authority not to destroy, but to save: not to hurt, but to help, etc.
to be so merciful, as not to be remiss: so to administer Discipline, as not to
forget Mercy, etc. have formerly inclined our Bishops in the Reigns of King
James and King Charles the First to think themselves obliged to interpret and
declare the Laws about Church discipline as dispensable, and to dispense with
them in the Cases of Mr. Hildersham and Mr. Dod, as I told you at our last
meeting. And can you here see an Act of Parliament that thus s^tleth the
Ordination of Bishops, and which Act not only allows but requires them thus to
Interpretari and dispensare in lege, or in an Act of Parliament; and fancy it
possible for the King (when as the Act of 37o H. 8. tells you that Archbishops,
Bishops, Archdeacons and other Ecclesiastical Persons have no manner of
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, but by, under, and from His Royal Majesty) not to
be empow'red to exercise such Jurisdiction?

And I may here add, that when it is declared in the Statute of 1o Eliz. c. 2.
that the Queen's Majesty may orda^ such further Ceremonies and Rites as may be
most for the advancement of God's Glory, etc. will any one wonder at the Crowns
relaxing the Penal Laws about Rites and Ceremonies in the Case of particular
Persons; and as Edward the 6th (as is known) did in the Case of Bishop Hooper?
And if you have a mind to see an Act of Parliament, that not only approves the
Prince's remitting of his Penal Laws, but what applauds some excess in so
doing, I can for that purpose direct you to the Act of 1o Edw. 6. c. 12. in the
beginning of which it is said, Nothing being more Godly, more sure, more to be
wished and desired between a Prince the Supreme Head and Ruler, and the
Subjects, whose Governor and Head he is, then on the Prince's part, great
Clemency and Indulgency, and rather too much indulgency and remission of his
Royal Power and just Punishment, then exact Severity and Justice to be showed,
etc.

But as when we were near the end of our former Conference, you rightly
observed that many perverse People would be crying out that any lawful
Dispensing with the Laws established, was Contradictio in adjecto, so I shall
now observe to you that any who to the diminishing from a Prince's Character of
being just, presume to insinuate it that a Prince's valuing himself on that
Character, and yet showing mercy to some in releasing them from the Bonds and
Penalties of some of his Laws, is a Contradiction, do appear to me great
objects of Compassion in so erring. And for this I shall refer you to the Happy
future State of England, where in p. 233. it is said that He who separates Mercy
from Justice, is unjust to the very name of Justice, and robs it of the
better half of its signification, leaving its teeth and claws, and taking away
its heart and bowels. Jarchas the Indian, and Chief of the Brachmans in
Philostratus is brought in finding fault with Apollonius Tyaneus and others of
the Greeks, for that they confined and applied the word (...) to those only who
do no wrong to one another, and telling them that they were in an error, for
says he among the Chiefest Offices of Justice (...) and (...) together with
(...) ought to be reckoned up. And (...) and (...) just and kind men are
convertible terms in Aristophanes, and joined both together in Plutarch: and
Aristotle says, (...), Moderation or Clemency is (...): a piece of justice
better then all justice.

And you will find Mr. Gregory there cited for relating it in his Opus^. That
the Mahumetans have another Lord's Prayer, called by them the Prayer of Jesus
the Son of Mary, and that ends thus, And let not such a one bear rule over me
that will have no Mercy on me, for thy Mercies sake, O thou most merciful.


A. I say Amen to that Petition; and do at the same time pay my thanks to
Heaven for that one does bear rule over me, in whose great Genius Justice and
Mercy do appear to the World as the same thing: and whose Justice when ever any
one shall come to Paint in Story, he will not need to do it in the way of a
half-face to hide any defect of Mercy: and wherein if any Prince be deficient,
his Historian will be put to do it in the way I mentioned; and as Pliny tells
us, Appelles drawing the Face of a King who had but one Eye, and intending to
conceal that defect, was put upon the Painting him turning his Visage a little
away, and so showing but the one side of his Face: and from whence Pliny makes
the Invention of that way of Painting to have come.

But as I have now represented Justice and Mercy to you to be the same thing,
so at some other meeting I shall show you that Dispensation and Mercy are the
same: And in the mean while I shall tell you that there was a time namely
throughout the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and in part of the Reign of King James
the First, when the Learning about Dispensations was not in England, Dark
learning, but generally understood, and that not only by the Writers of the
Church of England, but by the Puritan Writers: and I shall show you when this
learning went to sleep, and which I account not to have been again awakened
till in the Conjuncture of Thomas and Sorrel's Case. But when I come to
entertain you with the learned Notions about it out of some of our Church of
England- Writers, I believe you will not in the least startle at the thoughts
of your Prince's dispensing with disability.

One of those Writers writ of the Subject before Suarez, and whose Book I
suppose that our Excellent Bishop Tailor happened not to have read, because I
met with no references to it in his Ductor dubitantium, and where probably
there had been many, had the Bishop read it. The Book speaks the Author to have
been profoundly knowing in the Civil and Canon Law, and not unacquainted with
the Lex terrae, and one who (I think) made a great figure in the Administration
of the Discipline of the Church of England, and whose great talents might
probably cause our great Churchmen then to engage him for their Champion
against some of the Puritan Writers, who looked with an evil eye on the Regal
dispensing with disability or incapacity in many of our Clergymen. And as when
of old some of the English-understandings were employed in the writing of
School Divinity, they penetrated as far into the Subtleties of it as those of
any Nation, so I may tell you that (in my poor opinion) that Author has writ
of the Learning of Dispensations both with all the subtlety and solidity
requisite, and more substantially then Suarez. I shall lay the Book before you
at our next meeting, but shall now tell you, that as to some Points we have
been discoursing, he observes that There is a Dispensation called of Justice,
as it were, an Interpretation or Declaration of the true meaning of the Law
juxta aequum and bonum: and he cites the Canon Law to prove that Dispensation
is a due, for that the Precept of Mercy is common to all. And I may tell you
here, that if you will look on your Durand's Speculum in his first Volume,
where he writes so copiously of Dispensing, his style is, Dispensatio sive
misericordia.


A. You have taken care enough to make my entertainment in this meeting end
with an appetite for another; and the rather for that nothing is more pleasant
to me then to find an Historical account of the Progress of any Controverted
Point of any learning that has made a ferment in Church or State. And tho as
the course of Providence has made the knowledge of this learning to be the
opus diei, and so the Ignorance of some, and Malice of others has made it
looked on as angry work, and as frightful as a Comet, and as odious as if it
were to bring us under a torrid Zone* yet (I think) your having surrounded the
Nature of Dispensation, with such mild and gentle Rays as to represent it to be
of the nature of the Sol justitiae with healing in its wings, must needs engage
the knowing to bid it welcome with a (...), and make all their animosities and
ferments about it to be soon over.


B. Truly I do not suppose that any knowing man can have an aversion against
it, and that this Learning non habet inimicum nisi ignorantem.

And that you may continue in your judgment of any ferment about the
Dispensative Power being soon over, I can refer you to another Judgment of
Parliament, wherein a great tenderness for this branch of Prerogative is shown,
namely in the Statute of Octavo Elizabethae, c. 6. and to which that Excellent
and Learned Person, and great Ornament of the Law, Sir Robert Atkins (as you
will find it in Keble, Vol. 3.) referring in his Argument in Chomas and
Sortell's Case says, 8. Eliz. cap. 6. takes notice of License to dispense with
such Laws as were pro bono publico; yet does not forbid it, but rather
compounds the matter.

It has been the luck of Dispensation to meet with an ill name from some of
our famous Writers, who tell us that there were no such things as Dispensation
or Non-obstante heard of till they came from Rome here in the year of our Lord
1240. and that afterward Kings learned from Popes to dispense with their Laws,
whereas before they caused their Laws to be observed like those of the Medes
and Persians; as the Irish Reports tell you in the Case of Commendams, and
whereupon Mr. Prynne on the Fourth Part of the Institutes, c. 22. treating
largely of Non-obstantes calls them Papal Engines. And our old Monkish Writers
have been quoted for bestowing the terms of legum vulnera, infames nuncii, and
repagalum, etc. on Dispensations and Nonobstantes.

But I shall at our meeting again show you that the practice of Dispensing may
easily be traced to the Imperial Laws: and this you may soon find, if you will
look on Dr. Donne's Pseudo-Martyr that you have by you, and where you may guess
at the age of Dispensations, by his referring you in p. 40. to the Divinae
Indulgentiae, in the Digests, and his telling you out of the Code that
Theodosius and Valentinian making a Law with a Non-obstante did praeclude all
Dispensations which the Emperors themselves might grant, in these words, Si
coeleste proferatur oraculum, aut divina pragmatica Sanctio.

And if you will look on Gothofred's Notes on the L. Iubemus. C. De
Sacrosanctis Ecclefiis and de rebus and Privilegiis earum, cited by the Doctor
there, you will thus find it in those Notes: Caeleste oraculum quid est?
Principis dispensatio.

There is another thing I have not had time now to Discourse with you about,
and that is of the Nature of Laws in terrorem, as I intended, and which
suitably to the Wisdom of a Father in menacing a Child with cutting off his
Head if he does this or that thing, are by the Pater Patriae and the Estates of
the Realm sometimes lawfully made to intimidate men grown childish and vain, by
Sanctions of Punishments not intended to be executed according to the general
tenor of such Laws. But as what may make for my purpose of showing you how
worthy it is of the Majesty of Princes to incorporate Mercy with Justice in
dispensing with many particular Persons, and even to the freeing them from the
terror of those Laws in some angry Conjunctures when others were to be
affrighted with them, I shall refer you to King James his Proclamation of June
the 10th, in the year 1606. and where having mentioned the Religion of the
Roman Catholics, he says, We desire still to make it appear in the whole
Course of of our Government, that we are far from accounting all those Subjects
Dis^oyal that are that way affected, and that we do DISTINGUISH of such as be
carried only with blind zeal, and such as sin out of Presumption, etc. and
therefore as after times must give us trial of ALL men's behavior, so must all
men expect that their own deserts must be the only measure of their Fortunes at
our hands either one way or other: and having before spoke of the Gunpowder
Treason, and the Doctrines of some Priests that might encourage it, and said
that thereby there is sufficient Cause to justify the Proceedings of us and
our said Parliament in the making and execution of these last and all other
former Statutes tending to the same end, it follows, nevertheless seeing the
Sovereign Care appertains to us who have the Sovereign Power of Justice in our
hand, and the Supreme Dispensation of Clemency and Moderation of the Severity
of our Laws is likewise as proper to us to use, whenever we shall find it
reasonable, the same deserving to be no less allowed in us (being in our
Dominions God's Lieutenant) then it is praised in him among whose highest
titles it is that his Mercy is above all his Works, etc.

The King in the beginning of his Proclamation having professed his Zeal for
the Religion of the Church of England by Law Established, and his constant
Resolution for the maintenance and defense thereof, said, Of which our purpose
and determination, beside all other our former proceedings (since our Entry
into this Kingdom) we have given a new and certain Demonstration by such two
Acts as have been passed in this Session of our Parliament, both tending to
prevent the Dangers and diminish the number of those who adhering to the
Profession of the Church of Rome, are blindly led (together with the
Superstition of their Religion) both into some points of Doctrine which cannot
consist with the Loyalty of Subjects toward their Prince, and oft-times into
direct actions of Conspiracies and Conjurations against the State wherein they
live, as has most notoriously appeared by the late most horrible and almost
incredible Conjuration, etc. The two Acts there referred to are those that you
will find in your Statute-Book, Anno tertio Jacobi Regis, cap. 4. An Act for
the Discovering and repressing Popish Recusants (and in which the Oath of
Allegiance is contained) and Cap. 5. An Act to prevent and avoid dangers by
Popish Recusants, and whereby Popish Recusants Convict are disabled from
bearing Office. But here you see how that wise Prince so soon after so horrid a
real Plot did by distinguishing in his Proclamation between the Principles of
some Roman Catholics and others as to Loyalty, and alluring the Loyal by the
avowed Dispensative Power of his Mercy, and hiding them under the wings of his
Mercy from the terror of his Laws and affording to all his Subjects who should
afterward behave themselves well, a Tabula post naufragium as to the expectance
of making up their fortunes, think himself obliged then to cause his Moderation
to be known to all men.

And you may hence take occasion when you think of the many Acts in terrorem in
the Statute-Book, and where there is no Proportion between the Crime and the
Punishment, and in some that seem inflictive of Punishments in the Case where
men cannot be to any but the Searcher of hearts known to be Criminal at all (as
for example in their owning some Problematick Points of the Christian Religion)
to consider that most probably the Wisdom of the Government would not have
passed them but on the Suppo^ition of the Regal Power of dispensing therein,
expressly or tacitly. You see how the Laws commonly called Sang^inary, have been
tacitly suspended: and I may tell you, that tho I desire to live no longer then
I shall be a maintainet of the internal Communion due from all Christians to
all Christians as a part of that Holiness without which no man shall see God;
yet I should soon withdraw from the external Communion of the Church of
England, if it owned the justness of such Laws otherwise then as in terrorem^
and if it owned the lawfulness of putting men to Death for the Profession of
any Religionary Principles, their liberty to prosess which was purchased for
them by the Blood of their Redeemer. But I need not say more now about
cautioning you or any one against the taking offense at any of our Laws, Laws,
through want of considering which of them were designedly made for terror.

I might here likewise as to many Acts about Trade that swell the StatuteBook
apply the Consideration of the Regal Power of dispensing therein having
encouraged our Ancestors to perpetuate them as Laws.


A. The truth is you now put me in mind how I having long ago spent much time
in considering the Trade and Traffic of our Country, and of other Parts of
Christendom, and finding that shortly after His late Majesty's Restoration, one
of his Ministers had in a Public Speech intimated it to the Parliament, that
His Majesty had settled a Council of Trade, consisting of some of the Lords of
his Privy Council, and of some Gentlemen of Quality and Experience, and of some
Principal Merchants of the Principal Companies, I had the curiosity to look
over their Iournals and their Advices, and Reports to the King, and there I
found somewhat of the same notion with yours in one of their Reports to His
Majesty. For there in one of their Papers of Advice addressed to the King,
taking notice that what they conceived fit to be done for the advancement of
the Trade of the Realm, was Prohibited by diverse ancient Statutes, they make
them imply that the thing might be done by the King's license or dispensing,
and whereupon they thus go on: And therefore finding this Dispensation to be
your Majesty's Prerogative preserved entire to the Crown through so many of
your Royal Progenitors, we have not thought fit to touch further upon this
Matter, as being humbly confident that your Majesty's Subjects shall upon all
occasions be indulged the like, if not more ready relief and accommodation for
their Trade from your Majesty's Royal Grace and Bounty: only because the
Observation was obvious, that perhaps all former Parliaments purposely left
this door open to the People by the Grace of the King to be relieved with those
dispensations, as foreseeing how difficult, if not impossible, or how
inconvenient at least it might be altogether to restrain what those Statutes
prohibited, we could not omit the same in this place, etc.


B. And you have put me in mind how a very Loyal and judicious Gentleman of
that Council of Trade, (and whom I look on to be as deeply studied in the
business of Trade and Traffic as any one of the age) was pleased once to give
me his opinion in Discourse, that a vast number of our Statutes made for the
advancement of Trade did really depress it; and he then told me, that the
making of one new Law against the giving Alms to Beggars in the Highway, would
enrich the Nation almost more then all our old Statutes.


A. I have many times been apt to think so. And considering how great a part of
Mankind every where the Credulous are, and that the Beggars are a necessary Tax
upon the Credulous; as we must imagine that a great loss happens to the
well-meaning People in the Nation through the Profusion of their Charity to
Pa^pers in the High ways or Streets, so again considering the vast numbers* of
such Pa^pers, and how valuable their Industry would be to the Public, if
Necessity the mother of Industry through their not being relieved in the
Highways or Streets made them advantageous to the Kingdom instead of being
Nuisances to it, one may easily guess that an Act of Parliament of that Nature
would awaken Trade and Manufacture to a much higher Proportion than our many
sleeping Statutes can do.


B. Why, then; I must tell you what I told him, namely, that there is such a
Statute in being, and long ago made, and that the execution of this Statute
has been in the populous Suburbs of our Metropolis (the places where Peggars
do so much swarm) often awakened within these late years by the
Middlesex-Iustices causing Printed Papers to be sent to the Churchwardens and
Overseers of the Poor in the respective Parishes, and with this Clause therein
inserted, viz. And for the discouragement of all idle Vagabonds and Vagrants,
etc. all Persons are hereby desired and required to forbear to relieve any
Beggars at their doors, or in any other kind about the Streets, on pain of
suffering the respective Penalties by Law provided against all such Offenders.


A. I never before heard of this Penal Law.


B. You may find it referred to, and likewise what may show you how it has
been tacitly dispensed with, in my Lord Hatton's Treatise of Acts of Parliament
and the Exposition thereof, c. 5. Of Interpretation of Statutes by Equity: and
where he says, The Statute of E. 3. ordains, That no man upon pain of
Imprisonment should give Alms to a valtant Beggar. Yet if one meet with such a
one in so cold weather and so light apparel, that if he have no Clothes given
him he shall die before he comes to any Town, if a man gives him apparel, he
offends not the Law. For there is an inward dispensation by the bond of
Christian Charity and Compassion.

But since humane Laws bind the Conscience, we cannot without the Prince's
tacit Consent rationally to be presumed, thus give our selves the Latitude of
an internal dispensation, or relaxation from the band of that his Law: So that
therefore when ever you gratify your own indulgent disposition in relieving
one in the Streets, or in itinere whom you look on as one of God's Poor, you
are at the same time to be sensible of the Regal dispensative Power relieving
your Conscience, and legitimating that your intended Charity by Tacit
Dispensation.


A. You have often referred my Thoughts to consider the Nature of the Prince's
Tacit dispensing. Do you account it to have any great spreading Influence on
men's Consciences here in keeping them both innocent and quiet?


B. When we meet some other time, I shall show you the Universal influence of
this kind it has among all Orders and Degrees of our Prince's Subjects: and I
shall then give you a full view of it.


A. But will you then tell me of Disability being thus tacitly dispensed with,
and with a salvo to Conscience as to the obligation of humane Laws?


B. Yes; in many Cases. I have told you of one already when the Roman Catholic
Physicians were disabled by an Act of Parliament in the Reign of King James the
First from Practicing, and when the Regal Tacit Dispensation proved an
effectual Antidote to their Consciences against mortal Sin in the Case. But
because you seem to be somewhat impatient to know another Case wherein the
Tacit Dispensation with disability did thus operate, I shall give you a
home-case, by desiring you to recollect how old you were when you were first
chosen a Parliament man, and then to read Mr. Prynne's Book published A. 1661.
and called Minors no Senators, or a brief Discourse proving Infants under 21
years to be incapable in point of Law, etc. of being elected or admitted
Members of the High Court of Parliament, etc. He refers there to Coke's
Institutes for rendering none eligible to be a Knight, Citizen or Burgess, who
is under the age of 21 years: and in p. 5. he faith, the Common Law of England
is so exact and curious in the Election of all Officers of an inferior Nature,
as Coroners, Verderers, Keepers of Seals for Recognisances, or Statutes
Merchant, Constables, Bailiffs, Mayors, Clerks and others, who are eligible by
Writs, Charters or Prescription, that it expressly requires every one of them to
be idoneum hominem qui melius sciat and possit officium illud intendere, and
therefore (says he) much less ought a Minor to be chosen a Knight, Citizen, or
Burgess, etc. and if he is unable to be an Attorney or Proxy to assent for
another in any Court of Justice, much more then in a Parliament, the supremest
Court. And in p. 24. to the Objection that some Infants under 21 years have
been permitted to sit in former Parliaments, he answers, that no^e ever sat in
former Parliaments but only by Connivence, and whose Elections were never
questioned, and that some whose Elections were questioned, were ejected.

And now as Bishop Sanderson in his 7th Lecture, viz. De Legum humanarum Causa
efficiente, speaking of Laws ceasing to oblige by contrary Custom, makes that
contrary Custom to be nihil aliud quam Conjuncta populi Consensio eam legem ut
inutilem observare negligentis, and Consensio principis Observationem ejus non
exigentis; and in his 10th Lecture does very judiciously distinguish the
Prince's Consent about relaxing Subjects from the obligation of a Law into that
which is expressed, and that which may rationally be presumed, it was by this
latter consent of your Prince so exuberantly indulgent in his Nature, that you
were brought off from Sin in the forum internum, when you were both Senator and
Minor, and when you helped on the making of Laws to disalle others, and who
have since made it a question whether the King could expressly or tacitly
dispense with the incapacity that by means of your Vote, and perhaps of other
Minors, passed to be enacted as a Punishment.

But to speak frankly, you will oblige me now we are so near parting, to tell
me of any one learned Man in the Profession of the Laws of any part of
Christendom, and particularly of our own Municipal ones, who has ex Professo
and argumentatively writ of the Prince's Prerogative of dispensing with a Penal
disability in particular Cases, and denied it.


A. I did not as to our Lex terrae account it tanti to set up the Judgment of
any one particular man when you have entertained me with Judgment of Parliament
in the Case. But I am sure you cannot but know how that great Man in that great
Case we have referred to, I mean my Lord Chief Justice Vaughan in Thomas and
Sorrel's Case, seems to be of opinion that the King cannot dispense in the Case
of Incapacity: He says, the reason why the King cannot dispense in the Cases
of buying Offices and Simoniacal Presentations is because the Persons were made
incapable to hold them: And a Person incapable is as a dead Person, and no
Person at all as to that wherein he is incapable, etc.


B. Tho that great Man has not therein as in other Passages in his Argument,
discussed the Point argumentatively, I shall yet pay so much respect to his
opinion, as to give decent Burial to his dead Man. But you see that after he
had said, The Reason why the King cannot dispense, etc. is because the Persons
were made incapable to hold them, he only gives it as a reason of their being
incapable, and of the King's not being able to dispense in their Case, viz.
that they are dead Men, that a Person incapable is as a dead Person, and
whereby he gives us a Magisterial gratis dictum, or a Petitio Principii
instead of what might deserve the name of a Reason, or what might prove that
the King could not dispense in the Case of one Politically dead, or one dead in
Law. I have formerly told you of the Saying used by Magerus, and other Civil
Law-writers, that Mors civilis naturali non aequiparatur nisi in casibus in
jure expressis. And there are Cases enough expressed there, that show how the
Prince who is according to the style of Seneca, viz. Animus Reipublicae, illa
Corpus suum, and ille spiritus vitalis quem haec tot millia trahunt, and who in
the Scripture Phrase is the breath of our Nostrils, can according to the Law of
the Land as I told you in the Case of Sir Walter Raleigh, animate a Person dead
in Law.

And none need question why King James the Second cannot thus raise the dead as
Queen Elizabeth did, and King James the First, or our following Princes, and I
may say as well as any who went before him. Infames dicuntur civiliter mortui
is a common Saying, but you see that Fas est cuivis Principi maculosas notas
vitiatae opinionis abstergere is as common. Thus too Magerus tells us, that
Banniti pro mortuis reputantur, and we know that the Excommunicate may in some
respect by reason of their temporary disability be termed so too.

And if you will look on the Book called Reformatio legum Ecclesiasticarum,
under the title De excommunicatione, you will there in the Chapter of the
Denunciation of the Excommunicate, find the Minister enjoined to tell the
People that they must all abstain from the Excommunicate Person, tanquam a
Putri and Projecto membro, etc. that an Excommunicate Person is to be thrown
out of the Church as a dead Carcass: but you will there find in the Formula
reconciliationis excommunicatorum with what tenderness it is said reum hunc
charissimum fratrem membrum assumamus and agnoscamus Communis in Christo nostri
corporis: and intimus ut noster affectus in hoc corporis nostri recuperato
membro testatior sit, etc. and that the Pastor in the Absolution of that
returning Prodigal who was dead and is alive again, must in the administration
of the King's Ecclesiastical Laws, say tibi rursus pristinum in Ecclesia tua
locum, and plenum jus restitue.

Thus too at the end of the Canons, A. 1571. you will find the same style of
tenderness in Vogue in Queen Elizabeth's time that was in Edward the 6th's, as
likewise of the powerfulness in raising the dead. You see there a Form of the
Sentence of Excommunication, viz. Fratres quoniam quicunque profitemur nomen
Christi sumus omnes membrum ejusdem corporis, and par est ut unum membrum
alterius membri sensu and dolor afficiatur, etc. And it being afterward
mentioned, that the Person having been accused of such a Crime, and having been
contumaciously absent, it follows, the Bishop in God's Name and by his
Authority has Excommunicated such a one from the Society of Christ's Church,
and tanquam membrum emortuum amputasse a Christi corpore, etc. that you may
shun his Company: tamen ut Christiana charitas nos monet, let us pray for him
to God who is a merciful God, and who can lapsos etiam a morte revocare.

And you may take notice of what is said in Croke 2d, and Coke 8th Report,
Trollop's Case about the King's Pardon raising the Excommunicate from this
civil death, and that a man need not be Absolved by the Church if the King
Pardons. And thus Hobart, Serle's Case, p. 294. shows you that after the
discharge of a Clerk Convict, he shall never be questioned in the
Ecclesiastical Court for deprivation. You may likewise see it in Coke Inst. 3.
Chapter Of Pardons, The King may Pardon one Convict of Heresy, or of any other
offense Punishable by the Ecclesiastical Law.

You may too in that Chapter observe his tenderness for Prerogative, where
having mentioned that by the 13th of R. 2. it is provided that no Charter of
Pardon for Murder, etc. shall be allowed etc. if they be not specified in the
same Charter, and that before that Statute by the Pardon of all Felonies,
Treason was Pardoned, and so was Murder; and at this day by the pardon of all
Felonies, the death of a Man is not pardoned; he thus goes on, these are
excellent Laws for direction, and for the Peace of the Realm. But it has been
conceived (which we will not question) that the King may DISPENSE with these
Laws by a Non-obstante, be it general or special (albeit we find not any such
Clauses of Non-obstante but of late times) These Statutes are excellent
Instructions for a Religious and Prudent King to follow, but he does not make
them obligatory to him. My Lord Coke then says, This is to be added that the
intention of the said Act, 13. R. 2. was not that the King should grant a
Pardon of Murder by express Name in the Charter, but because the whole
Parliament conceived that he would never Pardon Murder by special Name for the
Causes aforesaid, therefore was that Provision made which was grounded on the
Law of God, Quicunque effuderit humanum Sanguinem, fundetur Sanguis illius,
etc. Nec aliter expiari potest, nisi per ejus Sanguinem qui alterius Sanguinem
effuderit. His Margin there cites Genes. 9. 6. Numb. 35. 33.


A. But (by the way) do you think then that Sovereign Princes offend the Law of
God in Pardoning Murder?


B. I do observe that many presume to censure Kings for so doing, and are
superstitiously misguided by thinking that those two places of Scripture
referred to by my Lord Coke do necessarily make it a sin in Princes to Pardon
Murder. But I shall when we meet again show you the mistake of such therein;
and shall show you that David at that time when the Law of God, and the lex
terrae was the same thing, (and who had Sworn and would. perform it, that he
would keep God's righteous Judgments) was not to be censured to have sinned
either in the reprieve of Ioab who had murdered Amasa, and Abner, and in
delaying the Execution of the Law, and leaving it to Solomon his Son, or in the
Pardon of Absolon, who had slain his Brother Ammon: and that when the Law faith
in Numb. 35. The Murderer shall surely be put to death, our best Commentators
(and out of the Rabbis) say, that this is spoken to the Judges before whom
such Causes regularly came, and under the Supreme Power and by authority
thereof judged those Causes; and that tho the Judges who were subordinate to
the Supreme Power were to take no Satisfaction for the life of a Murderer, but
were by that Law to Condemn him, yet that it follows not that the Supreme
Power who made them Judges, might not in some Cases Reprieve and Pardon some
whom they had Condemned.


A. I shall be glad to hear you discourse of this, and the rather for that it is
so Customary to many when they find the Prince exercising this Prerogative of
Pardoning, to be apt too much to busy their heads with those two places in the
Old Testament, to their neglect of others there* viz. Exodus 22. 28. Prove. 24.
21. Eccles. 10. 20. and of Acts 23. 5. in the New, and likewise there of Romans
13. 2. 5. 1. St. Peter 2. 17. and from whence they might Collect their moral
offices of not doing, or speaking, or thinking dishonourably of the Lord's
anointed, and of paying honor and obedience to his Sovereign Power, and that
for Conscience sake.

But in the mean time give me leave a propos to ask you if ever you heard of
any one of the Judges of the Realm in the Reign of our former Princes, that
gave his judgment for the allowance of the King's Pardon of disability? Show me
but that, and I shall not be affrighted with my Lord Chapter Justice Vaughan's
Simoniacal Dead man.


B. I shall tell you of a Case that was well enough known to him, and which you
may find in Croke 3d, p. 55. Sir John Bennet, v. Dr. Easedale: where you may
see that Sir John Bennet being fined 20000 l. for Bribery* by the Star Chamber,
and Censured to be Imprisoned, and made incapable of any Office of Judicature:
and that he having a Pardon from the King reciting the Bribery and Offenses
mentioned in the Decree, and all Penalties and Punishments by reason thereof,
and all Disabilities and Incapacities, and all things concerning the said
Sentence except the Fine of 20000 l. and the Court of Star Chamber having the
advice of all the Judges relating to the Decree and Pardon, it was resolved by
them all, that this Pardon has taken away all force of the Sentence in the
Star Chamber, except for the Fine of 20000 l. and all Disabilities are
discharged thereby.

That Lord Chief Justice knew that (as it was set down in that Chapter of
Pardons, Inst. 3.) the King's Pardon extends to all Suits in the Star Chamber:
and he knew of what was mentioned, Inst. 4. Chap. 1. Of the High Court of
Parliament, viz. Of a Pardon to the Lord Latimer of a Judgment in Parliament:
and he knew that by his own and other Justices of Assize going into their own
Countries in the Execution of their Offices by virtue of the King's Non-obstante
to the Statutes of 8. R. 2. c. 2. 3. H. 8. c. 24. himself and as many as went
Judges of Assize so into their own Countries, gave Judgment by so doing for the
Prerogative of dispensing with such Acts of Parliament: and he likewise knew
that (as it is well expressed in The^ Answer of King Charles the First to the
Declaration of both Houses of Parliament concerning the Commission* of array,
A. 1642.) An Act of Parliament in any* Matter tho mistaken, being assented to
by the King and his two Houses, is equally binding (as having equal Authority)
with an Act introductive of a new Law, and that therefore Acts of Parliament
having so particularly declared the justness of the Prerogative's dispensing
with disability, no magna nomina of any particular Sages of the Law in
otherwise opining, can expect any deference.

And if you will consider what my Lord Coke in that Chapter of Pardons has
mentioned of the operation of Prerogative over the dead in Law, and consider
the President he refers to, viz. Pasch. 22. E. 3. tit. Cor. 239. Coram Rege,
Quidam indictatus de Felonia, and inde Culp. dicit quod Rex eum Conduxit, and
inde producit Chartam, quod Rex eum Conduxit in Vasc. in exercitu, and dicta
Charta allocata fuit per Curiam; and there see his opinion grounded on it, that
if a man be Indicted of Felony, and found Guilty, and being in Prison, the King
may under the Great Seal, reciting the Offense, etc. retain him to serve in his
Wars on this side or beyond the Seas: this Charter he may Plead, and the Court
ought to allow it* I believe you will be of Opinion that any one who will
desire any more Presidents for the Commanding the services of dead men ought to
be sent for one to the REHEARSAL, viz. that of Arise you dead Men, and get ye
about your business.


A. Well Sir: As for this objected Dead-man, requiescat in Pace. I have done
with him: and since from some things you have said, I gather that the
dispensing with disability by Roman Emperors and Popes of Rome, did never by
any ferment disturb their Governments; and moreover, since no men of sense here
have ever troubled themselves or the Government with any vexatious Question
about the King's Power in discharging a man from a Praemunire, but not from a
Penal disability incurred, whereas by a Praemunire (as my Lord Coke shows us,
Inst. 3. c. 54.) men are put out of the Protection of the King, and DISABLED to
have any Action or Remedy by the King's Law or the Kings Writs, and exposed to
many other dreadful Punishments: I do now begin to wonder whence it is that the
mistake in some men's Minds has come about a Penal disability being so
unremoveable. And thus I think too one might wonder how such as will allow the
King's Pardon to discharge one from an Excommunicatio minor or major, do look
on disability as such an anathematizing thing as is not to be touched or that
cannot be quelled by Prerogative. Can you guess whence it is that men have
imbibed this mistaken fancy?


B. I shall frankly tell you what I think has occasioned it. It is most
natural to all men in arguing to take the shortest course they can to bring
their Adversaries to what is reputed by all to be an absurdity; and there being
some Disabilities that the Law Books mention wherein Property is concerned, and
wherein it appears as an absurd thing in any one who should say that they could
be dispensed with, and as for Example, what the (...) tells us of Disability,
where a man is not of whole Memory, which disables him so that his Heir shall
take advantage of his Disability after his death: and where he passes any
Estate out of him it may be after his death disanull'd by his Heir, and which
cannot be disanull'd by himself during his life. For it is a Maxim of Law, That
a man of full Age shall never be received to disable his own Person: and for
which he cites Sir E. Coke. And he had before spoke of Disability by the
Persons own Act, which is, if I bind my self that upon surrender of a Lease, I
will grant a new Estate to the Lessee, and afterward I grant over my reversion,
in this Case tho I afterward repurchase the reversion, yet I have forfeited my
Obligation because I was once disabled to perform it, Coke lib. 5. f. 21.

Thus likewise it appearing to be against reason that men should be made Judges
who are under natural incapacities to exercise Jurisdiction, (and such as
Vantius in his Book de Nullitatibus instancing in, as, Surdus, mutus, perpetuo
furiosus, impubes, says, that quoniam defectus and incapacitas istorum a
natura ipsa provenit, ideo a quoquam etiam Supremo Principe suppleri non
poterit (quia etiam Imperatori tollere non licet quae juris naturalis sunt) an
asserting of the Power of Prerogative in dispensing with such incapacity would
be absurd; and it would show somewhat of laesa Principia and of natural defects
and incapacities in one who did rear Suppositions of a Prince's intending to
employ such Uncapables: and however nothing appearing to the first thought more
ridiculous then a dispensing with incapacity of this kind, many may be so apt
to think that incapacities enacted by Penal positive Laws, (and by such Laws
perhaps as were made in terrorem) cannot be dispensed with.

But in fine, when we meet hereafter, I shall give occasion to both our
thoughts for a higher flight, then they had in that poor low Question, Can the
King dispense with Penal Disability? and I shall show you that where the King
can as to any particular man relax the bond of his Law, let the most
penetrating Wisdom of Men or Angels be employed in the settlement and invention
of the most terrible Penalties to guard the Law, the Person so dispensed with
is ipso facto and ipso jure freed from them all. He by being exempted from the
Obligation of that Law is as innocent and free from any Sin by the
transgression of it, as the Child unborn. The Dispensation has intercepted all
the Penalties; has absolved him a culpa, and therefore a paena, and if you
punish him, you punish an innocent Person.


A. You will then make a happy riddance of the vexata quaestio of disability,
if you have not done it already.


B. But now Sir* by WAT of RECOLLECTION as to what has poss'd between us,
either at this Conference or the other; if any thing occurs to your thoughts,
by me either obscurely spoken (and which you would wish better illustrated) or
what may seem in the least to reflect on our Laws, or on the Religion of the
Church of England by Law established, I do most earnestly conjure you now to
name it to me. It is possible that for a Month or two's time, we may not meet
again, and therefore I shall be glad that our parting now may be without any
offense given or taken, as to any of these Matters premised, and in order to
which, that while what has passed between us is fresh in both our Memories,
any misunderstanding therein may be prevented. And I yet further give you the
liberty in case any thing of the nature aforesaid, or of what nature soever
shall occur to your thoughts after we are parted which we have discoursed of,
and which you would wish better considered, that you would when we meet again
freely impart it to me, and when if you can show me that I in any thing have
erred, I shall show you my readiness not to persevere therein, and so we shall
be both gainers, you will gain the Vict^ry and I the Truth.


A. I am sure I cannot oblige you more then by making use of the freedom you
have offered me, as I should find occasion so to do: and for which at present I
find but little. I was during our Discourse of the Interpretation; of the Oath
of Supremacy afraid that you would have le^t some great words in it that relate
to no Foreign Prince or ^ relate having any Jurisdiction here Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual, etc. under some clouds of doubtfulness, and thereby have seemed to
derogate from the honor of the Oath, till I found that you both asserted the
honor of the Oath and of the Government too by showing it from the Sentiments
of my Lord Primate Bramhal, and otherwise that Coactive Jurisdiction was
thereby only meant.


B. I must caution you with a Nota been to keep in your mind what I have both
positively and argumentatively told you in obviating your scruples about the
Oath, and of the Regal Power of interpreting making the Coast of the Oath so
clear to you, and how I have supported the honor of the English Consciences of
all considerate Persons of the Church of Rome in Harry the 8th's time, and of
the Church of England in Edward the 6th's, by showing you that their sense of
the Bishop of Rome's having here NO Jurisdiction, was of no Independent
Coactive Jurisdiction, when they took the old Oath of Supremacy, and likewise
of those of the Church of England, who in Queen Elizabeth's time and ever since
took the new one. And I need not tell you again that at the time of the making
of the Statute of 37o of H. 8. and of the Revival of it by Queen Eliz. (and
wherein it was declared that Archbishops, Bishops, etc. have NO manner of
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical but by, under and from His Royal Majesty) both
Harry the 8th, and that Queen, and the judicious in the Clergy of each knew
that as to their Potestas Ordinis which by virtue of their Function they have
to Preach, and give the Sacrament, and give Orders, etc. it was derived from
Christ to the Apostles and their Successors, and that so likewise was the
Potestas Iurisdictionis in foro interno, and that therefore none needed to
suppose that either by Harry the 8th's Oath or Queen Elizabeth's, in the words
of no foreign Prelates having here any Jurisdiction, etc. any Power the Pope
could justly claim as a Successor to the Apostles was impeach^d.

And no doubt but Harry the 8th being by that Statute declared to be but a
Layman, no men of sense construed that Statute to give him the exercise of any
Jurisdiction, or Power of the Keys in foro interno, as a Successor of the
Apostles. The old Distinction of Bracton, l. 1. c. 8. that King's cannot
Excommunicate ministerialiter (because they are Laymen) but may do it
authoritative by appointing others to do it, gave Satisfaction in Harry the
8th's time, and might had it been thought of in Queen Elizabeth's Reign have
saved the labor of the Interpretation in the Admonition in removing the
ferment that the Oath occasioned among Protestant Scruplers.

But tho the Preamble of the Admonition referrs to some Protestant Clergymen
as the Scruplers, yet the following words, viz. That her Majesty would that all
her loving Subjects should understand that nothing was* is* or shall be meant
or intended by the same Oath, etc. show her Pious design of Complaisance as to
the Consciences of her Catholic as well as Protestant Subjects, and whose
freedom from Imposition of ambiguous or otherwise unlawful Oaths she knew was
purchased for both of them alike by the Blood of Christ. And you know I
referred you to, Sir John Winter's Observations on the Oath of Supremacy, as
representing the Oath by the help of Queen Elizabeth's Interpretation in the
Admonition, and of the Enacting of that Interpretation in Parliament, and of
the Interpretation in the 37th Article, as lawful to be taken, tho possibly
inexpedient on the account of Scandal, and likewise to another Roman Catholic
Writer, who on the account of those Interpretations, thought it might both
lawfully and without Scandal be taken. And you and others who think that Oath
of importance for the securing the Peace of the Government, may thank the
Prerogative of Regal Interpretation for supplying the Lamp of it with the Oil
that has made it last so long, and which otherwise would soon have gone out in
a snuff, as I showed you by the offense that was taken at it at home and abroad
when it was first set up, and which now may perhaps help to illuminate the
English World in the measures of Loyalty so long as the Sun and Moon endure:
that is, if you suppose that the use of Oaths would endure so long. But, Dii
meliora.

And it here coming into my mind that you in your somewhat airy way of
discoursing of the Oath, resembled it to a tender-sided Ship girdled with so
many interpretations, I shall take occasion further to impress it on your
thoughts, that it is still THE SAME OATH, tho partaking of all those
Interpretations, and as we say of eadem navis toties refecta: and the several
interpretations are not by you to be resembled to girdlings, but to its main
inward beams and timbers that are become parts o^ it. Moreover you know that a
girdled Ship by reason of the incompactness of its adventitious parts with the
other, cannot last the fourth part of the time that another will. But you see
how long this Oath has continued, and riding triumphantly in the Sea of time,
has too carried out all its Guns in Stormy weather, and made the Usurped Power
of the Court of Rome strike Sail to our Princes.

Yet I shall here take occasion from my having just now minded you of the
Interpretations of the Oath inclining Sir John Winter and the other
Roman Catholic to judge of it as they did, to tell you that I have often
wished that in the times of the three last Reigns the Power of Interpretation
had further exerted it self in the further clearing of any thing in that Oath
and in the Oath of Allegiance at which offense was by so many taken, however by
the Oaths not given: and that such Interpretations had been approved in
Parliament, and particularly that the Interpretation of the word HERETICAL in
the Oath of Allegiance, as being meant of Contrary to the Word of God, had
brought all our Roman Catholic Brethren to the taking of that Oath, as I told
you that F. Cressy thought it would have done, and who said that he believed
that that was the sense intended by King James in the word heretical.

And I shall be glad if those Interpretations relating to the Oath of Supremacy
which succeeded those that Sir John Winter and the other Roman Catholic took
notice of, may in the event Conduce to render it more acceptable to others of
them: and the rather for that it is apparent that all the Interpretations are
Consistent with the Oath, and with one another, as from what I have spoken you
may Collect. But by so many other Pious and Learned Roman Catholics appearing
not to be of the opinion that the Interpretations of the Oath mentioned by
those two Writers, may legitimate the taking of it, I have long wished to the
Oath all the additional clearness that Law could give it, and that they would
wish given who were required to take it. And as one Doctor's opinion for the
justness of a Litigants Cause has on his being cast in it, been allowed to
save him from being as a Calumnious and rash litigator condemned in Expenses,
thus so great a Master in our Israel and Vindicator of our Church from Schism,
as Archbishop Bramhal having given his Opinion about the Oath (as I told you)
namely as to what related to the King's Power in Spirituals, and to no foreign
Prelate having any Spiritual Jurisdiction here, viz. This might have been
expressed in words less liable to Exception, I shall censure no man as a
Ca^umniator of the Oath who shall wish that any lawful Interpretation may make
those words less liable to Exception.

Sir John Winter (as I told you) having mentioned the Explanations not being
known to all, and their intricacy and the constant tendering of the Oath for ^o
many years without the aforesaid Explanation as likely to give just cause of
Scandal, etc. I must tell you I like not his words of the GIVING just cause of
Scandal; but what I have showed you of many passages about the Explanations
which were not observed by him, and particularly of the 37th Article affording
only to the Clergy a more favorable interpretation (and which was enacted as
to them in 13o Eliz*) and of the Canons of King James first extending the
benefit of that Interpretation to the Layety, and of the Canons of King Charles
the First further explaining the 37th Article, may justly incline you to wish
that the sense of the Oath did Prima facie appear as liquid to all as it now
does to us two.

And I shall here take occasion for the propping up the interpretation relating
to the Oath made by those two Princes in their Canons, to tell you that as you
accounted King James his Interpretation as good as Queen Elizabeth's, so you
may account that in the Canons of King Charles the First, as good as that in
those of King James; for that tho it is said by some that the Canons of King
Charles the First were damned by the Act of 13o Car. 2. c. 12. yet the truth
is, that that Act leaves them in statu quo, and the last Proviso in it does
only express those Canons not being confirmed by it. Nor (in my judgment) did
they need any Confirmation from it: for that (according to my Lord Chief
Justice Vaughan's Opinion that I have cited to you) a lawful Canon is the Law
of the Kingdom as well as an Act of Parliament: and the Consideration of this
may show you, that as Queen Elizabeth's Interpretation in The Admonition was
perpetuated by the Ensuing Parliamentary Approbation thereof, so the
interpretations of those Princes in those their Canons confirmed for them,
their Heirs and Successors, are now binding to you; and I pray God to incline
you to keep this your Solemn Oath according to these interpretations of it.


A. I thank you for this your serious and Christian wish, and do give you my
hearty thanks for what you have discoursed to me of the many Interpretations
relating to the Oath, and the rendering them so consistent with it, and by means
whereof I am sensible that the Oath has become more then res unius oetatis,
and that without them it would not have been so much: and by which both the
credit of the Oath, and the quiet of the Consciences of the Takers of it have
been preserved. And I am glad that the task of enumerating them all has
happened thus to fall into your hands, and that therein you have not (as they
say of young Conjurers raising Spirits that they cannot lay) occasioned any
doubts in me about the Oath but what you have fairly ^ and fully satisfied. And
indeed you have laid some doubts that the Two Roman Catholic Writers raising
them, happened not to lay. Throwing therefore by, any Thoughts and Expressions
of mine of that nature which you censured as airy (and as to which I submit to
your reproof) I shall prepare my mind with a decent temper both of delight and
Pious dread to contemplate my Oath as now set before me, and as containing in
it that clearness, and that Majesty that may excite both those Passions in me,
and the real view of which I may some way compare to that in vision, Ezekiel's
terrible crystal.


B. Long may you live in this temper. I remember I have somewhere read it, that
the Oath by which the Cardinals are bound to the maintenance of the
Church-Privileges is drawn in such clear and powerful words, that Baronius
calls it terribile Iuramentum, and says, that the only remembering of it
inflicts a horror upon his Mind, and a trembling upon (...) Body. And I doubt
not but when I shall at our next meeting discourse with you about our
obligation from the Promissory part of the Oath that relates to the assistance
and defense of the Regal Rights and Privileges, you will think that every Taker
of it, ought to have some such sense of his remembering it, as Baronius had
about his terrible Oath.


A. But to go on according to the freedom you gave me, I remember you told me
that you would not trouble me with any Notions or Moot Points about the Power
of Interpreting Acts of Parliament, and about which you cited Sir Christopher
Hatton's Book Of Acts of Parliament and their Exposition: but I remember you
have Sparsim variously spoke of it, and you mentioned to me what King Charles
the First told both Houses shortly after the granting the Petition of Right,
that to the Judges only under him the Interpretation of the Laws belonged, and
that none of the Houses of Parliament, joint or separate either could make or
declare a Law without his Consent. I suppose you intend here to lodge no Snake
in the grass of this Regal Power of interpretation, whereby we may be
interpreted out of our Magna Charta and the Petition of Right, and out of our
Religion, or Property.


B. Your Supposal does but right to my intentions. I have referred you only to
Facts, and leave you to make a due use of them, and shall when we meet again
show you further why I have thus referred you to these Facts of the Regal
interpretation: And in the mean time you may take notice, that as to what I
have mentioned as a Notion out of the Lord Chancellor Hatton, (of which the
intent and substance was, That if all the Parliament were voluntarily assembled
again and not by Writ, Eorum non esset interpretari dubium Statutum, as the
words are in the Table of his Book, Chap. 4* and with which the Chapter agrees)
I told you I would not trouble you with it, and you may give it its transeat as
a kind of curious impossible Case. Nor need you amuse your self about any
Consequences by me meant in what I told you of King Charles the First, telling
the three Estates as they were feasting themselves with the noble Concessions
of the Petition of Right. I know nothing asserted by my Lord Coke in Inst. 4*
Chap. 1. Of the High and Honorable Court of Parliament, but wherein I own my
agreeing with him, and particularly as to what he speaks of Judicature. And I
doubt not but every one accounts that what he said Inst. 3. c. 73. was very
Orthodox, viz. NOTE, Proclamations are of great force, which are grounded upon
the Laws of the Realm. Nor considering the exuberance of that great thing
called bona fides that is to be expected from Princes, need any man fear that
there will be an Exposition of abrogamus for statuimus in any of the
Declaratory Proclamations that ours shall make.

But because you have named Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, I shall
take occasion to cite to you a very popular Authority to show you that any
Proclamations our English Monarchs shall make for the Dispensing with Penal
Religionary Laws, will be but Declaratory of Magna Charta, and of the Petition
of Right. You know we have often spoke of the Arguments in the Parliament of
40. made by Mr. Bagshaw, who was Pars magna of the Faction then regnant, and by
which those Arguments of his were much celebrated. You may find some account of
his Character in Heylin's History of Archbishop Laud, who mentions his being
chosen Reader for the Lent Vacation by the Middle Temple in the year 1639. And
he in his First Argument, viz. Concerning the Canons, p. 11. says, Liberty of
Religion and Conscience are (as I take it) within the words of MAGNA CHARTA
granted to me as mine Inheritance, Cap. 29. Nullus liber homo imprisonetur ^ut
disseisetur de libertatibus vel liberis Consuetudinibus suis. And Liberty of
Conscience is the g^test Liberty. It is by a necessary Consequence and
deduction within the words imprisonetur. For put the Case that the Clergy make
Canons to which I never assented, and I break these Canons, whereupon I am
Excommunicated, and upon a Significavit by the Bishop, my Body is taken and
imprisoned by a Writ de excommunicato Capiendo, now shall I lie in Prison all
the days of my life, and shall never be delivered by a Cautione admittenda,
unless I will come in and parere mandatis Ecclesiae, which are point blank
against my Conscience. And he had before said, A Comparatis: by an Argument a
minori ad majus; if Property of Goods cannot be taken from me without my assent
in Parliament, which is the fundamental Law of the Land, and so declared in the
Petition of Right, why then Property and Liberty of Conscience which is much
greater, as much as bona animi are above bona fortunae, cannot be taken from me
without my assent.

This it seems passed as Current Coin for Judgment of Parliament in behalf of
Liberty of Conscience, in the Conjuncture of 41, the year in which his Book was
Printed: and if it were so then allowable, you may well think that a Prince's
owning the Religion that flourished here in the time of Magna charta (and which
inspired the Virtue that produced Magna Charta) and indulging some others of
the same Religion to profess it without Punishment, is not likely to occasion
any durable ferment.

And what I have here referred to concerning the Petition of Right, minds me of
the great effort of Pious zeal in our famous Bishop Hall, and his laudably
making use of the Popularity he had among the Protestants in sending a Letter
to the House of Commons, April the 28th, 1628. during the great ferment about
that Petition, and in which he gives so much fatherly and Prudent advice to the
great Agonists for Property, that they should consider when they were at the
end of their race, and then to sit down and rest. He has in it these tender
Expressions, Gentlemen, For God's sake be wise in your well-meant zeal, and our
Liberties and Proprieties are sufficiently declared to be sure and legal, etc.
let us not in suspicion of Evils that may be cast our selves into present
confusion. If you love your selves and your Country, remit something of your
own terms. And since the Substance is yielded by your noble Patriots, stand not
too rigorously upon Points of Circumstance. Pear not to trust a good King, who
after the strict Laws made, must be trusted with the Execution, etc. relent or
farewell welfare.

You may hence easily imagine how passionately that good Bishop would have been
concerned if he had then seen among the Patriots any unquenchable heats about
the not trusting the King with the Executive Power of Penal Laws, and Laws in
terrorem, and such Laws as Mr. Glanvil in the ' Month after the Date of the
Bishop's Letter, said in a full Committee of both Houses, That the Commons must
and ever will acknowledge that it is in His Majesty's ABSOLUTE and undoubted
Power to grant Dispensations in, as I told you.

In God's Name, often think of that great Patriotly saying of Tully so often
with just Applause cited by Sir E. Coke, Major haereditas venit unicuique
nostrum a jure and legibus quam a parentibus: and you may account him a
Profane Person who despises his Birthright given him by the Law. And pity
any one who speaking of his Property, does not know this to be the meaning of
it, namely that it is the highest Right he has or can have to any thing, and
which is no way depending upon another man's Court^e. And consider, that as you
have a Property in your Chattels and Hereditaments, so you have in your
Religion.

Think often with honor of our Ancestors, who by so many Acts of Parliament,
and lawful Canons and Constitutions since the Refo^mation, provided for the
securing your Property in your Religion; and remember how binding the very
declarative Laws about it are.

Cast your Eye with Pleasure about the Realm, and see if you can find any one
who fears that any one will ever move in Parliament for leave to bring in any
Bill to take away the least part of your Property in your Religion. But then
consider how Savage a thing it is in any to take excessive delight in the
Execution of Penal Laws. Ferus est qui fruitur paena: and remember too that
your Prince has a Property in the Executive part of the Law, and in
distributive Justice and in showing Mercy. And when you hear any one telling
you of a Snake in the grass of the Prince's dispensing with Penal Laws, and
that therefore there may be danger of your Prince's dispensing in Laws that are
leneficial; you may tell him of the notorious Non-sequitur, and that you have a
Property in not being punished, and in having the benefit of the Rule as to
favorable Statutes, being made more so by interpretation: Favores sunt
^mpliandi, and on the contrary as to Penal ones that odiosa restringi convenit.
And so to any such impertinent Objecter you may say that the voice or sound of
his Snake, and the Goose are all one.

But consider that since you have so much cause to depend on the glorious and
consummate justice inherent in the nature of our great Monarch for his
defending you in the security of all the Declaratory Acts of Parliament that
maintain your very Property in your Religion; both Justice and Common Ingenuity
call upon you to own his Power of Dispensing (and even with disability) for
which I have shown you so many clear and incontestable declarative Judgments of
Parliament, and shall direct you to more when we meet again.

And let me tell you that you ought to have the greater tenderness for this
Prerogative of our Prince; for that in his Administration of it, he has in
some Points shown a greater tenderness to his Laws and People then our Princes
since the Reformation have done. You may remember I showed you how Queen
Elizabeth and King James did by their Authority out of Parliament MAKE things
Penal by Disability that were not so by any Law in being, and therefore you may
the less wonder when you see your Prince dispensing with it, and thereby
preventing the Punishment of it, and sometimes and in some Cases pardoning it.


A. I shall carefully take notice of all these Matters wherein you have
cautioned me: but am here occasionally on the account of some things you said
about the Interpretation and the Acquittal from Penalties in the Queen's
Admonition being perpetuated by their being declared good in Parliament, to ask
you if you do not account that Dispensations or such Interpretations of the
Prince by his own single Authority, may be made to continue good in following
Reigns?


B. I do not in the least doubt but they may; and I shall hereafter evince the
thing to you: but shall at present out of a Manuscript Report I have of the
great Case of Thomas and Sorrel, tell you that by one of the great Council who
argued in it, it was asserted with great Learning, That the Nonobstante in that
Case remained good after the King's death. That tho Acts the King does in his
Natural Capacity determine by his death, as making of Judges, etc. ( for those
referr to his Natural Will) yet things done in his Royal Capacity as King, do
not determine by his death: as a License to alien in Mortm^in* in one King's
time serves in another; and the Reason is when the Subject is once exempt out
of the Restraint of the Act he is ever exempt, unless the Exemption be limited,
Coke 1. Inst. 52. 6. If the Lessor license his Lessee that is restrained, by
Condition not to Alien, tho the Lessor die, the license shall serve the Lessee
to alien, and is not determined by the Lessor's death. And in this Point he
cited Trin. 2. Jac. C. B. Rot. 2835. Wright versus Radcliffe, and Trin. 2. Jac.
Norris v. Mason. C. B. as Cases adjudged in this point.

And I shall then show you how the same thing was then by others asserted: but
you may now for this purpose remember how the instances I have given you of
Queen Elizabeth's Parliaments approving and declaring to be good, what she did
of this kind, and the instances of what others of our Princes did by their own
Authority and out of Parliament being valid, and being afterward approved in
Parliament, have supported the extent of the Regal Authority of this kind, as
to point of time.

But because according to the Rule of Unumquodque dissolvitur eo modo quo
colligatur, many Indulgences, and Injunctions and Dispensations being revocable
by Kings themselves and by their Successors, and because declaratory Acts of
Parliament cannot be repealed but by other Acts, common Prudence does suggest
it to all to endeavor the perpetuating to themselves by the Legislative Power
what they account beneficial. And if you will, you may use the term of having
it confirmed by that Power; that is, if you will allow it to have been firm
before, you may call it confirmed by the Prince, and the three Estates
afterward enacting it, and making its firmness perpetual. And this is the thing
I aimed at in what you might take for a Criticism when I said, that the 39
Articles owed no Confirmation nor Authority to the Act of the 13th of Eliz.


A. I know the reason of your cautious speaking here about a tender Point. You
accounting even every Declaratory Judgment of Parliament for our Religion to be
a Treasure, and having often said that you would allow some Roman Catholics to
mock on in calling our Religion a Parliamentary Religion, did (I judge) design
to do honor to our Religion as well as to our Prince's, in showing that it was
here orderly established by God's Vicegerents, before it was by the Deputies of
the People, or the Magnates Regni.


B. You guess right at my meaning in this way to salve Phenomenon. And if you
will look on a Book Printed in Oxford, A. 1645. entitled Parliaments Power in
Laws for Religion, or an Answer to that old and groundless Calumny of the
Papists nick-naming the Religion of the Church of England by the name of a
Parliamentary Religion, etc. you will find the Fact in this Point clearly
deduced through the course of our Laws and Constitutions in a long series
temporum from the Reign of Harry the 8th downward, and for the honor of our
Kings and of the Church and the Reformation; and the measures I have taken in
our discourse have been suitable to those of the judicious and learned Author
of that Book.


A. Well Sir: we have had a great deal of frank Discourse, and I will now take
the freedom to put one Question more to you. You have entertained me with the
several Interpretations of our Oath, and have showed me how the obligatoriness
of them all has been perpetuated: and you have likewise* salved the Phenomenon
in the Justice of the Government as to the Laws in terrorem. But you know the
Story of one who being Lord of a place did leave a Pit long open too near the
Highway, and who at Night erected Lights about it to prevent its being
mischievous: and he afterward, hearing that sometimes poor Blind men who were
Travelers fell into it and that at other times by various accidents the Lights
were not helpful to other Passengers, as being took away, or going out too
soon; and he therefore at last very fairly removed both his Nuisance and Lights
together. And now may it hot be wished that the Prince and the three Estates
would remove the Laws about our Oaths and the Interpretations too, and so
likewise all the Laws in terrorem, (among which I suppose you reckon the
Test-Acts) at which so many have taken offense?


B. You may easily guess that till we have both of us at another meeting
discoursed of the Obligation resulting from the Promissory part of the Oath, I
will not engage your thoughts in any matter of Controversy that may in the
least perplex them. But as soon as we have fully discoursed that, I shall
frankly give you my thoughts at large relating to the question about Repealing
of the Test-Acts in a Parliamentary manner: but do at present wholly forbear to
mention what I think thereof. And I have before told you my judgment of the
likelihood of the continuance of our great Oath as a great luminary that may
perhaps enlighten our English World in the measures of Loyalty to the end of
time; and as I have told you the Oath gives no offense to the Considerate, so
I will hope none will be taken at it.

But I must here tell you, that I have a greater veneration for the Oath,
because I look on the serious Consideration of the assertory part of it as
likely to be very Instrumental in allaying the ferment we have been speaking of.


A. God grant it may be so.


B. You remember what I hinted to you about the Clause whereby you testified
and declared that the King is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm as well
in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or Causes as Temporal, (and from
whence it followed by way of natural Consequence, that no foreign Prince, etc.
has any Jurisdiction within this Realm) being the Cornerstone on which the
great And therefore, I mean, your forsaking foreign Jurisdiction was built. And
I assure you that the same first Declaration does bind you to the like AND
THEREFORE to renounce the belief of any Power on Earth being able to dissolve
your King's right of Commanding your Obedience, and your Obligation to obey him.

And indeed if I had produced to you no Judgment of Parliament for the purpose
I have done but that which is contained in the assertory part of the Oath, (and
which is unanimously interpreted by Divines and Lawyers, as expressive of the
King's right jure naturae to Command the Obedience of all his Subjects) it
might have sufficiently satisfied you therein: and if at our next meeting you
will have me dilate more on what our Lawyers have said about the Point of the
debt of our Natural allegiance, I shall do it.


A. Our great Lawyers Judgments in that Point being known may be variously
useful, and directive to the many illiterate and presumptuous Reflecters on the
exercise of Prerogative; and especially if so learned and so popular a Lawyer
as Sir Edward Coke shall be by you further cited in such a Case. And so what
you shall acquaint me with as from any such one of them shall be kindly welcome.


B. What you have now said brings it into my mind how that Great popular Man
Sir Edward Coke was cited for this purpose by that great popular Man Sir
William Jones in his learned Argument in Thomas and Dorcel's Case, and where he
did so much right to the DISPENSATIVE Power.


A. What? Did Sir William Jones maintain the King's Power of Dispensing with
Acts of Parliament?


B. Yes, and ( I believe) was never censured for so doing by any one.


A. I pray tell me what was said by him in his Argument.


B. Then according to the very Learned and Judicious and Candid Manuscript
Report I have of the Case, thus it was, Among the three Points made, the first
being if the Non-obstante in the Patent of King James was good against the
Statute of Edw. 6. Jones agreed that the King may by Non-obstante dispense with
a thing Prohibited by Statute if the thing were lawful before the Statute were
made. And he afterward said, that a Dispensation to one and his Heirs was never
good but only in that of a Sheriff. 2. H. 7. 6. Grant of a Shrievalty in fee
Non-obstante the Statute. But Coke 7. R. 14. Calvin's Case; the Reason of that
is because the King has interest to have the Service of all his Subjects by
the Law of Nature.

And the truth is, that on this noble and great Consideration it is that our
Divines who have treated of the OATH of SUPREMACY have fixed the reasonableness
and intent of that Oath, and of the King's having a right to Command the
Obedience of all his Subjects, upon the basis of the Law of Nature, as well as
on the Divine Law Positive. And thus too the style of the Acts of Parliament
about the Oath of Allegiance runs, and which Acts you may Consult if you want
any more Judgments of Parliament about the indissolubility of the King's right
to Command the Obedience of the Subject, and of the Subjects duty to obey,
before we meet again. The reasonableness of the words in that Oath contained in
the Statute of 3tio. Iacobi, viz. Of declaring that the Pope has no Power to
discharge any of his Majesty's Subjects of their Obedience, appears from its
being called in that Statute their Natural Obedience. And the putting in
Practice the persuading or withdrawing any of the King's Subjects from their
Natural Obedience to his Majesty, or to reconcile them to the Pope or See of
Rome is there made Treason. We will speak more of other Statutes of this nature
at our next meeting.

And in the mean time let me observe to you how as in the Conjuncture of the
Exclusion so many were infatuated as for fear of Popery to come, to run upon
the very Court of Rome-Popery at present, namely that of Dominium fundatur in
Gratia, so likewise many men's fear of the belief of perhaps some Religionary
Tenets of Popery gaining ground for the future, has hunted them upon the
Popery of thinking that Subjects CAN in part, or in whole be discharged from
their Natural Obedience to their Prince.


A. I thank you Sir, for suggesting that to me: for the truth is the tenet of
thinking it lawful so to discharge Subjects from such their Natural Obedience,
is the very odiosa materia charged by so many on the Council of Lateran.


B. You say right. But however let me occasionally advise you not to charge the
odious matter in that Council on the Communion of the Church of Rome. For I
shall tell you that the great Writers of our Church did after the real Plot of
the Gun-Powder-Treason pursue such noble Methods of Christian Charity, as with
an intent of improving the Principles of Loyalty and Allegiance among all our
Roman Catholic Countrymen, to endeavor to prove with all their Learning that
the Decrees of that Council obliged no Papist in point of Conscience. King
James in his Works calls it but a Pretended Council, and Dr. Done in his
Pseudo-Martyr endeavors to prove it no Council.

Moreover Bishop Bilson in his learned Works for maintaining the Oath of
Supremacy, says that Nothing was Concluded in the Council of Lateran. I have
here on the Table his Book called, The Difference between Christian Subjection,
and Un-christian Rebellion, Printed A. 1586, in which his Learned and Judicious
Assertions and Explications of the Regal Supremacy, and of our Moral Offices to
defend the same are comprised: and there in Part 3. p. 6. you will find what he
says of the Lateran Council.


A. I have not the Book, and shall be glad I may borrow it from you, that
thereby I may have the better prospect of the Measures of our Divines in their
Sense of the Assertory part of the Oath of Supremacy, as making the Rights of
our Kings to Command the Services of all their Subjects, to be indissoluble.


B. I pray take it along with you. And I am the rather desirous you should do
it, because in this Crooked and Perverse Generation many who strain their
Consciences by the inobservance of the Oath, may be so vain as to fancy that
others strain the Oath who endeavor (as I have done) to build the Right of our
Kings to Command the Services of their Subjects, on its so firm Foundation. He
was trusted by the Government to write on the Subject of the Oath, and so his
Authority is of the more weight: and I shall here at parting read to you what
he says in Part 2. p. 183. where he so well insinuates it, that the Prince can
freely permit, safely defend, generally restrain, and externally punish within
the Realm: but in p. 328. having spoke of the true Supremacy of Princes, he
says, This is the Supremacy which we attribute to Princes, that all Men within
their Territories should obey their Laws, or abide their Pleasures, and that no
man on Earth has Authority to take their Swords from them by Judicial
Sentence, or Martial Violence. And he there had before said in his Margin, the
Sword of Princes is Supreme, in that it is not Subject to the Pope; and must be
obeyed of all in things that are good. What he says likewise in p. 346. there
is worth your reading, where he makes the word Supreme to be a plain and
manifest deduction out of the 13th of the Romans, Let every Soul be subject to
the Superior Powers. If all Men must be subject to them, ergo they are Superior
to all: and Superior to all is Supreme. He then thus goes on in his
Dialogue-way, Phil* S. Paul makes them Superiors over all Persons, but not
over all things. Theop. That Distinction is ours, (meaning Protestants) not
yours: we did ever interpret Supreme for Superior to all men within their
Dominions. Phil. And so we grant them to be but not in all things. For in
Temporal things they are Superior to all men, in Spiritual they are not. Theop.
That restraint comes too late: the Holy Ghost charging you to be subject to
them simply without addition. It passes your reach to limit in what things you
will, and in what things you will not be subject. And he there says, Out of
all Question where Princes may by God's Law Command, all men must obey them not
only for fear of wrath, but for Conscience sake. To this purpose too he asserts
the Supremacy in the following Page: All men are bound to be subject to the
Sword in all things, be they Temporal or Spiritual, not only by Suffering, but
also by Obeying: but with this Caution, that in things that are good and
agreeable to the Law of God, the Sword must be obeyed, in things that are
otherwise, it must be endured. At the same rate you will find him writing in
his Third Part, p. 7. The Word of God binds you to obey Princes, the words of
men cannot loose you. But if you will there take notice of the fire of his Zeal
breaking into a flame at the thoughts of the displacing of Princes from their
Thrones, and of the discharging of the People from the Oath and Obedience
toward Princes, he says that they who will go to that, turn Religion into
Rebellion, Patience into Violence, Words into Weapons, Preaching into Fighting,
Fidelity into Perjury, Subjection into Sedition, and instead of the Servants of
God, which they might be by enduring, they become the Soldiers of Satan by
resisting the Powers which God has ordained.


A. I thank God I am a Member of the Church of England that may value it self
not only on its Doctrine of NON-RESISTANCE, but on its DOCTRINE of Positive
ASSISTANCE and DEFENSE of all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Pre-eminences and
Authorities granted or belonging to the King, etc. or united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm.


B. And how from this great Promissory part of our Oath, our Obligation to
assist and defend the Jurisdiction, Privilege, Pre-eminence and Authority of
the Dispensative Power in particular, granted or belonging to the King, and
united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm does arise, we will at
our next meeting consider, and when I will likewise show you that the
Prerogative royal is a part of the Lex terrae.


The End of the Second PART.

