portrait of Sir John Pettus S. John Pettus of Suffolk Knt. 1641 One of the
Depty. Governors of the Mines Royal. 1651. Auratus Infletatus. 1679.
AEt. 70. 1683

R. White sculp.
Honestus at Pie.

AGRM.



FLETA MINOR.

THE LAWS OF ART and NATURE, IN Knowing, Judging, Assaying, Fining, Refining
and Enlarging the BODIES of confined METALS.

In Two Parts.

The First contains ASSAYS of Lazarus Erckern, Chief Prover (or Assay-Master
General of the Empire of Germany) in V. Books: originally written by him in the
Teutonick Language, and now translated into English.

The Second contains ESSAYS on Metallic Words, as a DICTIONARY to many
pleasing DISCOURSES.

By Sir John Pettus, of Suffolk, Knight. Of the Society for the MINES ROYAL.

Illustrated with 44 Sculptures.

Mal. 3. 3. Numb. 31. 31. Jehovah Chimista Supremus.

Carolus D. G. Secundus.

LONDON, Printed, for the Author, by Thomas Dawks, his Majesty's British
Printer, at the West End of Thames Street. 1683.

Collegium Emmanuelis Cantabrigiae



TO THE Kings most Excellent MAJESTY.
SIR,
THE Materials of this Book are derived from your Majesty's undoubted
Prerogative to the Mines (in your Dominions,) of which Metals are made; Of them
Moneys: And then honored with your Majesty's Superscription. And so by a
Christian Circulation, the Possessors do, or ought to render to Caesar the
things which are Caesar's.

Thus Your Majesty has a double Right to the Mines, and to the Products of the
Chimical Art, by which Metals are fitted for their Journey to Public Commerce.

Herein I humbly offer my Endeavors to assist their motions, and only to
refresh your Majesty's Memory, not to inform Your Knowledge: for (as it is hinted
in the Title Page) Your Majesty is (in the Science of Chimistry, as in all
Sciences of Humanity) Nulli Secundus.

These Perfections are evident in Your Majesty's public and private
Elaboratories, from which pure Justice, and pleasing Arts and Sciences are
communicated to Your Subjects.

In these I have observed Your Majesty's particular respects to Chimistry (of
an Universal Extent,) and thereupon I resolved to transplant this German Twig
of L. Erckern (on that Subject) into Your Majesty's Nursery; and Humbly
Dedicate it to Your Majesty, (with my Additionals) and also Humbly crave your
Acceptance, as an encouragement to my further Progress in serving Your Majesty
with more Fruits; but at present it is to show, That I am intent in promoting
the Services I owe Your Majesty, as well with my sedentary Passive Pen, as
before with my personal Active Duty, having (upon some significant occasions)
had the Honor to be known to Your Majesty near Forty Years.

Now, Great Sir, Wherein I am incapacitated to express my Duty, for want of
Ability of Mind or Body, or secular Fortunes; they shall be supplied by my
constant Prayers for Your Majesty's Health, Happiness, and Serenity in Your
Government, being

Feb. 26. 82/3 Your Majesty's most Obedient and Humble Subject, JOHN PETTVS.

To the Right Honorable, George Marquess, Earl, Viscount Hallifax, and Baron
of Eland, Lord Privy Seal, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council; and Governor of the Society of the Mines Royal, and Battery Works.
My Lord,
YOur Lordships free acceptance of the Government of the Mines Royal, has
encouraged me to add it to your Titles, and I hope without the least
disparagement to your other Honors, deservedly conferred upon your Lordship by
His Majesty.

It is a Trust of great Concern (and I doubt not but it will be so managed by
your Lordship) and of Honor too, (as it has been always esteemed) for (not to
trouble your Lordship with very Ancient Records,) I find that King Edward the
Fourth did make Richard Earl of Warwick (who soon after was made one of the
Governors of this Kingdom, during its Troubles) and John Earl of
Northumberland, his Guardians and Governors jointly of all his Mines in
England; and King Henry the Seventh made Jasper Duke of Bedford, and other
Earls and Lords, his Guardians also of all the Mines in England (adding Wales.)
And Queen Elisabeth, in the 10th. of her Reign, did form the Government thereof
into Societies, by the Names of Governors, Deputy-Governors, and Assistants for
the Mines Royal and Battery-Works, and then made Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord
Keeper, and other eminent persons, her Governors for England and Wales, (adding
those within the English Pale in Ireland,) which Government did continue
Successively to the Earl of Pembrook, and others for some Years: and after, his
late Highness Prince Rupert was made a Governor; and your Lordship to our
contentment, does succeed him.

Now, my Lord, As for my self, I have been one of the Deputy Governors for
above 30 Years, and do think my self obliged in point of Gratitude to the late
Governors, and present Members (who were pleased unanimously to order a
Contribution to the Charge of this Book, and for some former Favors,) to
endeavor the advancing of their Concerns (especially now we have the Honor to
be under your Lordships Regiment,) and therefore as an Introduction to my real
Intents, I not only publish this, but by some Additionals, I shall study to
make the Government more advantageous to the Society, and much more to His
Majesty; and even to other Proprietors of Mines, wherein I have sat still some
Years, because I found that I should be obstructed by some who studied the
advance of themselves more than His Majestics Revenues, which I do not aim to
do by any Oppressing Method, or projecting Humor (for I hate it) but by an
honest just way, and I hope not displeasing to any, but such as nothing will
please.

And these I shall in due time communicate to your Lordship, being so confident
of your Lordships great Abilities, (joined with your perfect Loyalty to your
King, and Love to your Country) that your Lordship will not approve of any
thing that I shall offer, if it agrees not with your Lordships sound Judgment
and deep Wisdom, for which all who knows your Lordship have an high value, and
particularly

Your Lordships most humble and obliged Servant, JOHN PETTUS.

To the Noble and Honored Subscribers and Contributers to this BOOK.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Did design to have published your Names in a way that should have more fully
manifested your Favors, and my Acknowledgments; but this Book extending to
above 50 sheets more than I designed, or at first proposed, took up my limited
time, so as I must respit that intention, for I have not done with this
Subject; intending not to trouble you or my self with Subscriptions, but such
as have Subscribed to this, shall have notice when the next is ready* and if
they approve of this so well as to take the next from me, it will be an
additional Obligation to me, for I am prepared to go through the Body of this
ART, upon these Reasons* First, That it contains the Grounds and Maxims of most
admirable Speculations; and next, That I may divulge their chifest and most
curious Experiments and Practicks: Now, that which incited me to this, was
occasioned from hence, That having caused Erckern's Books to be Translated
about Ten years since; some eminent persons did persuade me (like the Story in
Bocalino,) not to publish it, lest the Common sort of People should make an ill
use of its impartments, alleging, That it was not well Translated: whereupon I
betook my self to the German Language, and in a short time I was so much Master
of it, That with the help of a German here, I did indeed find many Errors, and
Corrected them, which answers one Objection; and I have Printed such a
convenient Number as may answer the other; And yet I am not altogether
satisfied therein; for, what has made Arts and Sciences flourish more in the
time of King Charles the First, and now in His Majesty's Reign, than their
Majesty's encouragements to the free communication of such things as had many
Ages before lain secret? so that we hope that all Pancerollus his lost things
may in a short time be found again.

We punish our selves by fixing and disputing on the Theorems of ancient
Writers, and thereby making things to be Diabolical, which are only Divine
Favors shown us by Natural Agents, so as for want of knowing the true
Practicks and Experiments, they are divulged either by umbraging
Sophistications, or concealed under the Name of Philosophical Secrets, which,
no doubt, but GOD intends for a public and common Good: and this ill Fortune
befell the Vnguentum Armarium, as a piece of Witchcraft, 'till our Eyes were
enlightened; and in many other things (which were they clearly communicated)
such Superstructures would be raised from them, as might arive us to a kind of
Angelical Knowledge in this World, and make us more apprehensive of our
Happiness in the next: and therefore it shall be my study to unfold the
Metaphysical Notions of this SCIENCE: by Practicks especially about the
Philosophers Stone, which Study I value only for its fine Pursuits and Products
of Experiments, but more, because the Laborers for it are, by their own
Affirmations, obliged to a strict and religious Life:

I shall trouble you no further at this time, but with my humble and hearty
Thanks: and so subscribe my self

My Lords and Gentlemen Your most humble Servant JOHN PETTUS.

To my Worthy Friend, Richard Manlove, Esquire Warden of the Fleet.
SIR,
I Am here, a confined Person, for my being too kind to others, and too unjust
to my self* and for not doing what was not in my Power to perform, by wanting
the Justice of my Debtors, whereby I am rather a Prisoner to them than to my
Creditors.

Yet I can dispense with all these, because they have occasioned my happiness,
in your Acquaintance, and my contenting Retirement in this place, which was
once a Palace, after, a Staple of Comerce, and long since and still, a
Repository of our Laws: And now, like Homers Iliads in a Nut-shell, here are
all sorts of Degrees, from Prince to Peasant, all sorts of Professions, from
the Doctor to the Novice; all sorts of Trades and Manufactures, and all sorts
of Virtues; but your Prudence does still suppress the Vices.

And I ingeniously confess, that by yours, and your Ladies constant Kindness
and Indulgence to my declining years, I have made it a College of Learning,
and so may other Gentlemen do (if they please) it being so qualified, that in
an hours time there is no Art or Science wherein one may not be punctually
instructed.

Now, Those that think themselves Prisoners to you are much mistaken, for they
are Prisoners to the LAWS, and may make themselves Students of All Souls in Le
Fleet, of which you are Warden.

A Guardian-ship very needful for the People, as a Completion of JUSTICE, in
point of Restraints: For, (besides many other wise Considerations) they are
good for Cooling the Animosities between Creditors and Debtors, and between the
LAWS and Contemners of them, (and thereby prevents the Effusion of Blood, which
has often happened) and for Curing the sullen and contemptuous Disposition of
others to their Superiors.

For, I can truly say, That, by my patient Submission to them and my
Misfortunes (being prepared with my 14 months Imprisonment in Windsor Castle,
under the late usurped Power) I do now with more Satisfaction to my self,
undergo this under a Legal Power, and thereby I affirm, That no Gentleman has
received greater Respects from you than my self, and therefore I take this
Occasion to make my public Acknowledgments, that it may be a Guide to other
men's Contentments, for, as I have observed, That as you never were out-
Hectored by Affronts or Resistances, so you were never outdone by Civilities
or Compliableness to your Methods.

As to the first* I never gave Occasion, and as to the other, my studious
temper complying with your Love to Learning have so won on your good
Disposition, that I must acknowledge to my honored Subscribers, and others, that
had it not been for your Encouragement and particular Assistance with your
purse; (though with some Inconveniences to your own Occasions) I could not
have finished this Book, as now I have done, and therefore as one Memorial of
your kindness, I have given it the name of FLETA, and in my Picture minted the
word insletatus from this Place.

I could with delight to my self and others, spend more time on this Subject;
but I must end with this request, That as you have given House-room here to the
whole Impression of my Books, so you will please (in respect my person is
restrained in Execution of the Laws,) to encourage it in its Travels abroad;
and so not doubting of your Favor, I shall conclude with Ovid (then, in my
present Condition, but I will not punish my self with his Tristibus's,) Parve
nec invideo sine me Liber ibis in Aulam Vrbem


Which I have thus Englisht, Go little Book, leave me, but make report,
Who treats thee best, the City or the Court.


However you shall have the continuing thanks of

Your Obliged Friend and Servant* JOHN PETTUS.

To the Courteous READER.
I Think fit before you read this Book, to instruct you in the Method of it, so
as you may read the whole, or part, as your leisure serves.

1. It is divided into two parts (as the Title mentions,) viz. Erckern's V.
Books, and my Dictionary.

2. Whereas the Original of Erckern's 5 Books had no Numeral distinction of
Chapters and Sections, I have divided them into Chapters and Sections, and
Printed them before the Five Books, with numeral referrences to their chapters
where they are contained.

3. Whereas the Sculptures had only Literal, and no Numeral Directions of their
Contents, I have in the second part of the Contents before the Five Books,
Printed the Contents of the Sculptures, with references to the Pages where they
may be seen and read.

4. Whereas the Original of Erckern's 5 Books has no Coma's, Colons, Periods,
Parenthesis, or Interrogatory Points, pertinent to the distinction of Words or
Sentences (which are also wanting in many German Books) I have complied them to
our way of Orthography, (which was no little trouble,) and therefore if the
Reader find some few Omissions, they may upon that account be the more kindly
dispens't with.

5. I do retain many ancient and Saxon Words, upon the account of their
affinity to the like Words which are still used among us, and these are hinted
in the Dictionary.

6. In the Dictionary or second part, the first Words which I thought fit to
explain, are in Capital Letters, and next, the Teutonick and Latin Words for
those Capitals; (and other Languages, as occasion requires,) and these I
collected from G. Agricola, Alstidius, Cowel, Minshaw, and Skinners Dictionarys
for the Teutonick, from Cooper and Holiock for the Latin; from Florio for the
Italian, from Cotgrave for the French; and from Waltons Lexicon for the
Oriental Tongues, which, with a German was all the help I had for the use of
above 600 Words; but the two chief Languages, of which I make the greatest use,
are the Teutonick and Latin, this from the old Romans, (who continued among us
above 500 years) the other from the Saxons (who were mixed with us as long,)
from both of which Nations we gained a particular knowledge of Mines and Metals,
as may be evident from many Roman and Saxon Works* which remain here under
their Names to this day; and many of our Monarchs, particularly Queen Elizabeth
did think fit to desire the assisting SKILL of the Germans, to improve OURS; to
prevent which trouble, I here publish part of their Art, and intend more.

Lastly, I have given it the Title of FLETA, which is borrowed from an eminent
Lawyer, who whilst he was Prisoner in the FLEET, writ his Learned Book of the
Common Laws of England, and thereupon (as it is said,) he called his Book FLETA
(Cowel) to which I add MINOR, in submission to his great Learning, and for its
affinity to the word MINER, viz. one who Labors in the Mines, as I do in
Learning the Metallic Art.

To conclude, I have writ some things from Authentic Authors (too many to
recite here,) and some from my own Conceptions and Observations; now as they
pleased me in writing, so I hope they will not displease others in reading.

JOHN PETTUS.

THE PREFACE OF Lazarus Erckern, To his five following BOOKS.
Of the Art of Assaying.
TO learn and understand the way of Assaying, Proving and Refining of Metalls,
is an Excellent, Noble Science, and an Ancient and profitable Art, long since
found out by the Art of Alchimy and Chimistry, as also all other Works of the
Fire, by which not only the nature of Oars and Mines, and what Metalls
contained in them are known; but also how much there is in a Centner, or in
greater or lesser Weights, and not only so, but this Art also teaches how to
Examine each Metal by it self, as whether there be any Adulterated or mixed
Metal with it; what, and how much the same is, and then which way those Metals
may be separated from such mixtures or adulterations, as also by several ways
to cleanse and separate other incorporated Metals, so that they may be judged
to be fine, clean and free from mixtures, therefore this Art is very profitable
to Minerists and such as work in Mines and intend to have benefit by them, and
such Artists must endeavor by all means to learn and exercise themselves in
the same, that they may thereby reap a Profit to themselves and others, and
preserve themselves from Inconveniences and Dangers by their want of knowledge
therein.

By this Art of Refining and the Profit that acrews by it, many good and rich
Mines have been discovered, which otherwise would have lain concealed: and by
the Advantage of these Discoveries many Cities and Villages have been built,
Lands have been improved in their Values, and People thereby increased and
plentifully maintained: As also great and mighty Trades and dealings with Gold,
Silver, Copper and other Metals here, and in other Countries exercised, and the
Coiners of Coin and Minting Works have been multiplied by their Guardians and
Masters; for from Gold and Silver, Money is made and much improved, so that the
true Insight, Trial and Examination of this Art, cannot be in any wise omitted
or neglected, as that which is highly necessary to be known.

Rewarded by Princes.
And such Artists as have exercised themselves in the Knowledge of Assaying,
and fundamentally and diligently practiced the same, are by Princes, Lords and
Communities thought worthy not only of great Thanks, but been also promoted and
recompensed by them.

Mother of ARTS.
For this ART of Assaying is the very Inlet and Mother of many other honorable
and profitable Sciences as Experience teaches us, and the more a man finds out,
the more he is stirred up to the contemplating and doing things of an higher
Nature.

To know Metals necessary.
So that the Knowledge of Metallic Oars and Minerals are first to be inquired
into, namely, How each one according to their Nature, Figure, Form and Color
are distinguishable from each other: Which without great diligence and daily
Practice cannot be known, because God the Almighty Creator, in the beginning of
the Creation of the World, has placed Metals and Minerals in the Mountains,
Valleys and Veins of the Earth, and causes them to grow there: He has also
given to all and each of them an outward Form and Color by which the one from
the other may be distinctly known.

How to use Fire in Metals.
Secondly, The Knowledge of the Fire is a principal part of this Science, and
very necessary to be inquired into, that he may the better know how to govern
the same, so that he may give no Metal more Fire than its due, but to every one
its proportion of Heat and Cold, as necessity requires to add or take from it,
in its Operation.

To make Instruments.
After the Knowledge of Governing the Fire, the Artists must have the Knowledge
also of making all the Instruments and Furnaces for this, either by his own
handy Furnaces.
work, skillfully to prepare them, or at least to direct that they may be well
made, whereby he may not be hindered in his working, but by his own diligence
accomplish them.

Weights and Scales.
In like manner he must be careful in procuring good and just Scales and
Weights, and to know also how to make them (in case such Artificers should be
wanting) and fit them to all Metals, and he must have great Care in preserving
them from Dust, and that they be always pure and clean so that (as occasion
serves) he may rely on the certainty of Proofs by them.

To be skilled in Arithmetic.
Next to the former Directions he must be well skilled experienced and
exercised in the Art of Arithmetic, for the numbering and casting up Accounts
(which to Assaying Coins and Refining Works are very necessary, and is one of
the Master*pieces in this Metallic ART) And every Assayer must not only
diligently learn this numeral Science (necessary to be known for the Proving of
Metals or what belongs thereto) but also all such Arts and Sciences as may
accomplish his full Designs therein.

Now, though it would not have been unserviceable to have writ of all such
things more largely in this Preface and Entrance to what follows, as also of
the Rise and Springs of metallic Oars, and how they grow in the Mountains,
Veins and Channels of the Earth, and how generated (of which the old and later
Philosophers have had many different Opinions) as also of the Streams, Channels
and their Entervals (and other Accidents which do discover and produce Oars,
whereby the Miners do guide themselves in their Proceedings and Works.) Yet
because it would have been too long and endless to recite the Opinions of
Philosophers, and the various Operations of Miners (in respect they do not
agree in all things, and miss very much of their Aims, and have written many
Books to little purpose) therefore, for brevity sake, I have omitted them, and
proposed only my own Practice, for the better advancing this Metallic ART.

The first PART, Consisting of V. BOOKS.
The CONTENTS of the Chapters and Sections of the first BOOK.
CHAP. I. of Silver Oars. Sction 1. The I. SCULPTURE Deciphered. 2. The II.
SCULPTURE Deciphered. 3. The purpose of this first Book. 4. Why Silver in the
first place. CHAP. II. How Silver Oars are distinctly known. SEction 1. Of the
difference in Assaying Oars, and of the several sorts of Silver Oars, as
follows. 2. Of Glassy Oars. 3. Of white Goldish Oars. 4. Of Horny Oars. 5. Of
Red Goldish Oars. 6. Of Black Oars. 7. Of Ironish Oars. 8. Of Leadish Oars. 9.
Of Glittering or Bismutick Oars 10. Of Float Oars. 11. Of Azure or
Mountain-Green Oars. 12. Of Flinty Oars many sorts. 13. Of Blanch, Cobolt,
mispeckle or speckle Oars. 14. Of Glimmer, Wolferan, Talk, Cat-Silver and
sparkling Oars. 15. Of Spelter or Spizy Oars. 16. Of Spady Oars. 17. Of Slacks
and Copper-Stone Oars. 18. Of the ways of Assaying them. CHAP. III. How the
Assay-Ovens to prove Silver and other Metals are to be prepared and made.
SEction 1. Of special Ovens, adorning them not profitable. 2. The Assay-Ovens
variously used to make good Loam. 3. An Assay Oven made by Norimbergers. 4. An
Assay Oven made of Tiles. 5. An Assay Oven in which the fire is best governed.
6. Assay Ovens of Armor Plates. 7. The III. SCUPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. IV. How
Muffles, Bottom Plates, Tests, and other small Potters Works are to be made for
Assays. SEction 1. The Assayers are to be skilled in making them. 2. Of making
the Loam for them. 3. The Frame for Assay Tests. 4. To make Muffles. 5. How the
bottoms of them are to be framed. 6. Of drying and Calcining the Loam. 7. The
IV. SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. V. Of Copels, how they may be made firm and
good. SEction 1. Of good Clay and Clar. 2. What Ashes to be used and how washed.
3. Of Vine-Wood and common Ashes. 4. Of Bone Ashes, which best. 5. Of
Instruments for the Clar. 6. Of glue Water for Copels. CHAP. VI. How good
Copels may be made, wherein the Trials will not leap or sparkle. SEction 1.
Bones for Copels, of Calves and Sheep. 2. Bones of Fishes the best. CHAP. VII.
How good Clar is to be made for Copels. SEction 1. Clar of Calves-head Bones 2.
Clar of Hartshorn. 3. Clar of Fish Bones. 4. How to be kept for Use. 5. The V.
SCULPTURE Deciphered. 6. The VI. SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. VIII. How Lead
Glass is to be made. SEction 1. To what Oars Lead Glass is to be used. 2. To
prepare the Fluss or Lead Glass. 3. Another way to prepare it. 4. Another way
to make it. 5. To cleanse the Lead Glass. CHAP. IX. Of the Weights that belong
to the proving of Silver. SEction 1. Of the Centner Weight. 2. Of dividing the
Centner Weight into Drams, Loths, Ounces and Pounds. 3. Of the Penny-Weights.
4. Of dividing the Penny-weights into Hellers, Pence, Drams, Loths and Marks.
5. Of dividing the Dutch Penny-Weights, into Grains, Pence and Marks. 6. Of
dividing the Grain-Weights into Loths, Ounces and Marks. CHAP. X. How all
Silver Oars are to be Tried and Assayed. SEction 1. Of Assaying soft Oars. 2.
Of Assaying hard Oars. 3. Of quick boiling Silver Oars. 4 A way to Assay Raw
Oars. 5. To help raw Oars. 6. Of Assaying Coppery Flacky Oars. 7. Of cleansing
gross sulphurous flinty Oars after boiling. 8. To Assay Cobolt Oars. 9. Of
Roasting Oars in the Ovens. 10. How the full worth of proofs may be sound. 11.
To Assay with Lead Glass. 12. How many Oars may be Tried in one Oven. 13. To
Assay Oar to a Dram. 14. How to weigh the tried Grain. 15. To boil Rich Oars
with Fluss or Lead Glass. CHAP. XI. How poor Oars of Silver are to be Assayed.
CHAP. XII. To Assay Muddy Water coming from Springs of Silver. CHAP. XIII. How
a true Lead-Grain is to be drawn from the Assay. SEction 1. Care in the
Assaying. 2. The poorest Lead not without Silver. 3. Of Copper to be added to
the Lead Grain. 4. Another way to make a Lead Grain. CHAP. XIV. How Slack-Stone
and Copper-Stone are to be Tried for Silver. SEction 1. What Slack-stone is. 2.
How to separate it from Sulphur, etc. 3. How the Cakes of the Slacks are to be
used. CHAP. XV. To Assay Hard Work and Copper-Laech for Silver. CHAP. XVI. To
Assay melted Speize. SEction 1. What Speize is. 2. The difference between Spize
and Slackstone* 3. To take the Silver out of the Spelter. CHAP. XVII. How black
Copper is to be melted and cast into Ingots. SEction 1. The difference of black
Coppers. 2. How to be cut in pieces or Ingots. 3. How to cast these Ingots. 4.
Differences in Proof Ingots. 5. The Assaying an Ingot. 6. To govern the fire
for it. 7. Of the Grains produced from the Assay. 8. Another way to try Copper
for Silver. 9. Care of Instruments. 10. The proving of black and raw Copper.
11. The Weight of the Copels. CHAP. XVIII. To Assay Bell-Metal for Silver.
CHAP. XIX. How old Silver-Plate or Coyns are to be Granulated. SEction 1. The
graining of Silver profitable 2. Why Crucibles break often in this Work. 3. To
make Grains round, or hollow, and thin. 4. How to govern the Fire in this work
of Granulation. CHAP. XX. How to Granulate Silver out of a Kiln. SEction 1. The
manner of performing it, 2. A quick way of Granulation. 3. What to do if the
Crucible break. 4. The VII. SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. XXI. How the Granulated
Silver is to be Assayed for fine Silver. SEction 1. Of the different Contents
of grained Silver. 2. The different quantitys of Lead to be used. 3. Of the
Assay Grains. 4. Of the rich Assayed Grains. 5. When the Proof has too little
Lead. 6. When the Proof goes too hot. 7. To Assay Grains with fine Silver.
CHAP. XXII. How Coined Money of great or small sorts may be Assayed. SEction 1.
To Assay Dollars and Rix Guilders. 2. To Assay with covered Ovens. 3. To Assay
double Stivers. 4. The quantity of Lead to be used for them. 5. To Assay Pence.
6. To find the Proof of small Money. 7. To Assay Silver by the Centner Weight.
8. To Assay the Contents in Grains. CHAP. XXIII. How burnt Silver pieces and
Plates are to be cut out for Assays. SEction 1. Of burnt Silver. 2. Of Plates.
3. Of blink Silver or Silver not clean. CHAP XXIV. How Touch-Needles or
Proof-Needles for Silver are to be made. SEction 1. Generally used by Refiners.
2. How to make them. 3. How to forge them. 4. Needles of the half Loath. 5. The
VIII. SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. XXV. How Metalls that are melted must be cut
out and Assayed for Silver. SEction 1. Of clean Work. 2. Of unclean Work. 3.
Some customs of Assayers about these Works. 4. Of the addition of Lead to
them. 5. Harth-Works for Trials. CHAP. XXVI. How Tin is to be Assayed for
Silver. SEction 1. Of the Trial of it. 2. Of the Lead-Grain to this Trial. 3.
Another way to prove Tin. CHAP. XXVII. How to separate Iron and Steel from
Silver. SEction. 1. Of Iron rich in Silver. 2. To Assay it with Brimstone. 3.
To Assay it with Antimony. 4. To Assay it with gross Flints. 5. To separate
them. 6. Of Coppery Iron, holding Silver to be made profitable. 7. Of Iron
Stone containing Silver. CHAP. XXVIII. How blinck or unclean Silver is to be
burnt clean, and how Tests for it are to be made. SEction 1. Of Deft or neat
Silver. 2. To prepare the Tests. 3. The manner of Trying them. 4. The best
VVood for burning Silver. 5. The Contents of burnt Silver. 6. How to cool the
Silver. 7. Of Silver not burnt too high. 8. Of Coppery blink Silver. 9. How to
know when well burnt. 10. The IX. SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. XXIX. How to burn
Silver under the Muffle. SEction 1. Of Tests with Iron Rings. 2. Of Muffles for
the burning. 3. A clean way of burning Silver. 4. What to do with it after
burning. 5. To keep the Tests. 6. The X. SCULPTURE Decipheted. CHAP. XXX. How
Copper is to be Assayed for fine Silver. SEction 1. How much Lead is to be
added. 2. To take the smoke of Lead from Silver. CHAP. XXXI. To separate Silver
from Tin. SEction 1. The making a Test for it. 2. To make Tin thus separated
profitable. 3. To precipitate the Silver from Tin. CHAP. XXXII. How to drive
all sorts of Silver that they be deft smooth and fine. SEction 1. The Use of
Lead for the same. 2. Brittle hard Silver made deft. 3. A Fluss for Brittle
Silver. CHAP. XXXIII. How to boil Copper from the pagment or old Silver in
Coin'd-Money, or from thin beaten Plates of Silver. CAAP. XXXIV. How good
Proof-Ballances are to be made. SEction 1. An Assayer able to make Balances.
2. How to help their defects. 3. Of the Scales. 4. Of the VVaretzs and Tongue of
the Balance. 5. The Fork of the Balance. 6. How to prove the Balance. 7. Of
Gold-Solder to be used. 8. To make the Balance look blew. 10. The XI.
SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. XXXV. Of Filing and joining the Proof-Scales or
Balances. SEction 1. To fit Scales. 2. The weight of the Balance and of the
Scales. 3. The strings and knots. 4. The motion. 5. To make all parts move or
stand true it Equilibrio. 6. Cases with oyld Paper to preserve them in. 7. The
XII. SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. XXXVI. How the Proof-VVeights are to be made
and divided into Grains, Pence and Carrat-VVeights. SEction 1. To be made of
Silver or Brass. 2. Weights of a Mark. 3. Proof weights. 4. A referrence to
the ninth Chapter of this Book. CHAP XXXVII. Of dividing the Centner Weight.
SEction 1. Of Carrats. 2. By unequal parts. 3. Whether the Proof Weights be
true. 4. To number the Weights. 5. The XIII. SCULPTURE Deciphered. 5. The
Authors Apology.
The CONTENTS of the Chapters and Sections in the second BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of Gold Oars and Gold Slicks. SEction 1. The purpose of the second
Book. 2. Of the knowledge of Gold Oars. 3. Gold is intermixed with other Metals.
4. Gold in Horny Oar. 5. Gold in VVolferan, Tin and Iron Oar. 6. Rivers have
Gold in them. 7. Of the River Nile having Gold. 8. Grains of Gold found in
Germany. 9. Iron-Man Oar has Gold in it. 10. Gold in Flints. 11. Gold in the
Marchasite. CHAP. II. What Proofs and Washings are used by the Gold VVashers.
SEction 1. How much may be washed in a day. 2. Of Cricers, Gilders or Penny
weight of Gold. 3. Of Gold Grains. 4. To prepare boards for washing it. 5. An
especial Wash-work. 6. the proportion of a Ratar or Sieve to cleanse the Stuff.
7. The XIV. SCULPTURE Deciphered. 8. Of seircing the Gold Oars. 9. The sorts of
Cloth that are to be used for scircing. 10. How to use the long Ratars. 11. The
XV. SCULPTURE Deciphered. 12. To purify the Gold Slicks. 13. Of great grained
Gold. 14. How mingled with dig'd Gold. 15. Of Flinty or Horny Oars, how to be
used. 16. A Roasting Oven for it. 17. How to use the Roasting Oven, and to
quench it. 18. The XVI. SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. III. Of Gold Slicks.
SEction 1. Of poor Gold slicks. 2. Of rich slicks called Gold ram. 3. To bring
both to profit. CHAP. IV. How Gold slicks with dig'd Gold is to be prepared and
quickened. SEction 1. To get Gold out of the slicks, by Quicksilver and Vinegar.
2. Of pressing the Quicksilver through a Leather. 3. When the Gold has
Silver in it, what to do. 4. Of melting the dig'd Gold. 5. The manner of
quickening Gold by Gold-VVashers. CHAP. V. How clean Gold slicks are to be made
to profit without Quicksilver. SEction 1. By Littarge, Lead-Glass, etc. 2. To
make firm Tests for it. 3. How to boil it up. CHAP. VI. To make Fluss for
boiling up of Oars. CHAP. VII. How Gold may be separated very clean from
Quicksilver. SEction 1. Of the use of Quicksilver in the work. 2. How an Iron
Jugor Pot is to be made and covered with Loam. 3. To refresh Quicksilver. 4.
An Earthen Jug for the use. 5. Of the use of a Limbeck herein. 6. To avoid the
poisonous smoke of it. 7. The XVII. SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. VIII. How Gold
Oars are to be proved. SEction 1. Of mild flowing Gold Oars. 2. Of Flinty Gold
Oars. 3. Another way of proving them. 4. A Proof of fine Gold, with advice to
the Assayers. CHAP. IX. How Gold in Lumps, Plates, Ingots, or Coined Gold is to
be Assayed, how to be touched, and by Touch-Needles for Gold. SEction 1. Shows
the deceipts in Touch-Needles. 2. How to use both the Gold and Silver
Touch-Needles called white and red. CHAP. X. Of white Touch-Needles, how to be
made. CHAP. XI. How Touch-Needles are to be made and used for Crown Gold and
Coined Gold. CHAP. XII. How to divide the Touch-Needles, when the Metals are
half white, half red, or half Silver and half copper with Gold. CHAP. XIII. How
Touch-Needles are to be made for Rhenish Gold, in which there is two parts
white and one red. SEction 1. The Division of the Metals for Touch-Needles. 2.
Needles, of Copper for Gold. 3. The Divisions cast together. 4. The Needles to
be beaten into Lengths. 5. The common Goldsmiths Touch-Needles. 6. The XVIII.
SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. XIV. How Touch-Needles are to be used. SEction 1.
Of Touchstone. 2. Concerning the touch of hard and brittle Gold. CHAP. XV. How
Gold is to be Assayed by Aqua Fortis. SEction 1. To cut pieces for trial. 2. Of
the Carrat-Weight, Grains or Marks. 3. The Assay Proof. 5. To make the Carrat.
5. The trial of it. 6. How to beat the Rolls. 7. How to dissolve them. 8. To
dulcify them. 9. To Neal them. 10. Proving Coined Gold. 11. To make the true
Carrat. 12. Another way to find out the red and white in Gold. CHAP. XVI. How
to prove Aqua Fortis, and how much it does leave in the Gold proof. SEction 1.
Manner of trying it. 2, Another way. 3. The remainder. 4. Some Rules for it. 5.
Of Glasses and Instruments for separating it. 6. An Instrument for the Glasses.
CHAP. XVII. How Silver is to be proved for Gold. SEction 1. The first trial. 2.
To Dulcify it. 3. To glow it. 4. A second trial. 5. A third trial. 6.
Differences of proofs. 7. A singular way dissolving it. CHAP. XVIII. How to
prove Goldish Silver by Water-weight. SEction 1. The first Experiment. 2. The
second Experiment. 3. Known by Arithmetic. CHAP. XIX. To find without such
proof, whether Silver contains Gold. SEction 1. The first way. 2. The second
way. 3. The XIX. SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. XX. How to separate Gold and
Silver, and how to burn and distill Aqua Fort. and to prepare Instruments and
Clay for the Work. SEction 1. Of the Clay for Ovens. 2. Of Luting the parts of
the Oven. 3. An other Clay for Bottles. 4. Of Venetian Glass. 5. To prepare
Jugs and Retorts. 6. Of Iron Jugs or Pots. 7. Of Luting those Jugs. 8. To get
the Caput. Mort. out of those Jugs or Pots. 9. The XX. SCULPTURE Deciphered.
CHAP. XXI. How to make Ovens for distilling Aqua Fort. SEction 1. Ovens of
several sorts. 2. Of the Athanor or great Furnace. 3. Earthen Pots better than
Iron. 4. Covers for them. 5. The XXI. SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. XXII. Of the
Species or Compositions used for distilling and making Aqua Fort. SEction 1. Of
Calcining Vitriol for it. 2. Of Nitre or Saltpeter. CHAP. XXIII. How Aqua
Fort. is to be distilled. SEction 1. In a Glass Bottle. 2. Copels for it. 3.
Another way. 4. Water in the Receiver. 5. A trial of Vitriol. CHAP. XXIV. How
Aqua Fort. is to be distilled in an Iron Jug. SEction 1. Jugs cast or Hammered.
2. How to place them in the Athanor. 3. Of governing the Athanor. 4. Of
disposing the grosser Spirits. 5. To order the fire when too hot. 6. The drops
to be counted. 7. To force the Spirits. 8. When the Glasses, Limbecks and
Receiver are to be taken away. CHAP. XXV. How to Distill Aqua Fortis in 4 or 5
hours. CHAP. XXVI. Another good way to distill Aqua Fort. SEction 1. With
uncalcined Vitriol. 2. Such Vitriol as is boiled out of Flints. 3. Another way.
CHAP. XXVII. How to make an excellent strong Aqua Fort. SEction 1. Of the
Ingredients. 2. More Gold produced by this way than any other. 3. A luting on
which the Spirits do not operate. CHAP. XXVIII. How to distill Aqua Fortis
(called Aqua Regis, which dissolveth Gold, Copper, Iron, Lead and Tin) also
Mercury Sublimate and Arsnick. SEction 1. Ingredients. 2. How to distill it by
degrees. 3. The XXII. SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. XXIX. To Distill Aqua Fort. in
Retorts, with the Advantages by it. SEction 1. No new Invention. 2. The use of
Calx Viva. 3. For want of a Receiver, what is to be done. 4. Earthen Receivers.
5. To fit the Glasses to the Helm. 6. The placing By-Ovens to the Athanor. 7. A
long Oven and the use of it. 8. Strong and weak Aqua Fort. 9. The XXIII.
SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. XXX. How Aqua Fort. is to be separated and cleansed
from its Feces. SEction. 1. The manner of doing it. 2. The Feces useful. CHAP.
XXXI. How weak Aqua Fort. is to be made stronger. SEction 1. The preparation.
2. Second Proceeding. 3. To draw off the Phlegm. CHAP. XXXII. How Gold and
Silver in Aqua Fort. is to be separated. SEction 1. The preparation. 2. The
second proceeding. 3. To Dulcify the Gold Calx. 4. To glow out the Gold Calx.
5. To Cast the Gold. 6. What to do if much is to be cast. 7. To separate the
Silver for granulating. 8. Aqua Fort. for the granulated Silver. 9. When a
glass breaks what to do. 10. To Dulcify the Silver. 11. The Contents of the
parted Gold. 12. That it may not shoot into Crystals. 13. When the Aqua Fort.
remains Silvery, what to do. 14. The XXIV. SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. XXXIII.
When the Gold is abstracted, how to bring the Silver out of the Aqua Fort.
SEction 1. The manner of doing it. 2. Why the Silver Calx is dulcified. 3. Of
the Content of this precipitated Silver. 4. To make profit of the blew water.
5. To precipitate Silver in an Earthen Vessel. 6. Iron Lamins to be used in the
precipitation. CHAP. XXXIV. How Aqua Fort. drawn from Silver may be used again.
CHAP. XXXV. How to separate Gold and Silver by Fusion. SEction 1. How to
understand separation by Fusion. 2, 3, 4, 5. What precipitation or casting down
is. 6. When the Scorias contains Gold what to do. 7. When the Regulus is poor
of Gold what to do. 8. How much may be set at once in the Oven. 9. How the Gold
may be precipitated at once. 10. Another way. CHAP. XXXVI. How the Scorias or
Dross is to be made to profit. SEction 1. The first way. 2. The second way. 3.
To make the Scorias malliable. 4. The Uses of it. CHAP. XXXVII. The Fluss for
Precipitation. SEction 1. How to make it. 2. Separation in the Fluss requires
diligence. 3. The uses of the used Tests. 4. The XXV. SCULPTURE Deciphered.
CHAP. XXXVIII. How to make good and sound Crucibles for separating the Fluss.
SEction 1. To prepare Clay for them 2. How to make them. 3. To preserve them.
4. The XXVI. SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. XXXIX. Of Cementing, what it is. CHAP.
XL. How the covered Oven for Cement is to be made. The XXVII. SCULPTURE
Deciphered. CHAP. XLI. How Rhenish Gold is to be Cemented. SEction 1. How to
prepare it. 2. The first Cement Powder. 3. The second Cement Powder. 4. To
Cement Rhenish Gilders. CHAP. XLII. Other Cements for light Gold. CHAP. XLIII.
A common Cement for all Golds. CHAP. XLIV. More Instructions for Cementing.
SEction 1. The Composition. 2. Another way of making it. 3. To Cement brittle
Gold. 4. Another manner. 5. To make profit of Cements. 6. Of Philosophical
Cements. CHAP. XLV. How to Graduate Gold or give it an higher color. Sections
5. or V. ways how to Gild. CHAP. XLVI. How to make brittle Gold deft. Sections
6. By Six several ways. CHAP. XLVII. Another way to make Gold Deft. SEction 1.
By a flat Test. 2. To bring Gold clean out of the Crucible. 3. To take away the
ill Vapor. 4. Of the use of Mercury Sublimate. 5. Of the use of Sulphur and
Antimony. CHAP. XLVIII. How to make Gold Deft on the Copel. CHAP. XLIX. How to
Cast Gold through Antimony. SEction 1. Through fine Gold. 2. Through Poor Gold.
3. The XXVIII. SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. L. How blick or light Gold,
containing much Silver is to be separated. Four several ways. CHAP. LI. How to
separate Antimony that has been used. Sections 4. By four Methods. CHAP. LII.
How Gold is to be made fine and clean through Aqua Regis.
The CONTENTS of the Chapters and Sections of the third BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of Copper Oars. SEction 1. The purpose of this Book. 2. Copper of
various colors and sorts. 3. Of Copper Glass. 4. Of Green or Azure Copper. 5.
Of brown Copper. 6. Of Copper Shiffer. 7. of Copper Flint. 8. Of Copper Stone.
CHAP. II. How to make Crucibles and Ovens to prove Copper. SEction 1. The
Mould. 2. The form of the Crucibles. 3. The Clay. 4. Little Ovens for proof. 5.
Another form of Ovens. 6. Ovens of Tile. 7. Proof Furnaces. 8. The XXIX.
SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. III. How to make Fluss to prove Copper Oars. CHAP.
IV. How soft flowing Copper Oars are to be proved. CHAP. V. How hard flowing
Copper Oars are to be proved. SEction 1. The manner of it. 2. The Oar must be
burnt quite dead. 3. Some Copper not fit for Brass. 4. To boil Copper Oars with
boiled Copper. CHAP. VI. How to prove light Copper, six several ways. CHAP.
VII. How light Copper Oars which are mixed and insperged with Flints may be
brought to profit. CHAP. VIII. How to prove Copper Oar from Copper Stone, etc.
CHAP. IX. How to prove Copper-Oars another way. SEction 1. Preparations. 2. Of
Copper Shiffer. 3. When no stone in the Proof. 4. Roasted Oar do separate
better than raw or fresh Oars. 5 and 6. Are other Methods. CHAP. X. To prove
melted Copper Stone. SEction 1. The method of it. 2. The use of Venetian Glass.
3. The XXX. SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. XI. To prove Flinty Copper by Sulphur.
SEction 1. The first proceeding. 2. The Retorts for it. 3. The red Sulphur of
it. CHAP. XII. How to prove black Copper by defty and smooth Copper. SEction 1.
Of Copper Needles. 2. A Proof easy but not certain. 3. An other way. 4. How
Copper Flint and Tin Stone are to be separated. CHAP. XIII. To prove whether
Lead be Copperish. CHAP. XIV. Profitable Instructions for an Assayer. SEction
1. How Iron may be made Copper. 2. Iron will precipitate Copper; and Copper,
Silver. CHAP. XV. How to separate Silver from Copper in the great Work. 12.
Directions. CHAP. XVI. 13. Additional Instructions about good Copper. CHAP.
XVII. Six Additional Instructions about the proving of fresh Oar, called Hard
Lead. CHAP. XVIII. Six Additions concerning Thornels or little pieces of Oar
not fully melted. CHAP. XIX. Six more Instructions concerning good and deft
Coppers. CHAP. XX. Seven more Additional Instructions for good Copper. The
XXXI. SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. XXI. Nine Rules how the Regulus of poor black
Copper Oar is to be Assayed. CHAP. XXII. Seven more Instructions for the
Hungarian way of Assaying. CHAP. XXIII. How Littarge pieces are to be made, by
6 ways. CHAP. XXIV. How Silver from speizy and unclean black Copper is to be
made. CHAP XXV. Instructions for driving Lead and Copper for Silver. CHAP.
XXVI. Of driving the Keinstocks or Thornels. The XXXII. SCULPTURE Deciphered.
CHAP XXVII. A singular way of melting in the Assaying-Work. SEction 1. For
Copper. 2. Copper Roasted. 3 and 4. Addition of parts and poor Copper-Stone. 5.
Hard Oar and Littarge. 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10. To make the Oven for this Work, and
to cast the pieces. 11, 12 and 13. The profit of the Assay*Work. The XXXIV.
SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. XXVIII. How Copper is to be made into Brass.
SEction 1. Of the difference of Copper for it in many Countries. 2. Of the
mixture of Lapis Calaminaris, for the making Brass. 3. The Ovens for it. 4 and
5. Of Lapis Calaminaris which comes from Great Britain to make them Brass. 6, 7
and 8. Of the proportions of Copper and Lapis Calaminaris for Brass. 9. The
XXXV. SCULPTURE Deciphered.
The CONTENTS of the Chapters and Sections in the fourth BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of Lead Oars, Tin, Antimony, Quicksilver, Iron, Steel and
Lodestone. SEction 1. The purpose of the Book. 2. Lead known from other
Metals. 3. Of bright Lead-Oar. 4. Of white Lead-Oar. 5. Of red Lead-Oar. 6. Of
yellow Lead-Oar. 7. Of flinty Lead-Oar. 8. Of Lead-Oar unseparable. CHAP. II.
How to prove Defty Lead-Oar for Lead. SEction 1. The mixtures for it. 2. How to
dispose it in Crucibles and Ovens. 3 and 4. Iron to be added to it. CHAP. III.
How to prove an undefty Lead-Oar for Lead. CHAP. IV. To prove poor separable
Oars, by boiling it and trying it by Smelting. SEction 1, 2 and 3. A good way
of beating Oars. 4. A hurtful way of beating. 5 and 6. Of smelting Mills and
differences in beating the Lead Oar. CHAP. V. How to try common Lead-Oar for
Lead in little Ovens. CHAP. VI. How the inseparable and light Lead-Oars are to
be Assayed in a little Oven. SEction 1. Of the little Oven. 2. Of Crucibles for
it. 3. Of unroasted Oars. CHAP. VII. To make a Lead-Proof on a Table or in a
Stove. CHAP. VIII. How to make Lead-Oars (though they will not separate in the
water) to be profitable. SEction 1. Of Rocky Lead-Oars. 2. Of Sulphury Slacks.
3. Of Goslarish Oar. 4. Two melting Ovens on one Spring. 5. Of melt-Ovens for
the Oar. 6. Of Crucibles for the Lead. 7. Of closing the Work in the Ovens. 8.
Of kindling the fire. 9. The use of Copper to this melting. 10. Of opening the
Oven. 11 and 12. Of the Cakes or Sows of Lead produced from the Lead. 13. Of
Galmay or Lapis Calaminaris. 14. The Mine at Goslar wrought above 700 years
together. The XXXVI. SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. IX. Of melting Oars with Moll
or Turf and Coals. SEction 1. The Property of Moll or Turf. CHAP. X. How to
prove Spelter or Wismuth Oar, which some call Bismuth. SEction 1. Two ways of
melting it. 2. The difference of its Contents. 3. To melt them by the Wind. 4.
To melt them in an Oven. 5. The XXXVII. SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. XI. Of
Tin-Oar called Zwitter. CHAP. XII. To prove Tin-Stone for Tin. SEction 1. The
way of proving it. 2. In the Coals. 3. With the Fluss. 4. By a sudden heat.
CHAP. XIII. How to prove Tin-Stone in the little Ovens. CHAP. XIV. Of beating
and preparing the Zwitter or Tin Oar. SEction 1. and 2. To melt old gathered
Slacks. 3. and 4. The loss of burning it. 5. The way of burning it. 6. The
Goslar way of melting it. CHAP. XV. An Instruction for Tin Sope-work. SEction
1. Of Seeve-work. -- CHAP. XVI. To prove Tin by Addition. SEction 1 and 2. The
light Tin the best. -- CHAP. XVII. To prove Antimony. CHAP. XVIII. Of
Quicksilver Oar. SEction 1. Described. -- CHAP. XIX. How to prove Quick-silvet
Oar for Quicksilver. SEction 1. Jugs and Bottles to be fitted for it. -- CHAP.
XX. To prove Iron and Steel Stone. CHAP. XXI. To prove whether Iron-Stone be
rich in Iron. SEction 1, 2 and 3. To be tried by the Lodestone. 4 How to melt
the Iron Stone. CHAP. XXII. Of Magnets or Lodestone. SEction 1. 5. Several
uses of it. --
The CONTENTS of the Chapters and Sections of the fifth BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of Saltpeter. SEction 1. The purpose of this Book. 2. How to boil
Saltpeter. CHAP. II. What Earths do afford the best Saltpeter. SEction 1.
From Sheep-Cotes 2. From under old Walls. 3. From under Earthen and unplastered
Houses. 4. From under Horse-Stables. CHAP. III. How to prove the several Earths
for it. SEctions, 6. Several ways of proving it. 7. The XXXVIII. SCULPTURE
Deciphered. CHAP. IV. How to make a Lixivium, Menstruum or Lees of the Earth.
SEction 1. Of Tubs for the Lees. 2. Of Sticks and Reeds to be used. 3, 4 and 5.
Of weak and Raw and strong Lees. 6. Of strong Lees or Suds. 7. The XXXIX.
SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. V. How to boil the Lees or Suds. CHAP. VI. How to
prepare Lees for a crude and raw Saltpeter. SEction 1. How the Salt is to be
taken out. 2. XL. SCULPTURE Deciphered. CHAP. VII. How to cleanse the raw
Saltpeter. SEction 1 and 2. Of Raw Saltpeter. 3 and 4. Of Purifying it. 5. Of
course Saltpeter. 6. Proofs set out. 7. Of purifying it again. 8. Another
proof. 9. Of scumming it. 10. Of cleansing the Kettle. 11. Of what Saltpeter
is generated, and how spoiled. 12. Mingling splinters of Wood with it. 13.
Reference to the XL. SCULPTURE. CHAP. VIII. How to cleanse the great grained or
black Saltpeter. SEctions. 1. The uses of it. 2. To make it white. 3. To
purify it through Ashes. CHAP. IX. How to make the raw Saltpeter rich before
boiling of it. SEction 1. The manner of doing of it. 2. The profit by it. 3. To
water out the Earth and enrich it. 4. To enrich the Lees of Alum. 5. The XLI.
SCULPTURE Deciphered. 6. The Sheds for Salt Petre, how built. CHAP. X. How
Flints are to be proved for Vitriol, and Allum-Oar for Alum. SEction 1. To
make Lees or Suds of it. 2. To make Lees of Alum. 3. To make Lees of Vitriol.
4. The Conclusion to the V. Books, and the Authors Apology and thanks to God.
THE CONTENTS OF THE SCULPTURES In the first BOOK Of SILVER OARS.
Page 1. SCULPTURE I. Represents 1. THE Effigies of Lazarus Erckern the
Assayer. 2. The Scales and Boxes of Weights. 3. Glasses for Aqua Regis, Aqua
Fortis, Aqua Vitrioli, Aqua Argenteae or Quicksilver, etc. Page 2. SCULPTURE
II. Represents 1. THE Form of an Athanor or great Furnace. 2. The Forceps or
Tongs and Forks. 3. The Copels, Tests and Philosophical Bellows. 4. The
digestive Pot, with its Cover and Fire about it. 5. A covered Crucible. 6. The
long Bell or Mattress Glass, in a Sand Furnace. 7. The Wind-Furnace, with a
blowing Pipe. 8. A Furnace with a Copper-Head and its Receiver. 9. A Furnace
with a naked and open fire. 10. A Pestle and Mortar with a Man beating the
Metals. 11. The Owls Head, or another form of a cover to the eighth Figure in
this Section. 12. A Retort. Page 13. SCULPTURE III. Represents 1. AN Assay Oven
used by the Ancient Refiners (joined with Iron Plates.) 2. An Assay Oven used
by the Norimbergers in Germany. 3. The Foot of it. 4. An Assay Oven made of
Tiles joined together, which may quickly be done. 5. An Assay-Oven made of
Potters Loam and fastened with Iron Bonds or Hoops. 6. The upper Mouth-hole of
it. 7. The lower Mouth-hole of it. 8. The Holes for Iron Bars to be put in. 9.
An Assay-Oven made of Armor Plates. Page 17. SCULPTURE IV. Represents. 1. THE
form of Muffles, which the Ancient Assayers did, and still the common Assayers
do use. 2. The Muffle to the Norimburg Assay Oven. 3. The Muffle to the Assay
Oven with two Mouth*holes. 4. The Stopples. 5. The bottom Plate. 6. The wooden
Frame for that Muffle. 7. The lower part of the Assay Test. 8. The upper part
of it. 9. The Mould for the Assay-Tests. 10. The lower part of the Assay-Tests.
11. the upper part. 12. The Assay-Crucible. 13. The small Instruments for
governing the fire, made of Potters Clay. Page 24. SCULPTURE V. Represents 1
and. 3. THE Copel Cases. 2 and 4. The Copels that are made in them. 5. The
Copels set on one another. 6. The washed Ashes made into Balls. 7. He that works
the Ashes. 8. He that forms and strikes the Copels. Page 25. SCULPTURE VI.
Represents 1. THE Copel Case. 2. The Copel for Copper Proof and common Oars. 3.
The Copels fot Metals that are poor in Silver, or grained and common Oars. 4.
The Copels for common Silver Trials, which are Assayed according to Weight. 5.
The Copels for Sterling Silver Proof. 6. How the Copels are placed upon each
other in the Fire. Page 56. SCULPTURE VII. Represents 1. THE Grain or
Grainulating Kiln or Furnace. 2. The Wind-Oven. 3. Another Wind-Oven of Potters
Loam, girt with Iron, and placed on a three Foot Iron Frame. 4. The Crucible in
which the Siver is to be melted. 5. The Crucible in which the melted Metal is
taken out of the bigger Crucible. 6. The Copper Basin with two Ears, wherein
the Granulating of Metals is performed. 7. An Iron Roast wherein the Silver is
heated and roasted. 8. He that tends that Grain Kiln. 9. The Broom holder for
Granulation. 10. The Granulating Vessel. 11. The Bellows to the Grain Kiln. 12.
The Instrument used by him that tends the Kiln. 13. A Tub and Tankard for
Water. 14. Pieces that are Granulated. Page 65. SCULPTURE VIII. Represents 1
and 2. THE Proportion of Touch Needles for Silver. 4 and 5. The Ingots to be
compared with the Touch-Needles. Page 76. SCULPTTURE IX. Represents 1. THE
burning Fnrnace. 2. The Test which is put into it. 3. How Silver is to be burnt
on the Test. 4. The bellows blowing it. 5. The Iron Plates luted over the Clay,
used against the heat. 6. A Fork and Hook to stir the matter, and the Irons
used about proofs. 7. A complete Test unwarm'd. 8. A Test which is in warming.
9. The Roaster or Iron on which the burnt Silver is dried. 10. The Water-Tub,
over which the burnt Silver is brushed clean. 11. The Ball and Pestle for
making the Test. 12. The Block on which the Silver is beaten with the Hammer.
13. The split or riven Wood for burning the Silver. 14. A Test that has been
used or broken. 15. A three footed Stool for several uses. 16. A Tankard to
take out or Put in Water into. Fig 10. Page 80. SCULPTURE X. Represents 1. THE
Oven in which the Silver is to be burnt. 2. The inside of that Oven. 3. The
Wind-holes of that Oven, which drives the fire upwards into the Work. 4. The
Test that is set in it. 5. The Iron Ring or Mould, into which the Tests are to
be beaten. 6. A Test-Ring made complete. 7. The Ring filled with Ashes for the
Test. 8. The round Muffles for it. 9. The Ball and Hammer for making the Test.
10. The Servant that beats the blink Silver into pieces, and the Instruments
for it. 11. The Man (that takes care for the burning of the Silver) standing on
the backside of the Oven. 12. The Vessel of Water, into which the burnt Silver
is to be cast and cleansed. 13. Bellows and Instruments belonging to the Oven.
Page 90. SCULPTURE XI. Represents 1. THE forged Balance. 2. The forged Fork.
3. The half forged Fork. 4. The filed Scales with the half Fork. 5. The two
pearls, the one as a Pendula, the other on the top of the Tongue in the Fork. 6.
The end of the Beam, and the like is to be supposed for the other end. 7. How
the Balance, Fork and Pendula are to hang on the Wartz on each side of the
bottom of the Tongue. 8. 8. The holes in the whole Fork. 9, 9. The little holes
at each end of the Beam, in which the strings hang. 10. The Scales like small
Dishes. 11. Pincers to take up small Weights or pieces. Page 94. SCULPTURE XII.
Represents 1. THE outside of a Case for the Balance. 2. The inside of that
Case, wherein the whole Balance is to hang, and to be kept free from Dust.
Page 98. SCULPTURE XIII. Represents 1. THE form of the Boxes or Cases for
Weights standing open. 2. The same Case as it is shut.
The CONTENTS of the SCVLPTVRES In the second Book Of GOLD OARS.
Page 106. SCULPTURE XIV. Represents 1. THE Man that works with the Ratter.
2. The middle Floor, whereon that which goes through the Ratter does fall. 3.
The lower Floor, whereon that which comes from the middle Floor does fall. 4.
The plain Receiver of that which falls from both. 5. The Man that stands on a
board, and out of a Wheel-barrow throws the matter or Oar into the Tunnel which
guids it into the Ratter. 6. The Channel in which Water does run upon the
Ratter. Page 108. SCULPTURE XV. Represents 1. THE Miners which carries the
matter to be washed in the Ratter. 2. The parts of the Ratter (more visible than
in the former Figure.) 3. The Washman that governs the Ratter. 4. The upper and
lower falls from the Ratter. 5. The plain Boards or Harth on which they fall.
6. He that stirs about the muddy matter of both fallings. 7. The Tub in which
that which falls on the Hearth is to be put and washed. Page 112. SCULPTURE
XVI. Represents 1. THE form of Roasting Ovens. 2. The Shutters to them. 3. The
inside of them. 4. The Partitions in them made of Tiles, and a Man attending at
the Mouth of the Oven. 5. He that pours water into the Roasting-Oven. 6. The
wood that is used for those Roasting Ovens. 7. The Instruments to cleanse the
Oven. 8 8. The Ladder to go to the top of the Oven. 9. The pieces of Metal to
be used. Page 123. SCULPTURE XVII. Represents 1. THE Athanor or great Furnace.
2. The Ovens on the sides of it. 3. The Earthen Receiver for it. 4. The Earthen
Helmet for it. 5. The blind Helmet with a Pipe, on which Water may be poured.
6. He that fitteth the matter. 7. He that presses the Quicksilver through a
Leather. 8. The lower part of an Iron Jug or Receiver. 9. The upper part of it.
10. The Leather purse whereby the Quicksilver may be pressed out. 11. He that
causes the Gold to melt by help of the Bellows. 12. The pieces of Metal. Page
135. SCULPTURE XVIII. Represents 1. THE proportion of Touch-Needles for Gold.
2. The Ingots to be compared with those Touch-Needles, as also by the Touch
Stone. Page 153. SCULPTURE XIX. Represents. 1. HOW the Assayer stands before
the Assay-Oven to prove the Metals. 2. The Iron on which the proof is to be
cast. 3. A Wooden Instrument to see through into the Fire, to prevent hurt to
the Eyes. 4. A separating-Glass for proving Gold, placed on a little foot. 5.
He that does wash the Goldish Silver in water. 6. The Block, Hammer and Stool.
Page 158. SCULPTURE XX. Represents 1. A Luted Glass Bottle covered with an
Helm. 2. A luted Glass Bottle without an Helm. 3. Another kind of Glass Bottle.
4. The form of an Helm. 5. A Glass scale or half Pot, with one Ear and Mouth.
6. A Receiver with a pipe. 7. An common Receiver without a Pipe. 8. An Earthen
Retort. 9. An Earthen Jug or Culb to burn Aqua Fortis in. 10. Other kind of
Bottles, Glasses and half Glasses, or Pipkins and Tunnels. Page 161. SCULPTURE
XXI. Represents 1. THE Athanor. 2. The Mouth-hole of it over the Grate. 3. The
Mouth-hole under the Grate. 4. The Grates in the By-Oven. 5. The form of the
By-Oven. 6. The Instruments to open or shut the wind-holes. 7. The Covers for
the By-Ovens. 8. The Pins for the Registers or wind-holes. 9. A Semicircle
piece of Wood by which the Athanor is to be made. 10. The Cover for the
Athanor. 11. The Man that tends it. 12. A dish of pieces to be used. Page 173.
SCULPTURE XXII. Represents 1. THE Tower of the Athanor in which the Coals are
to be put. 2. The By-Oven in which the Bottle is to be placed. 3. How the
Bottle is to be placed in the Oven. 4. The Glass Helmet made for it. 5. The
Recipient or Receiver. 6. The Pot full of materials prepared. 7. The same Pot
empty. 8. The Man that tends the Athanor and By-Ovens. Page 177. SCULPTURE
XXIII. Represents 1. THE Tower of the Athanor. 2. 2. The two sides or By-Ovens
in which the Jugs are to be set with the stuff. 3. 3. The Glass Receivers. 4.
The earthen Jug or Receiver. 5. The Oven for the Retorts. 6. The little
Receivers to be added to the great Receivers that there may be room for drawing
the Spirits, 7. The long Oven. 8. The By-Oven in which the Spirits are to be
forced into the Aqua Fort. Page 185. SCULPTURE XXIV. Represents 1. THE Tower of
the Athanor. 2. The side-Ovens upon which the Copels are to be placed on Sand.
3. 3. The Glass Bottles for separation covered with Helmets. 4. The Receivers
which are laid to the Helmets. 5 How the Aqua Fort. is by them to be drawn from
the Silver. 6. An Iron Instrument with which the Glasses are to be taken out
and in. 7. The Man that attends the Operations in the Glasses. 8. Another Man
to attend the other Glasses upon shelves. 9. The Ingredients prepared in a Dish
or Pan. Page 200. SCULPTURE XXV. Represents 1. THE inward part of Wind-Ovens.
2. The outward parts completed. 3. The holes next the Wind-Holes. 4. The Pots
in which the Sulphur and grained Metals is to be prepared, with a Fire under it
and a Man attending it. 5. A single Crucible and cover to it. 6. The Iron Tongs
by which Crucibles are put in and taken out of the Fire. 7. The Frame on which
the Crucible is to be set. 8. The Iron Vessel into which the stuff or melted
matter is to be cast. 9. The Man attending the Wind-Ovens. Page 203. SCULPTURE
XXVI. Represents 1. THE lower part of a wooden Frame of a Press for making
Crucibles. 2. The shape of the whole Press, and how the Crucibles are to be
forced under it. 3. The Iron Rings or Hoops about the Frame. 4. The shape of
the Crucibles which are to be made in the Press. 5. The handle by which the
Scrue of the Press is to be turned. Page 207. SCULPTURE XXVII. Represents 1.
THE Athanor and lower Mouth-hole of it. 2. The upper Mouth-hole. 3. The Edge on
which the Iron Plates do lay on the Iron Grates. 4. The registers or air-holes
above the Grates. 5. The little air-holes near the top of the Athanor. 6. The
stopples for the registers or Air-holes. 7. A Test fitted for the Athanor. 8
and 9. Cement-Pots. 10. An Hook to stir the Coals. 11. The man that stirs the
Furnace and works. Page 222 SCULPTURE XXVIII. Represents 1. THE form of a
common Cup, cast in Brass. 2. The Cup of Smiths Work. 3. A Crucible for the
Work. 4. A Flat Test for it. 5. The Ingot. 6. The Plates of Antimony with the
Gold Regulus. 8. The Antimony when the Gold Regulus is beaten from it.
The CONTENTS of the SCVLPTVRES In the third Book of COPPER OARS.
Page 235. SCULPTURE XXIX. Represents 1. THE inside of the little Oven made
with Tiles. 2, The same when it is closed 3. The foot of the Crucible upon the
Grate. 4. The little Oven of Potters Clay, strengthened by Iron Hoops and Bars.
5. The foot of it. 6. The Iron Grate in it. 7. The Crucible on the Grate, with
the Proof in it. 8. The wind-hole wherein the Bellows are put. 9. The whole
Oven open with the Bottom. 10. The Iron Hoop which goes about it. 11, 12 and
13. The Bellows, Brush and Instruments. Page 247. SCULPTURE XXX. Represents 1.
THE Melting-Oven to try Copper Oars from Copper-Stone. 2. The luting it with
Clay. 3. The buck't or washed Oar. 4. The little Ovens in which the Copper-Oars
are to be proved, with ordinary Bellows, and a Man to attend them. 5. The
Bellows as they are used. 6. A Copper Instrument (with a Neck) in which water
is put and set over the Fire, and used instead of Bellows (called Philosophical
Bellows, see Lib. 1. Sculp. 2.) 7. The Pot in which the Fluss is to be made. 8.
The Assay Crucibles. 9. The Block, Hammer and Pieces to be beaten. Page 265.
SCULPTURE XXXI. Represents 1. THE Copper and Lead Pieces weighed, and a Man
that attends them. 2. The Oven for melting fresh Oars. 3. The Copper Pan into
which the fresh pieces are to be cast. 4. The form of the fresh pieces melted.
5. The Melter. 6. The Vault which receives the dust and smoke. 7. The little
Door out of which the dust is to be cleansed. 8. The Wheel that brings in Water
with the Tub to receive it. Page 274. SCULPTURE XXXII. Represents 1. THE Assay
Oven for Copper. 2. The supporters to be made of Copper. 3. The Assayed pieces
as they stand in the Oven. 4. The VValls or four sides of the Oven, with the
fire in it, and how the Oven is braced with Iron Hoops. 5. The stamped pieces
and Coals on the top of the Oven. 6. The Copper or Iron little Pans, with a man
putting the melted stuff into them. 7. The Kinstocks. 8. The Crane or draught
by which the Assay pieces are to be lifted out of the Assay-Oven, or otherwise
disposed of. 9. Instruments, viz. Ladle, Pitcher, Fork and Hook. 10. The Trough
or place to cool the Instruments in water. Page 278. SCULPTURE XXXIII.
Represents 1. A Drying Oven. 2. An Oven soon made, according to the Hungarian
way. 3. A common ready Harth attended with two Men. 4. The Kinstocks which are
to be picked with an Iron Tool and beaten by a Man. 5. An Harth for spizing,
according to the Hungarian way. 6. 6. 6. The Copper Cakes, quenched in a
Cistern of Water by a Man. Page 284. SCULPTURE XXXIV. Represents 1. A Fresh
Oven. 2. A little By-Oven for Lead. 3. A fresh piece, with a Man lifting it. 4.
The separation of roasted and weighed Lead, brought by a Man with a
VVheel-barrow, and laid in heaps. 5. The Vault for the smoke and dust. 6. The
Tunnel for the Smoke. 7. The fresh Oven without a fore Wall. 8. 8. The
Assay-Oven. 9. The little Pans for the melted Work. Page 288. SCULPTURE XXXV.
Represents 1. AN Oven in which Brass is to be made, the shape of it in the
inside, and how the Pots and Crucibles are to be placed in it. 2. How the Brass
Ovens are to be placed in the Work. 3. The shapes of the Pots and Crucibles. 4.
The Shovel for the beaten Calaminaris Stone, which is to be mixed with Copper
for the making Brass. 5. The Tongs by which the Pots are to be set in and taken
out. 6. The Wind-holes in the Oven. 7. The Pieces of Britain Stone, or Lapis
Calaminaris unbeaten. 8. The place for the Master that sets-in the Pots.
The CONTENTS of the SCVLPTVRES In the fourth Book Of Lead OARS, Tin, Antimony
and Quicksilver, Iron and the Lodestone.
Page 303. SCULPTURE XXXVI. Represents 1. THE Walls of the Furnace. 2. The
Lines on them shows the Gradations of the Metal descending. 3. The Man that
manageth the Metal in the Furnace. 4. The back of the Furnace with the Coals,
and Pieces of Metal flowing. 5. The grand Test. 6. The Oven for that Test. 7.
The pieces from the Test. 8. The Man that beats the Oar. 9* The pieces of Oar
and Cinders. 10. An heap of Charcoal. 11. The Water-Troughs to wash the Oar in.
12. The Pipes by which the foul water is cast out. 13. The Instruments for the
Furnaces and Tests. Page 307. SCULPTURE XXXVII. Represents 1. THE little Iron
Pans for Spelter or Wismuth Oar, 2. The Wood Fire for them. 3. The melted
Spelter that is to be made clean in the Iron Pans, and the workman that tends
it. 4. He that draws the Oar out of the Mine.
The CONTENTS of the SCVLPTVRES In the fifth Book of Saltpeter, Vitriol and
Alum.
Page 325. SCULPTURE XXXVIII. Represents 1. THE Tub in which the Lees is made
for Salt Petre, and out of which it is to be extracted, and the Can or vessel
to put water into the Tub. 2. The greater Tub into which the Lees does run. 3
and 4. The Master and the Balance by which he proves the goodness of the Lees.
5. The Lamin. 6. The Candle. 7. The Pincers. Page 329. SCULPTURE XXXIX.
Represents 1. THE 8 Tubs into which the Petre-Earth is to be put. 2. The Pipe
with Brass Cocks, into which the water is let into the 8 Tubs. 3. The channel
by which the Lees fall from each Tub, and so into the Receiver. 4. The Sink or
great Receiver of the Lees. 5. The ninth Tub from which the Lees run into the
Kettle. 6. The Oven wherein the Kettle stands. 7. The Kettle. 8. The Iron Door
by which the wood is to be put into the Oven under the Kettle. 9. The
wind-hole, in the bottom of the Oven. 10. How the Oven may be seen in the
inside. 11. The Iron Grate on which the wood lays. 12. The door into the
working-House. Page 332. SCULPTURE XL. Represents 1. THE long narrow Tubs
wherein to cool the Lees. 2. The Oven wherein the Kettle is placed. 3. The
Master which makes and lets out the Salt Petre and puts it into separating
Baskets. 4. The separating Baskets. 5. The Tub out of which the strong Lees run
into the Kettle. 6. The Melting Vessels in which the Saltpeter improves. 7.
The 4 Kettles standing on the ground, wherein the Saltpeter also improves it
self. 8. A strong Tub into which the Saltpeter is to be be cast, as it
improves. Page 341. SCULPTURE XLI. Represents 1. THE forepart of the
Salt-Petre-House wherein the Lee Tubs do stand. 2. The back part of it, wherein
the Kettle and the Oven are placed and wherein the Saltpeter is to be boiled.
3. The old pieces of Earth, out of which Saltpeter is to be made. 4. The wood
used for boiling it. 5. The Servant that shaves and fits the Earth for boiling.
In the second Part of ESSAYS, THERE are the Twenty four English Letters,
artificially Cut in Wood: and two more SCULPTURES Engraven in Copper. viz.
under the Word Limbeck one, and Lodestone the other.

THE best Artists may commit Mistakes or Errors, but they are Pardonable, when
they proceed not from a willful and careless Neglect, and therefore it is hoped
that the Ingenious Reader will connive at the want, or misplacing of Comma's,
Periods, or Parenthesis, and for the rest they are here set down, that there
may be no Mistake in the Sense of the Author.

PAge 12. Line 24. for Essay, read Assay-Oven. p. 38. l. 15. r. Petre. p. 63.
l. 13. r. Needles. p. 72. l. 2. r. Blink. p. 75. Fig. 7. r. a complete unused.
p. 89. Fig. 7. r. the Fork and Pendula. p. 103. l. 24. r. a black Hair Sieve.
dele Sicher Troy. p. 114. l. 27. r. rough Stones. p. 118. l. 15. r. Sandiver.
p. 154. l. 3. for washes r. weighed. p. 167. l. 16. r. which you. p. 171. l.
15. for Rape r. Linseed. p. 181. l. 14. r. Silver. p. 186. l. 14. r. has. p.
189. l. 2. r. put in. p. 242. l. 17. r. with which. p. 252. dele 12. Necessary
r. Profitable. p. 280. for Loths r. pounds. p. 287. Fig. 2. r. How the. ibid
Fig. 6. r. Wind-holes. p. 313. l. 2. r. Tin by. p. 333. dele 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
r. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Lazarus Erskerus alias Erckern.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. Of Silver Oars.
Sculpture I.
Deciphered.

The Assayer 1. the Scales 2. the Cases for Weights 3. Glasses for Aqua Regis,
Aqua Fortis, Aqua Vitrioli, Aqua Argentea or Quicksilver, etc. 4.




Deciphered,
1. The form of an Athanor or great Furnace. 2. The Forceps or Tongs and Fork.
3. The Coppel or Test, with Philosophers Bellows. 4. The Digestive Pot with its
Cover and Fire about it. 5. A covered Crucible. 6. The long Bell, or
Matras-Glass on a Sand Furnace. 7. The Wind Furnace with a Blow-pipe. 8. A
Furnace with a Copper head, and its Receiver. 9. A Furnace with a naked and
open Fire. 10. The Pestel and Mortar, with one beating the Metals. 11. The
Owl's Head, or another form of a Cover to the Figure 8. 12. A Retort.




THIS first Book speaks of Silver Oars, how they may be distinguished by The
Purpose of the Book.
their several Sorts, and afterward by Assay-Scales and Assay-Tests; Of
Muffles, Coppels, and of Clar for Lead, of Lead-Glass, of Fusion-Pouder, of
Balances and Weights, and how a Lead Grainer may be made, and then how every
particular sort may be certainly assayed or tried, as also of Slake and
Slake-stone, Flakes and Hard-Work, See the Dictionary.
of Laech-Speize, Black Copper, Pagment, and of Granulations; as also of
Planches or Plates of Silver and burnt Silver, with a fundamental Information
how to burn Silver in the common way, and under the Muffle: as also the
preparing and making Tests: and how to cast Silver which is Tuff or hard, as
well as that which is not tuff or more ductile: also how to assay Tin, Iron or
Steel for Silver, and to know what any Silver or coined Money is worth: and to
make stroking or touching Needles, or Ingots of Silver for distinguishing the
fine from the less fine Silver.

Why Silver first treated of.
Now, because I have in this Treatise first begun with the Description of Silver
Oar and its Trials, some may wonder why I did not rather begin with Gold,
(which is treated of in the Second Book) and why I did not give Gold the
Pre-eminence, it being the highest and chiefest Metal of the Earth, and so by
right it should have been first treated of.

Therefore I think fit to inform the READER that I have not done this without
good Reason; For, from Silver Trials, all other Assays and Preparations of
Instruments do flow, as out of a Fountain, and have their Rise from thence; for
which cause I have judged it necessary, in the first place, to give information
of the same, and to place it in this first Book, because it is Bohemia, and
bordering Countries in Germany, viz. Miechfin, Sachsen, Shesren, Manhren, and
other Countries where there are many Mines containing good Quantities of Silver,
and many Miners, Gardians of Mines, Refiners, Provers, Smelters and Melters,
who exercise themselves in proving of Silver-Oars, and of such Metals as
contain Silver in them, and yet because there are many in these parts who have
not gained the true Knowledge thereof, or have not in all things pertinent to
this Science, obtained a fundamental Information, I have proposed to my self to
be serviceable to such, and therefore I have more largely treated of Silver,
and its Trials than of any other Metals, and am not willing to leave this
unmentioned in this entrance of what I am to write.

CHAP. II. How Silver Oars are distinctly known.
Section
SIlver Oars are found to be of many sorts and Colors, yet if they be not very
fine, they are not to be judged by their Looks (how rich soever they are in
Silver) and therefore it is proved by Artists (who have diligently searched into
this Science, and by them found out many years past, as also by others who have
since improved this Art) that the worth of every Oar may be certainly found
out, so that the very smelting, melting, refining and account thereof, may be
demonstrated both as to its worth and the Charges.

Now it is here necessary to be known, that so many as there are Sorts of
Silver Oars, so many are their Natures and ways of melting and refining them;
and therefore Difference of assaying Oars.
the Trials of Silver Oars must be ordered according to the Nature of the Oars,
because the hard, harsh, gross and crude Oars, cannot be proved like those of
an easier Fusion; or of a more mild, subtle and ductile nature, because, as an
Oar proves either harsh or hard of fusion, so it must be helped (in the
proving) by the Government of the fire, or by other ways; as, by much
Experience in proving such Oars have been and may be discerned according as
they melt in the fire: so that if there be not a knowledge of the Nature of an
Oar before melting, and how it will do in the fire, such an Oar, cannot be
melted to profit.

Now for the better attaining the knowledge of the Difference of Oars; as, which
are of an easy, and which of an harsh and crude Fusion; the most excellent and
experienced Miners do give every Mine (and Oar from thence) Names, according to
their Natures: all which according to the Terms used by them are hereafter
named.

Glass-Oar.
First, there are reckoned to the Easy-flowing Silver-Oars, these Nominall
distinctions, viz. Glass-Oars (as the chiefest of the leaden Colored Oars)
almost to be compared to the best digested Silver, for it does not loose above
a sixth part in the fire, and the rest is pure and good Silver, and this dig'd
Oar is a ccounted the best Silver Oar.

White goldish Oar.
Also there is found white-Goldish Oar, not that it contains Gold, but because
it is good in Silver, it has this name in respect of its Goodness.

Horn Oar.
Also the Horny Oar, (which is called so from its transparency or rather
lucidation like Horn) and is very rich in Silver next to the three last
mentioned Oars.

Silver-Oar which is Brown-red (almost like Cinabar, but not so light) and this
they call Red-goldish Oar, and this does yield above half Silver, and it Red
goldish Oar.
is found that these Oars do break like one another, and the difference not
easily discerned.

Black Oar.
As for all Oars which are gray and black in breaking and withal heavy, they
are often rich in Silver, but such as break black and light, or brown and
yellow are not always rich, and it happens often that there is little or no
Silver in them.

Ironish Oar
All Ironish brown and Yellowish streamy Oars are from decaying Mines, pierced
by cold winterly Winds, and these contain some, but are not rich in Silver.

Leadish Oar
Also the leadish, or Oar that looks like mud (and therefore called muddy Oar)
is sometimes rich and sometimes very poor in Silver, and indeed all leaden,
horny, stony Oars, if they be yellow, white, gray, black, brown, red or green
do not contain in themselves (if no other Oar be mingled with them) much
Silver, and for the most part none at all.

Glittering Oar.
Also there is reckoned among the Easy-flowing Oars, all such Lead-Oars as are
of a bright, glittering, shining Nature, or of a gray, brown or white Color,
yet these of themselves alone have little Silver, but the small flaky
glittering or Wismet Oars, from the Mines in Bohemia, as also the much flaky,
shining Oars from the Mines of Fryburgh in Misnia, do contain from 6 to 10
ounces in a centner.

Float Oars many Sorts.
Also all float or Easy-flowing Oars that are Yellow, white, brown, blew,
green, or gray, do contain near that proportion.

Azure or blew Oar.
Also Copper-grass Oar or Copper of a Mountain green, or Copper glass-Colour do
hold some Silver, but the Course Oars of an Azure, Mountain-Green Color, are
commonly poor.

See the Dictionary.
In fine, all Silver Oars in all sorts of Mines free from Flint, Blent, Cobolt,
Mispickle, Glimmer, Wolferan, course spelter and Wismet (or be spizy and
Copery) are called, saft flowing mild Oars.

Flinty Oars many Sorts.
On the contrary, all flinty Oars are reckoned among the harsh, gross and hard
flowing Oars, and of these Oars there are also several sorts, namely the gross
Flinty-Oar, the water flinty-Oar, and the square flinty-Oar, these contain
little Silver (and the most part of them none) or not above half an ounce in a
Centner: also Copper-flinty Oars that are yellow like Brass, also the Brown and
Blew-staind-Flinty Oars, they do contain much good Copper (as may be Seen in
the third Book) but such Oars contain little Silver, yet one sort more than
another.

Cobolt blent mispickle Oars.
There are also rich-copper-Flinty Oars which have no Silver but the Blent,
Cobolt or mispickle Oars (as in Section 11.) if they be speckled or spotted
with round black or gray spots, they are sometimes rich in Silver and sometimes
poor.

Glimmer, Wolferan, Talk, Cats-silver and sparkling Oar.
Also all common-white Glimmer or wolferan (as in Section 11.) or glimmering or
sparkling Oars, or Talk or Cat-silver are very poor in silver, yet the black
Glimmers are sometimes rich; but for the most part all such glimmery Oars are
commonly poor, so as I account these but as Paterns to other metalick Oars.

Spelter and spizy Oars.
Also all course-Spelter, spizy or coppery-spizy Oars (as in Section 11.) or the
like kind, they are commonly poor in Silver and contain none at all.

Spady Oars.
Also all spady Oars (or such as may be dig'd with a Spade (if they be red,
green, yellow or white (if there be no other mixed silver-Oars with them) for
the most part do contain little or no Silver in them.

Slack and Copper stone
Also there is reckoned among the harsh, or hard-flowing Oars, the raw
slack-stone, and copper-stone, spelter, being alike in cleaving and splitting
of Furnaces which proceeds from the stirring of the flinty parts, as also from
the scummy part in melting them.

The Ways of assaying them.
But how the Proofs of the abovenamed soft-flowing, as also of the hard-flowing
silver Oars are to be wrought, I shall by the following DISCOURSE distinctly
and exactly inform the READER.

Now, because that in many places there are no Workmen who can well make
Instruments, belonging to the proving of these Oars, I will for the better
Information, show first what is chiefly necessary to be done in such proofs,
both in the whole, and in parts; as also what matter or stuff is to be used
about them; as also what Instruments are to be made and prepared for them.

CHAP. III. How the Assay- Ovens to prove Silver and other Metals are to be
prepared.
Special Ovens.
THERE must be special Furnaces (for Assaying) made of good Potters Clay, and
bound with strong Iron wyre or Hoops, that they may not fall asunder by reason
of the strong heat which they must endure. But some diligent Assayers which
intend to carry on their Work effectually, do form and adorn their Furnaces
fairly and comely, so as they may be pleasing to the Sight: This indeed does
Adorning them.
give them an adornment, but there is no more done with it, than with a Common
Furnace (that is made well, though plain.)

Now there are many sorts of Assay-Ovens which Assayers made use of according
to their several ways of working, but this is to be noted, That in one Oven,
the Fire is to be better governed than in another, either by heat or cold, as
the difference may be seen in the following Sculpture: But I intend to mention
first, how the Ancients have made their Furnaces.

Iron Assay Ovens of the Ancients.
The Common Assay-Ovens, in which the Ancients have made small Trials, they have
caused to be made square, of strong iron Plates about fifteen Inches wide
below, and sixteen Inches high, and sloping from below to the top, so that the
square was about ten Inches at the top, and this Square had no Bottom, but in
the Fire part it had a Mouth-hole (of four Inches and a half wide) and the
other three sides had each of them at the Bottom a wind hole, four Inches long,
and one and an half high: there was also every where about the plate, holes cut
into it, so that it was ruff and sharp for the Loam to stick the better to the
luting of their Furnaces.

To make a good Loam.
Now to make such a special good Loam, (as will hold well in the fire) take
good and well*wrought Loam, beat among it Flocks of Wool, or Horse*dung, Blood
of Oxen, scales of Iron and common Salt, with which lute the Furnace two inches
and a half thick, let it dry, then take small ground Venice-glass, Boneashes,
and a small quantity of Loam, mingle it well together, and plaster it all over
the inside of the Furnace, let it dry well, then make a gentle fire in it, that
it may be neald, and when the Furnace is to be used, there must first be a
smooth fireplace, and upon that Copell-Ashes are to be laid the breadth or
thickness of a finger, and this on the Furnace must be placed; and in the Oven
upon the Fireplace a Muffle (which is formed as the following Sculpture does
show:) and thus the Assay-Oven is made ready: and when there is any Trial to be
made of the Furnace, after it is well glazed within by the last plastering over
of the Furnace with the Venice-glass and Ashes, it will last the longer.

And when the Furnace in length of time is quite burnt out, then the old Loam
is only to be knocked out, and fresh put in the room thereof, and proceed as
before.

In such a Furnace, he that knows well the Government of the Fire, and is an
experienced Assayer, may make all manner of Trials, only the Registers are
sooner stopped with the Ashes than the Furnace with the two mouth-holes, of
which there will be information hereafter.

Norinberg Assay Ovens made of Potters Loam.
Some Assayers do use in their trial of Furnaces (which are made of Potters
Clay, and formed like the abovenamed Furnace) and tie them with wyre, and set
them upon a foot which is broad and hollow, and has in each of the four sides
wind-holes (as the following Sculpture will show.) And in this Furnace it is
more easy to govern the Fire, than in the above named Furnace, because the
wind-holes in that Furnace (which are in the foot) do stop themselves easily;
and such Assay-Ovens are called Proof-Ovens of Noringberg, and the Muffles
appertaining to them, are also seen in the Sculpture.

A slight Assay Oven of Iiles.
But if a man should be in a place where no Assay-Ovens are to be had, and yet
would assay a few trials in haste; in such case, Take only a few Tyles, place
them together in a square, and leave in the sides Wind-holes, and in the
forepart leave also a Mouth-hole, and with a Pipkin cut in two, make a Muffle
in it, and in such Furnaces Assays and trials may be well performed.

Assay Ovens in which the fire is best governed.
But in such Assay Ovens, in which most commodiously Assayes may be made, and in
which the Fire may be right and duly governed, also as such as are not easily
stopped with ashes, and in which all the Trials (that may be made in any
Furnace) may be tried, they are to be made thus, viz. eleven Inches wide, and
sixteen inches high, which is the full hight of the Assay-Oven, when you have
measured eight inches high, then work it a little in, also that the Oven at the
top may remain seven inches wide, and the thickness must be one inch and a
half, and the lowermost Bottom three quarters of an inch thick, then measure
from the bottom three inches high, and four inches and a half wide, which is
for the lower Ovens mouth, then measure two inches above the lower Mouth-hole
(which is for separating of the upper and lower Ovens mouth:) in like manner
measure the height, three inches and a half, and four inches wide, then after a
separation of an inch thick, make the uppermost mouth-hole about the bigness of
a little finger, so that from the middle of the hole to the top of the Oven
there may remain yet six inches and an half, then on both sides of the
Ovens-mouth, toward the corner, measure three quarters of an Inch: and make
there two holes a pretty-big Fingers widness, which must go strait through the
Oven, as also the like behind: when all this is done, you must then also make a
declination, from whence the Ashes may fall; which must stand two inches and a
half from the bottom, and two inches and a half from the sides of the Furnace,
and the declination must stretch hollow upward from the bottom, six inches and
an half: Only observe this, That if you intend to make any thing of Clay, then
you must add so much as the Clay uses to shrink, because one sort of Clay does
shrink more than another, but most commonly
Clay does shrink the tenth part: When this Assay-Oven is also finished, and is
yet soft, then there must be edges cut in it, in which the Iron-bonds or wire
may lay, after that, let it dry well in the Sun, and then let it be hard baked
in a Potter's Furnace or Brick-kiln.

Assay Ovens made, which outwardly are of a square form, like the abovenamed
Assay Ovens of strong Armour-plate.
Furnace, and are made very neat and clean, of strong Armor-plate, and writhen
with Ironpins, on which the Lute may stick well, and artificially brought
together, also that such a Furnace may be taken asunder into five pieces, which
Furnace, like to that of Iron-plate, must be neatly luted with a good and firm
Lute, and to the strong plate of Iron at the outside of the oven, there must be
little plates to put forward and backward in small Crevices, and so according
to necessity the Trial may be well made: Of such Assay Ovens there is much
Estimation made, but there can no more be accomplished with it, than in one of
the other mentioned Furnaces, if only an Assayer have well the knowledge of the
Fire, after which all Proofs are to be governed, then can he, without question,
do well in all these Ovens.

In this following Sculpture is to be seen how this and the aforementioned Ovens
are to be formed, which is thus Deciphered.
1. An Assay-Oven used by the Ancient Refiners, joined with Iron Plates. 2. An
Essay-Oven used by the Norinburgers (in Germany.) 3. The Foot of it. 4. An
Assay-Oven made of Tiles joined together, which may quickly be done. 5. An
Assay-Oven made of Potters- Loam, and fastened with Iron Bonds. 6. The upper
mouth-hole of it. 7. The lower mouth hole of it. 8. The holes for Iron-barrs to
be put in. 9. An Assay Oven made of Armor- plates.


Sculpture III.


When any one of these Assay-Ovens is thus prepared, then cause two Iron-bars
to be made of an equal length, which must go through the holes that are between
the upper and lower Mouth-holes (Figure 6 and 7) and stand out about three
Inches, on the outside of the Oven, on which the plate must rest before the
upper Mouth-hole, and cause a bottom-plate to be made no bigger than from the
Bars to the lower part of the upper Mouth-hole, and so broad that it may reach
a little above the Iron-Bars, and from the bottom-plate toward the sides, so
as there may remain near an inch of room on the Back part of the Furnace,
whereby the Wind may pass through it into the Oven, so that the fire may do its
work.

To this Assay-Oven there belongs singular Muffles, which may be seen in their
full proportions, in the fourth following Sculpture.

There must be also a Cover to the Furnace, with little Instruments to be made
of Potters stuff, to govern the fire, the Forms of which are also in the fourth
following Sculpture.

CHAP. IV. How Muffles, Bottom-plates, Tests, and other small Potters-Work
(necessary for Assayers) are to be made.
Assayer ought to have so much knowledge, that in case of necessity he may be
able to make his Assay-Ovens himself, as also his Tests, Crucibles, Muffles and
what other Vtensils or Instruments are daily used as necessary to Assaying,
because there are not in every place Masters of this ART to be found who know
how to make the same, and although much pains may be taken to instruct a Potter
(in case of Necessity) how to make some Instruments belonging to this ART, yet
it often happens that they do not make them well, nor in good shapes; whereby
an Assayer may perform his Work: and therefore I (as well as others, when we
could not have good Instruments made fitting for us) have been forced to make
them our selves, which are done thus.

Of preparing Loam for Instruments.
Take good Potters-Loam (as good as may be had) but the Loam or Clay that is
blew and becomes white in the fire, is found to be the best for use; Let such
Loam dry in the Sun till it be hard, and when you do intend to make Instruments
of it, let it be well pulverized, then moisten it with Water till it become
soft, and let it be well trodden or broken with an Iron, then put among it the
Washings of Pibble-stones or very fine sand, as much as the Clay can well bear,
but that you may not add too much or too little, be sure to make out of such
stuff some Assay-Tests or Crucibles, and put into them some hard-flowing Oar
and place them in the fire, which will offer thee a Trial, whereby thou may
see, if the stuff will hold, well, sound and firm; some do mingle among it some
Chalk-stone, or the subtle red Talk or Glimmer in such place where there is
much of it, but which is most necessary, Experience will teach: some take in
stead of it the broken Pots or Crucibles, beaten small and sifted through a
sine Seeve, and put so much among the Clay that they may work it well,
because of its britleness, such Crucibles and Tests as are made of it hold
well, (but when Pibble-stones, as has been said before, are mingled with
it, that it does bind together in the fire, and the bigger the heat is, the
more does it bind) and this Proof-Test may be taken whole out of the Frame.

Loam is prepared you must then have a Frame, in which you may beat the
Proof-Test and How the Cases and Frames and Assay-Tests are made.
Crucibles: the Frames are best made of Brass, but they that cannot have such
may cause them to be made of good Wood of Pear Tree, and an Iron-ring may be
put upon it, very closely, that the Frame, by reason of much use may not split
or break: then anoint the Frame with a little Bacon, and put in it a little
Ball of the prepared stuff, as much as may be enough, and grease also the upper
part of the Frame, which is called the Monk, and beat the upper part with a
wooden Mallet into the Case or Frame, then is the Test formed; press it out
with your Fingers, but have a care that the Clay be not too moist, otherwise
you can not press the Assay-Test whole out: Some do put the Case with the Test
upon a sudden and quick heat, and so the Test will come out whole, this is a
very good way to make the small Crucibles, but with the great Assay-Tests, it
would be too long and tedious.

Muffles you must have wooden sticks cut To make Muffles of Clay over
woodensticks or Fromes.
in form of that bigness the Muffles must be, grease them with Bacon, and frame
a Lump of Lute or Clay, of a convenient bigness, that it may be cut with a
copper wire, into a thin leaf or piece, and put it over the sticks or frame,
and cut out of it such another leaf, as may make it a half round piece, that
you may close it behind, all this must be done upon the form, and must with a
moist hand be stuck close to it: then let it stand, nigh three hours, that the
Clay may be a little hardened, then cut the Muffle out, so as you will have it
cut upon the sides and behind; and let it stand yet a little longer, that it
may go easily from the sticks: Some do strew a little fine sand or ashes upon
the Frame after it is greased with Bacon, that the Muffle may come easily from
the Frame: But that many Muffles may be prepared together, therefore cause more
than one of these Frames to be made, that in the mean time while one does dry
several more may be made.

How the bottom of them are to be framed.
Frames of Wood, in Widness as the bottom leafs are, thick and broad; they must
be pressed full with the prepared Loam, then they will dry quickly, and come out
easily; or cut out of a piece of Clay, a leaf with a small wire, so thick as
you would have it, and shape it further as is necessary.

Of drying and calcining the Loam for Assaying.
These Tests, Muffles, Bottoms, Leafs and Crucibles thus prepared, must be very
well dried, and then in a Kiln or Potters-Oven well calcined, although the
Muffles and bottom Leaves are also used raw and uncalcined in the Assay-Oven,
but there must be a very gentle fire, and the fire in the Assay-Oven, must
first be kindled from above, downwards, and so they will remain whole,
otherwise they will all fly in pieces; and thus you are fully instructed how
the Potters-Clay is to be made into Instruments, and if they be not good and
firm they are a great hindrance to the Assayer: the Forms of which are truly
to be seen in the follovving Sculpture.

Sculpture IV.
Deciphered.
1. The Muffles which the ancient Assayers did use, and the common Assayers do
still. 2. The Muffle to the Norimgberg Assay-Oven. 3. The Muffle to the
Assay-Oven with the two mouthed holes. 4. Stopples. 5. Bottom Plates. 6.
Covers. 7. Wooden Frames or Moulds for Muffles. 8. The lower part of an
Assay-Test. 9. The upper part of an Assay Test. 10. The Frames or Moulds for
Assay-Tests. 11. The lower part of the Assay-Crucible. 12. The upper part to
it. 13. The Assay-Crucible perfected. 14. The small Instruments for governing
the fire made of Potters-Clay.




CHAP. V. Of Copels, and how they may be made firm and good.
Refiner to have his Copels made well, because if the Copels Copels of good
staff.
be not made of good Loam or Clay they will devour the fine Metal very much,
especially when the Clar is not well made which is to be put upon the Copel,
because it will rise, and so the silver Grain will be hid under it, and if the
Clar be not good, the silver Grain will be lost under the Lead and not fined.
Also, if the Ashes be not good, or something fat or oily, then will the Copels
melt in the fire, which will prove of ill Consequence, because with such there
can be no Trial made.

But, that you may have good Copels, that your Trials may be the better
performed, make them in this following Manner.

Of Ashes for Copils.
Take Ashes burnt from any light Wood, (as Sallows, etc. for such are best for
this use) and put them into a Seeve, and pour Water on them that the Ashes may
be washed through the Seeve into a Tub, so the Coals and grosser parts may
remain in the Seeve, then pour into the Tub so much water more, that the Ashes
may be covered-over, then stir it about, and let it stand an hour or two:
whereby the water will draw out the fatness and oilyness out of the Ashes, then
pour the remaining water very gently off, that the thick troubled water may not
go along with the clear water; and then pour another water on it, and let it
stand also till the upper water grow clear; then pour it again gently off, and
this do till the water has no fatness or sharpness: then the third time pour
clear water on the Ashes and stir them about with a stick, as before, and pour
that water, whilst it is thick and muddy, into another Tub, that the gross part
of the Ashes in the first may remain till the water in the other Tub be clear
and well settled; then let the water run clear from it again, this is the first
clearing: then pour another water upon the washed settled Ashes, and stir them
again with a stick, then pour the thick again into another Tub or Boul, that is
to try if there remains any Fatness or gross Ashes, that it may all be cleanly
separated, and let the muddy water settle very well because it is the last
washing: and when the Ashes are thus far prepared, then make Balls thereof, let
them dry well in the Sun, or in a Bakers Oven, and keep them clean for use.

Of Vinewood ashes and common Ashes.
There are some Refiners that in stead of Ashes (burnt off light Wood) do take
Ashes of Vine-wood, (but they are not everywhere to be had) and they do wash
and prepare them as abovesaid, some do use only such Ashes of which the common
Lixivium or Lie is made, but the two former are better, which you will also
find by use and Experience, only there must be a care that the Ashes be clear
and well prepared.

Copels good Of Bone-ashes, and which Bones are most serviceable.
and clean Bone-Ashes, for which take Bones that have no Marrow or Gravy, and
burn them white, pulverize, and pass them through a hair Seeve, then grind
them upon a stone, like Meal, and so you have Bone-Ashes prepared: then take
two parts of the washed Ashes which have first past through the hair Seeve,
that they may not remain in Lumps; and with one part of the ground Bone-Ashes,
and mingle these two well together, and moisten them with strong-Beer (but
first let the Beer boil away one third) or, with a Glew-water: But, if you will
bestow something more upon it, then beat the whites of Eggs in water, and
moisten the Ashes therewith, but not too much, that when you press a handful
together, the Ash-ball may well remain entire: then let the Copel-case be well
filled with Ashes and put in, but be sure to scrape the superfluous Ashes off
it, Munich.
and give the Monk three or four blows with a wooden Mallet upon the
Copel-frame, wipe the Monk clean off, and strew (with a little wooden shovel)
good Clar upon the Copel, while it is yet in the Case, and part the Clar, with
your finger, and set the Monk strait upon it again, and give two or three
Blovvs to fasten the Clar upon the Copel (as necessity does require) that the
Clar may be fixed upon it, then take the Monk off, press upon other Ashes the
Copel out of the Case, so is the Copel ready; in such a manner may you make
Copels great and small, then let them dry till you have need of them, so will
they be firm and good.

Some do use a special Instrument made of Latten Clar, and with a wire that
has underneath a An Instrument to strew the Clar.
little cross- Plate, they cause it to run through, but I do not like it so
well, as if it were parted with the finger.

Some do take also among the Copel-Ashes the tenth Of Glue for Copels.
part of good Potters-Loam (which must also be washed like unto the Copel-Ashes)
and dry it in the Sun, and this is necessary to be used with it, and when the
Clay is good and holds well in the fire: otherwise it may do more hurt than
good in the Copels, and I conclude, when a man has good Ashes that are well
washed (as I have hinted before) good Copels may be made that need no mixture,
and those Ashes may well be moistened with fair water, but the Copels are more
brickle by it, and not so firm, as with the strong Beer or glew-water.

CHAP. VI. How good Copels may be made, wherein the Trials will not leap nor
sparkle.
SUCH Copels as I have hitherto thought Copel be cool and hot, then some part
of the Silver is soon lost, but if an Assayer is uncertain in the Silver and
Money-proofs, and has not a full knowledge of the Fire, it is better for him
to cause the following Copels be made for Trials.

Knuckle-Bones, or other Bones be burnt very Bones for Copels.
white (the Calves or Sheeps-bones are best) among common Bones) stamp them
fine, and grind them upon a Grind stone fine as flower, then mosten such
subtle bone-ashes (like other Copel-Ashes) with strong Beer, and of this make
Copels, and strew Clar on them, as has been done with the other before named
Copels, and let them dry; so are they prepared.

Bones of Fishes may be had, (which of all Bone-Ashes are the best to be used
for Copels.) When you would assay upon these Copels, set them in the
Proof-Oven, and when they are only glowing hot, then put what you do intend to
try in then, and although they are only thus, the Proofs will not leap, but be
purely finished: only this is to be noted, that the Assayes upon these Copels
are much colder, longer and go more subtly than upon the other Copels,
therefore there cannot easily any thing of Silver be lost; and when the proof
is finished than may the Grain be taken off very pure and clean, and nothing
stick to it, although it had been a Coppery-Silver that was refined in it,
which Grains do commonly enter into the Clar, and they cannot always be taken
off cleanly from other Copels.

CHAP. VII. How good Clar is to be made.
Clar must be had for the making of Copells, because if the same be not good,
then there can be no good Copels made, although the Ashes be prepared as well
as can be. Now (as for my part) I have with Diligence tried many Bones, and
have found that Calve's-head Bones or the Scales that come from their Forehead
are the best: Take them and wash them from a boiling hot water, or let them
boil well in the water, that the fatness and foulness may be separated from the
other, then dry them and burn them until they be fair and white, then stamp
and grind them on a stone, still moistning them with a little water, and put
them in a glazed Pot with a Cover luted on it, and set them once more in a fire
or Potters-Oven, and let them burn well for four hours, then let them cool;
this done, take these burnt Ashes out of the Pot, and grind them once more very
fine upon a smooth (or Marble) stone, that they may be very clear (of which
clear preparation, the Clar has its Appellation or name) keep it from Dust,
and it will serve for your use at any time.

Hartshorn to make Clar, and they Clar of Hearts horn
burn it and order it as the other abovesaid, and this does yield good Clar, but
those of the Scales of Calves-heads I like better.

Fish-bones (as Pike and other Fishes Of Fishbone.
Bones) very good Clar to be made, but the Fatness must be first separated from
it, by boiling and burning them (as before) but this according to ones
pleasure, and which Clar any one likes best, he may use, only he must be
careful to see that they be finely ground to Powder.

Clar is ground to powder, then some do How to be kept.
wash it in fair water, and make apiece Pieces of it, or Balls (like
Chalk-stone) as I my self did some years since, but I find that if it be finely
ground, and dried only, it is the better, because by washing and drying it, and
making them into pieces or Balls, they will grow hard, and cannot be so well
scraped from the Lumps, as with that which is in Powder.

Now, how the Copel-Case and the Copel is to be ordered and performed the
following Sculpture will show.

Sculpture V.
Deciphered.
1. 3. The Copel- cases. 2. 4. The Copels that are made in them. 5. The Copels
as they are set upon one another. 6. The Washed Ashes (or Clar) made into
Balls. 7. He that works the Ashes. 8. He that strikes the Copels into their
Frames or Cases.




But that the Forms and Proportions of the Copels may Sulpture does
demonstrate. Forms of Copels.


Sculpture VI.
Deciphered.
1. The Copel-Case. 2. The Copel for the Copper-Oars and common Proof of Common
Oars. 3. The Copels for Oars that are poor in Silver, and also for common Oar
Trials. 4. The Copel for common Siver-Tryals, which are assayed according to
Weight. 5. The Copel to Starling-silver Proof. 6. How the Copels are set one
upon the other in the Ovens.




CHAP. VIII. How Glass of Lead, or Lead-Glass is to be made.
Assayes, therefore I do intend, before I further proceed, to show Lead-glass
to what Oars it is to be used.
how the Fluss, or lead Glass must be prepared, which lead Glass is a Fluss, and
is used to the very hardest and unflowing Oars, to the end that they may as
easily be boiled up as the soft Oars: of which boiling, hereafter shall follow
more full Direction.

To prepare Flus or lead-glass.
Prepare this Fluss or Lead-glass, thus, Take fair and white pibble-stones, burn
them in a Potters-Oven, stamp them small, and pass it through an hair Seeve,
pour clean water on it, and wash the Mud from it, that the powder of the
pibble-stones may be clean and pure: of these pibble stones take one part, and
half a part of red Littorage or Littarge, mingle it dry together, put it into a
Crucible, but not above two thirds full, and put common Salt on the top of it,
or Saltpeter (if such can be had) about three Fingers height above the matter,
and lute it well; and let it flow together with a strong heat in a Wind-Oven or
Tyle-Oven; let the Crucible cool of it self, then open it, and all will be
mingled in a yellow Glass; only a little Regulus of Lead at the Bottom, which
is to be separated, but preserve the Glass, which is the Fluss.

Littarge first by it self, and of the slakes that come from it, take ten parts
to one Another way.
part of prepared pibble-stones, and cover it with Salt, (as above) cause them
to flow, and so a good Lead-glass will come of it.

Another way.
Or take instead os the washed Pibbles, good washed Loam, which is dry and
firmly pulverized, one part, and three parts of good red Littarge, cover it
with Salt, let it flow in a strong heat, this does yield a fair Lead glass.

To cleanse the Leadglass.
When the Lead-glass is made, and again melted in a Crucible, put a little Niter
in it, and cause it to flow a while after, so the Lead-glass will become
cleaner or more flowing: or one may use among it a fourth part of Caput Mort*
and cause them to flow together, this also causes the Fluss to become finer and
more flowing.

CHAP. IX. Of the Weights which belong to the proving of Silver-Oars.
Centner-weight by which all Oars, Slicks or washed slake-stones and what else
of this nature are proved) is by the old Assayers proportioned thus: That the
Centner is orderd to be just an Hundred pound weight: for this Reason, because
in many places the Oars or slake-stones, and the silvery unwash'd black Copper
is bought by weight, and the fine Silver in it according to the Proof (before
it is melted out of it) is paid for this end, that the Buyer may not be a
Looser (because of the waste in melting to get out the Silver) therefore has
he so many pounds as the Common Centner of the Mine yields (or where it does
weigh more or above) which Centner of the Mynt does commonly weigh an Hundred
and ten pounds, so that he may have the ten Pounds that is above, with the
Silver in it, to help to bear the loss) therefore in a well ordered melting of
poor Oars they do hold most commonly 3, 4, or 5 loath of Silver, for the loss of
the Silver in Melting should not be above the Silver contained in the ten
Pounds of the Oar, that was over, comparing it with the proof- Centner: but in
rich work and rich Oars, or concerning very rich Copper, the ten pounds which
are above are also justly taken along with it.

Dram. Of dividing the common Proof Centner.
1 2 Drams or half a Loath.

1 Loath or two Ounces. 2 4 8 16

1 2 4 8 16 A Pound. 25 A quarter of a Centner. 50 Half a Centner. 100 A whole
Centner.

Two sorts of Penny weights.
The Peny-weights are of two sorts, the one is with us in High Germany, the
other is as it is used in Holland, after which the Silver or Grains may be
tried, upon a just proportion how much a Mark has in it of fine Silver.

1 Heller, or Halfpenny. Of dividing the Penny-weight in High Germany.
1

1 Pence. 2

1 Drams. 2

1 Loath, or, 4 half Ounces. 2 4 8 16 Loath is a Mark, or 256 pence.

Of dividing the Low Dutch Penny Weight.
The single Grains. 1 2 3 6 12 Grains is a Half penny.

1 2 Pence. 3 6 Pence is a Mark, or 288 Grains. 12 There are so much as 256
pence.

The Mark in the Grain-weight, is parted into Loths and Grains, like as the Low
Dutch Peny-weight is parted into Loths, Pence and Grains, and this Weight is
most commonly used for Trials in the Crucible for Coined Money, to which it does
best serve: for this Reason, because the Grains here are reduced into greater
Numbers, and the Contents more exactly found out, because in the Peny-weight it
is only parted into Pence, and Halfpence, and although the fourth part of a
Grain (as to its Contents) is not usually reckoned, yet it is necessary for an
Assayer to have such a fourth part in his parting or sharing for Information
and Exactness sake,

Single Grains.

1 Grains is half a Loath. 2 3 6 9

1 2 4 Loath, or two Ounces. 8 16 Loath is a Mark, or 288 Grains.

CHAP. X. How all Silver-Oars are to be tried.
Oars, because Assaying of soft flowing Oars.
some are harsh, hard-flowing and raw; as also that some are soft-flowing and
mild: The soft-flowing Oars are thus to be tried for Silver: Take the Oar,
grind it with an Hammer upon a broad Iron, (fitted to that purpose) as small as
powder, weigh of it a Assay-weight) put it on a well-made Test, and mingle
eight times as much of Lead in Grains among it, and set in a warm Assay-Oven,
and presently make it hot, and set Coals before the Ovens mouth, so the Lead
will begin to drive and turn quickly to Slack or Dross, and when it has stood
so long in the Proof-Oven, that the Lead upon the Test is all covered over with
dross, then it has dross enough; (this is called Boiling up or Vp-boyling)
then take an Iron hook, lay it that it may be a little red hot, and stir the
Oar with it cleanly about, which is done for this Reason, that if there should
stick any of the Oar on the sides of the Test, it may be made loose, and that
the Lead also may work on it, and consume it: After the stirring, let it stand
a while, and then take it out of the Assay-Oven, and pour the Lead and dross
upon an Iron-plate, in one of the little holes that are to be made upon the
Plate, and let it cool, and then separate the dross clean from the Lead, so is
the proof of the Vpboyling ready, which is done in the space of about half an
hour, afterward set Coppels in the Assay Oven, and let them glow well for half
an hour, (and this is called Nealing) and upon these well neal*d Coppels put
your Lead so wrought, which has been boiled up, and make it warm that the same
may first begin to work, and when it begins to drive, then keep the fire not
too high, that the Lead or work may drive well, and go off upon the Coppel in a
conveient heat, and so the Lead will all be drawn into the Coppel, and the
grain of Silver will remain alone, (provided that the Oar has Silver in it)
upon the Coppel, although it be very small, then take the Coppel out of the
Assay-Oven, and take with your Pincers the Grain from it, so is the proof
finished: Now, how this Grain is to be weighed, with the Assay-Scales, it does
require a special diligence; and of this you shall be more exactly instructed
afterward.

Assay these harsh and hard flowing Oars in Trials of harsh Oars.
this manner, Take the Oar ground small, and weigh of it a Centner with your
Assay-weight, put it on a good Test, and add to it its due weight of Lead, to
wit, Fourteen Centners: set it in an Assay-Oven, and give it presently heat,
that the Lead in the Assay-Test may begin to drive, as you have done with the
soft-flowing Oars, and when the Lead begins to drive, then let it be cold
again, which will be, when you do shut the lower mouthhole, and do open the
upper, then will the Oar rise, and come to be roasted upon the Lead; when it is
roasted enough upon the Lead (that is when it is seen to leave smoking much
and begins to slack) then may thou give it heat again, as much as can be.
This happens when you do lay Coals before the upper Mouth-hole of the
Assay-Oven, so the great heat will force it, that the Oar will turn to slackes,
but it does slack small and not easily, and when the Oar is almost boiled up,
and has slacked finely, then stir it cleanly with an Iron-hook, let it stand
again a pretty while in the Oven, and when all is turned to fine slakes, then
pour it as before upon a Plate hollowed, or let it cool in the Test, and beat
the slackes from it, so is the proof of up-boyling ready.

A quick upboyling of Silver Oars
In such manner, almost, may all Pibbles or raw Oar be boiled up, and this is a
right and good way to do it, but the up-boyling is hardly done in an hour, yet
it may be done sooner in this manner; when you have weighed your Oar, and set
it on the Test without Lead in the Assay-Oven, give first some heat until the
oar upon the Test is roasted, and smoke no more: then set the Lead, (as much as
belongs to the Trial) upon the Test; give it a great heat, so will the Oar boil
up something easier, and in less time than if it should have been roasted upon
the Lead.

roasted without Lead) is false and not right, yet I do give this Information,
That I have oftentimes, (with one sort or other) tried both ways, and I do
truly affirm, That I have found no difference: But there must be a Care taken,
that when the Oar is set alone upon the Test, that it may not be put into a
violent sudden heat, because such an heat does raise the small Oar, and does
cause it to dust away, especially when the Oars are stony, for it makes the
Trial false (this excepted) I know no fault, but be careful and you will find
it true.

Another way to try raw Oar.
Some have also another way to try raw mild Oar; as thus, They set first the
Test in the Oven, that it may glow, and then put the Lead in it, and let it by
it self slack pretty well, after that put upon the slack'd Lead, the weighed
Oar in small Papers, so the hot Lead, and hot Slack will draw the Oar quickly
to it self, and will not let it rise much, or boil up very well: this way I
also like, only that in drawing the Oar upon the hot Lead, (especially the mild
Oars) it will dust, and when there are many Proofs to be made together, there
will something be neglected, and the Proofs may become false.

slack, but remain upon the Lead (for so will the Chalk-stones) the gross and
raw blind or Cobolt, the mispeckle, as also the mild and fresh Pibbles and
water-pibbles which must (assoonas they are weighed) be mingled with Flus or
Lead-glass (as has been before mentioned) which will hold the raw Oar, and
does not suffer it to rise high, because it has help by the Lead-glass, so
that it will become soft Slacks and slacks well, and boyls up clean, as may
be seen in melting: harsh Oars (which in Vp-boyling each one by his proper
addition may be helped) that they will be well separated, or else there will
remain some Silver in the slacks, and so there would be some Damage.

Of Assaying the Copper slacky Oar.
In S. Joakims Valley (so called) there are Oars broken, which are called
Coppery-Oars or flaky Oars, when they are once boiled up, the Work or lead
will not go off upon the Coppel, but casts up a Ring or border, and eats much
in, and makes the Proof false: and when this is known by an Oar, then must
the work or Lead which has been boiled up (and from which the dross is
separated) be again set upon the Test, and be slack'd again, and then the Lead
will come off clean and white; This is called, the Lead cleansed of its
Foulness, then it must go off upon the Coppel, as before.

Cleansing of the gross sulphury Flints after Vpboyling.
It happens also often, that the gross Sulphury oars do also make the Lead black
and harsh, also that upon a well neal'd Coppel it does not drive, but leap off,
which makes the Trials oftentimes come false, because of its Foulness, such
Lead you must once more set upon a new Test or upon the same, and let it slack
again, so will it be white and clean and go well off upon the Coppel, and loose
nothing.

To try Cobolt Oars.
Concerning the Cobolt oars, there are many sorts of them, some fresh and some
mild, black and gray, some in trying do go easily into the Lead, but such Lead
that comes by Vp-boyling from it, is black and red, and it afterward does work
upon the Coppel, and dissolves, therefore it must after the first Vp-boyling,
be cleansed again of its Wildness and must be slackd once more, so it will
become white, and go clean off from the Coppel: One may also set the weightiest
Cobolt Oar in a Test in the Oven, and let the smoke pass away, some of which
sort do leave gray Ashes, and some a black grain upon the Test, and the rest
will burn all away, but put a little Lead to it, and it will easily go in it,
and also go clean off from the Coppel, and is found alike with the other Trials.

raw oar upon the Test is roasted without Lead, the Roasting Oar in the Ovens.
roasting does take away some of the Silver, and that the gross Sulphur does
carry it away, and they will demonstrate it by some volatile raw Flints, and
the raw slackestone, which comes from it; which after they are roasted do not
yield so much Silver as if they were melted raw through the Furnace, to which I
do yield, and have found the same true: But because the roasting generally in
the great Work with quantities of oars is done in the naked fire, in which it
also must lie several hours* contrariwise in the Assay-oven and small Proofs
there is but little oar put in, and that in a close Fire is roasted in a short
time, I judge for certain, that through such roasting of the Oars in the Assay
oven, nothing can be lost of the Silver.

Probation by which the right and full worth may be found.
Some may ask, If this way of using, trying and boiling up of Oars in the Test
(and to let them so go off in the Test) be the right way, or no, by which the
true worth, and how much Silver the Oar contains in it may be known? To which I
answer, That this is the right proving, after which the melting Works may be
ordered, and set up: But the true worth, how much Silver the Oar has in it, is
not found there.

But to know this, Set a great Coppel (as is used to Copper Assayes for Silver)
in the Assay-oven, and neal it well, and put sixteen Centners of Lead in it,
let it begin to drive, then put one Centner of the ground-oar, which must be
parted into many parts, and put it in small Papers, one after another, when the
one part does come first on it, it will seem stubborn upon the Lead, and will
cover it all over, but let not this hinder thee; Do it first a little cool, and
then hot, so it will soon slack in the Coppel, and the slacks will pass
away, then set an other part of the Oar on the Lead, and that will do like
the first, which slackes will soon pass away, then put in like manner the
Oar all singly upon the Lead, and it will all pass clean away in the Coppel,
so that it will hardly be discerned, but seem like any other work upon the
Coppel.

In this manner may all other Works (if they be flowing or harsh, as also
melted slack stone and Copper stone) be tried through; in which you will
find a great difference, if you try the other usual Way of Refining, but this
way cannot be used generally, except of all Oars that are melted, to slacks
which are not altogether without Silver; therefore the common way of Assaying
(with the Vp-boyling upon Tests, of which all slacks do come, which cannot be
wholly without Silver) is the best way: I have only mentioned these Assayes, to
demonstrate, That with the same (out of every Oar) the right and full worth of
Silver may be found in it, as fully as in the other Common Assayes: For several
years, some worthy Assayers have weighed the Oars with the Centner-weight, To
try with Lead glass.
which they intended to try upon silver Proofs mingled with Lead-glass, and
covered with Salt in a Crucible, and placed it before the Bellows, and did melt
it into a Regulus, after which when the Crucible was cold, then have they
beaten out the Regulus, and together with the slackes have set it again upon a
Test in an Assay-Oven, and caused it to slack fully, which way is nothing
vvorth, especially when many Oar-Proofs are to be made: then Refiners have
soon seen it, and have When many Oars are*to be tried.
thereupon ordered their Trials according to our way.

Here I must mention also, That when an Assayer has daily much to try (to
whose hands without Question harsh and hard*flowing Oars come often) and if
he be then well skilled he knows by much and daily Experience and Practice)
how each Oar is in the Trial; therefore when he has prepared the Oar for
Assaying (and so he must because of the many sorts) use a bigger Assay-oven,
that he may set several Proofs together at Work, whereby his Trials may be made
the sooner, and must keep this Order, when he will set his Assays in the Oven,
if they be 8, 9, or more, he must place them accordingly upon the Assayes,
which are prepared in this manner; viz. That always the hard-flowing Oars may
be hindmost in the Oven, and that the soft-flowing may stand before: for they
are soonest boiled up, and so may be taken out of the Oven without hindrance to
those that must be longest in the fire, and then be cast upon an Iron- plate,
which Plate must be made thus, It must have as many Holes and Vents as there
are Tests to be set in the oven at once: so that each Oar may be poured out
from its own hole, that you may not mistake: But if it should happen that
(because of thy many Trials) you must have above one Furnace, then put all the
hard-flowing Oars into one Furnace, and the soft-flowing into the other;
otherwise you must stay one Trial for the other, which would be an hinderance.
This way of Assaying is at Kuttingburgh (because of the great Oar-Trade in
common use there) so that in some places every Week 200 Trials of Oars are
made, and the Contents are delivered to a Dram.

To assay to a Dram*
Take Notice, That it is with this, as with other Trials, (as was before
mentioned) only have a Care that you make use of an Assay-weight which may not
be too little, and to have good and quick Scales upon which you may know the
weight to a dram, or the fourth part of an Ounce, so then if you do well with
the Proof in the Fire, then may you safely and surely give in the true Contents
of as many Loths and Drams as you do find, after that one is weighed.

Trial is made and that you will draw up or weigh your small proofgrains, How
to weigh the tried grain.
let your Scales be kept in a Case of Glass (that the same may be preserved from
the Wind and Dust) then put into the one Scale the small grain of Silver, and
into the other the grain of Lead (as small as it is) and put as much of the
Assay-weight to it, that it may stand even with the grain in the other Scale,
when this is done, then change the Scales that are in the Proof-scales, and see
if the Scales stand even as before, if then the Proof be found alike on the one
side as on the other, and just with the weight, then may the same be judged
true, and be given in.

To boil rich Oar with Fluss.
Such silver Oars as are very rich may also with the Fluss (made of Salt-petar
and Argol asshall follow hereafter) be mingled and put into a Crucible and
covered over with Salt, and may be melted like unto the Copper Oars before the
Bellows, and there will be a silver Regulus, in the bottom of the Crucible
(which is not very tuff nor pure, because of other incorporated Metals) the
which you may make fully tuff upon a Test, and in this manner the silver is
very easily to be had out, but it is not the true Contents, because the Slacks
do yet contain part of the Silver in them, the grain also does not come very
fine from the Test except it be done upon the Coppel.

CHAP. XI. How poor Oars of Silver are to be Assayed.
poor and unclean silver Oars which are mingled with stones (and yet may be
washed off with water) Assay them thus; stamp and grind them in an Iron Mortar
very fine (like flower) mingle all well together; and weigh 28 Centners of it
with the Assay weights, then put it into a smooth Tub, wash it with water till
it remain like a fine slick or Clay, then weigh this wet slick and you will
find how much those Oars do weigh and afford of clean slick, in one Center
(because the slicks that are made clean by washing are also weiged wet) try it
upon silver (as you have been taught above) after such a Proof you may make
your Accounts: and if by preparing and vvorking thus you can subsist: such a
Proof has preserved many an Assayer from danger of loss.

CHAP. XII. To try Muddy-vvater springs of Silver.
mild silver Veins, there springs out of the Mountain a blackish or yellowish
muddy water, which does often contain Silver: this you must try thus, Take a
Potfull of this Water, boil it that there may remain a slime or settlement,
weigh this, and do with it as with other Silver Oar, so will you find what it
contains.

CHAP. XIII. How a true Lead-Grain which is usually drawn off in the Proof, is
to be made.
Assayer has need to have great Care of the Lead-grain which he may make of
the Lead that he uses daily more than one grain, that he may be certain,
because all Lead, almost, does contain Silver, and although the Lead of Villach
is counted the best for to assay withal, yet there is but little to be found
of it that is quite without Silver.

The Lead of Villach not without Silver.
unexpert Assayers that do run off upon the Copel four Centners of Lead, and
when they find no Silver therein, do therefore conclude that there is no
Silver in the Lead, but there is need to run off so much Lead upon the Coppel,
as much as is required to every Assay, and to try it more than once, and if
then there is found nothing in all this, then may it be concluded, That the
Lead holds no Silver, and yet one is not to rely altogether upon it, but an
Assayer is to prove his Lead several times over and over, again: that if a
piece or lump should differ one from another (because the Pieces of Lead are
not all cast at once in the smelting House where it is made) that he may be
certain of his Lead, which is of much concernment: and so you will find that
also the Villach-Lead does leave a grain of Silver when the full weight of Lead
is assayed, which silver-grain is to be laid upon the Scales with the
Assay-weight, that it may be abated from the other Grain of Silver which came
from the Proof-Oar.

Assayers are of the mind, That if there is a little Copper added that holds no
Silver at all, and The Lead-grain with the Addition of Copper.
does cause it to go off on the Coppel, that then the Lead-grain is found the
better: this is well, if one desires to try Copper upon Silver, and so to make
the Lead-grain; but to Oar-proofs, and to other things which are not Coppery
such a Lead-grain must not be used.

To make another Lead grain*
Because all Oar-Tryals do slack in the proving such as are very rich of Lead,
and yet do afford some Silver: the Opinion of some is, to take the weight of
Lead, and a Centner of Earth of the Mine or common Oar which has little or no
silver, and boil them up together, that they may turn to slacks, as is done
with the Oar-Tryals; then the slacks will draw in part of the Lead grain, which
is to be counted for a true Lead-grain for use. But I judge because the Lead
grain is otherwise poor, that the Difference herein is not great, yet it is
left to every ones pleasure to make use of his own way.

CHAP. XIV. How a Slackstone or Copper-stone is to be made, and to be tried for
Silver, and what the Slackstone is.
What Slackstone is.
SLACKSTONES (as the Philosophers do judge) are Sulphur and Arsnick mingled with
a subtle Earth, and does separate in fusion from the Dross, and does draw the
Copper and Silver to it self, demonstrated thus; The Brimstone in the beginning
does roast away, and the Arsnick does sublime it self with a strong heat, but
the Earth in which the Silver is and the Copper does remain, which is
afterward easily brought to slacks, that the Metal may be separated, which
otherwise could not be if the Arsnick had been with it, from hence may be known
how to draw the Silver and Copper out of the Slackstone, so can it be no
otherwise than to separate the Sulphur and Arsnick first from it, which is done
by roasting, as may be seen in the great works of Smelting; thus, that the
Slackstone in the beginning may have but small heat (and not a strong fire) so
that the To separate it from Sulphur.
cold Air may easily fall upon it, and cause the venomous Sulphur to rise,
(which does fly from cold, and
loves the heat) and so does easily separate, which otherwise does stay in a
violent heat, and remains always Slack stone, and is afterward not so easily
separated, yet a small heat only does it not, therefore in roasting, the fire
must be increased by degrees, and in the End, when the Sulphur is almost
roasted away from the Slack stone, then with a strong fire the remaining
Sulphur and Arsnick must be driven away, although the roast should flow with
it, yet it is no hurt to it: I do write this, That it may be seen, that the
Searchers of Nature, have also with Diligence searched into these things, and
that Roasting has had its rise from thence.

Which way the Cakes are to be knocked out.
When the Red Slacks or Copper-stones are prepared and the Cakes set upon one
another, and you are willing to try them for Silver, then beat out of every
Cake a piece, not quite in the middle nor quite at the
end, which is the best for proof (because the Silver runs toward the Cold) so
that the stone-Cakes are found richer at the end than in the midst:) Take all
the pieces that are cut out, mingle them together, and make a proof of it (this
is called Younger proof) which you may grind very small, and weigh of it a
Centner with thy Assay-weight, and assay such a Stone (as you have been taught
above) and as has been done with the harsh Oars, put presently its due of Lead
to it, and let it first roast off upon the same. In the end give it good heat,
that the proof may be boiled up; But because this Proof is of much Concernment,
therefore take sixteen weight of Lead, that the Trial may have enough, because
for a Trial it is better to have the weights of Lead too much than too little.

CHAP. XV. To try Hard Work and Copper-Laech upon Silver.
hard Work or Copper Laech some Founders (especially them of Cuttenberg) Two
Sorts of Hard Work.
do use for an Addition to work the silvery Oars into slacks, that such Addition
may be rich in Copper, and that fresh Cakes may be cast, and the Silver
separated, to which in Comparison to common Refining, there belongs a
particular Account and Understanding, for such dry and fat Hard Work must be
tried for Silver, like unto a Leadish black Copper (which is almost one thing)
and of which there will soon follow Direction.

CHAP. XVI. To Assay melted Speiz, and what it is.
Spiez Oar is in many places (especially in Joakim's Valley) and is found What
Speiz is.
out in melting: the Philosophers do think that it consists of Arsnick and
Brimstone mingled with a subtle Earth, which does separate it self from the
slacks, like unto the Copper slack stones, only in the Spiez Oar and the slack
stone there is this Difference: For, as the Brimstone does surpass (as
abovesaid) the Arsnick, so in the Spiezy Oar the Arsnick surpasses the
Brimstone: therefore the Speiz is vvhiter than the Slackstone, and does loose
but little either in the strong, or small fire, nor by roasting; nor can it be
overcome
by Lead, but is always found again, and does loose but little; only this is
necessary to be known, that when the Speize is melted in the flintish-Lead Oar
gently, and not To take the Silver out of Speize.
overheated, and does then mingle with the slacks of Iron and (according to the
manner of the City of Goslar) does melt among the light Dust, so comes the
Speiz to be lost, and none of it is found again, and the Silver enters into the
Lead, which is caused by the Antimony in the Lead-oar, and the red Sulphur in
the Flints: which are both again in the Arsnick. But when there is a desire to
Assay the Speiz for Silver, you must grind it small, and weigh it, and with so
much Lead (as a slackstone has need of) set it on a Test in an Assay oven, and
in the beginning a great Grain of speiz will be found svvimming upon the Lead,
which cannot be consumed by it, some Refiners do take this Grain with Pincers
out of the Lead, and although the silver of the speiz does enter into the Lead,
yet without question such Grain does contain some silver: But that the full
Contents thereof may be found out, Leave the Grain on the Test, and add to the
speiz on the Test, some filings of Iron, that has no silver, and then the
speiz will be quite consumed, and become dross or slacks.

CHAP. XVII. How Black Copper is to be melted and cast into Ingots.
Black Copper, one part is very good, but others unclean Difference of the
Black Coppers.
and harsh, as Iron-slacky, leadish, speizy, and also sometimes tinny, according
as a Copper Oar does break by another metallic Oar, or, if any of them has
veins through the Copper Oars, such a Metal comes to be mingled with the
Copper, and is the worse for it.

black Copper and will cast an Ingot of it, Take of the Cakes which have been
How black Copper is to be cut out.
made upon the roast at once into Copper, cut a small piece of every Cake above
and under, and not quite in the middle, nor at the end, according to proportion
and bigness of the Cake; and here you must be careful that you do not cut a
small piece out of a great Cake, nor a great piece out of a small Cake, because
one Cake contains more silver than the other, and so a Proof may be soon made
false.

How the Proof-Ingot is to be cast.
When the Cakes are all cut out, then put all the pieces into a Crucible, melt
them before the Bellows together, and when the Copper begins to flow and drive,
then stir it about with a dry splinter or stick, and let it stand a little
longer, then take a clean Ingot rubbed with a little tallow, and cast the Copper
into it, all at once, that nothing remain in the Crucible, but set the Ingot
smooth, that the Copper may be no thicker at one end than the other, because
where the Ingot does hang, the Copper runs that way, and is richer there in
silver, especially in rich Copper. You must also quench in water the cast
Ingot, if the Copper has not been leady or tinny, and with a hard Charcoal the
tallow may be scoured off, and the Ingot cleansed, but the Lead and Coppery
cast Ingot must be left cooling in the Ingot, that the Lead may not rise up, so
is the Ingot finished, which is to be cut halfthrough the Ingot, and beat it
cross way, then with a Hammer and Chisel strike it into two, so in the
breadth the goodness of the Copper may be seen, and how the Ingot has been
together: and one half is to be given to the Buyer, and the other to the
Seller, that if there should be an Error in the Proof then the Ingot might be
assayed again.

Copper does Difference of the Proof Ingot.
drive too long in the Crucible, it does waste and become richer in the
Contents, which is easily to be seen, besides, if the Ingot be cast too hot, it
will be in some places full of little holes, also if it is not all over smooth,
but wrinkly and with knots, then it is cast too cold, so it is not found alike
in Contents: if any of this happens in Casting by negligence, then such an
Ingot is to be done away, and the Copper Cakes again cut out, to cast another
Ingot, and thereby you will fine the right proof, and contents; because if the
first should be melted and cast again, then it must drive again in the
Crucible, and the Copper would waste more, so the Contents would be richer, and
the Trial false.

Cast Copper Ingots for silver: Cut (with a Chissel) at the end of the Ingot a
Assaying the Ingot.
little piece, put that away and cut another, beat it flat upon a clean Anvil,
or, if it is brittle, then to small bits, which you may weigh and assay thus:
weigh of such pieces equally two Centners, put each in a small paper by it
self, make it so that it may lie flat in the papers, and not in heaps, put also
two great well-made and well neal'd Coppels in the Assay-oven, in the middle
under the Muffle, and in each sixteen Centners of good clean Lead: but before
all this, make a flame in the Oven with a Copper pipe, and the Oven and Coppel
must be clean that no Ashes may remain in it, make it at the beginning warm,
and when it begins to glow, and when the Lead does go upon the Coppel, and does
not leap; then put the weighed Copper upon it; make it hot again until it
begins to melt or to go fresh. After this open the upper Mouth-hole, and shut
the lower, cover the Oven with a Cover, yet not quite close, but that it may
remain open about an inch wide, or as necessity does require; Afterward set
behind (and upon the sides of the Muffle) the little Instruments, so the Copper
will soon begin to go, then let it have a requisite Coldness (because the
Copper among other Metals (tried for silver) can endure the most cold. And
after it has
gone a while cold, then lay before the upper Mouth-hole a few live coals that
do not sparkle, or, if you do make your trial in the Furnace made of
Armour-plate, as in Sculpture Ill. Figure 9. then put before the upper
Ovens-mouth the little plate full of holes, and govern the fire with such live
Coals on the plate with holes, or by moving the Cover above, that the trial may
be hotter and hotter until the end, then take the Cover Oven, and cause the
Grain of Silver to be all over bright and clean from spots, because the Copper
Assay and government of the fire is of much concernment, The Regiment of the
fire.
and is accounted so, because it is necessary to know how to give heat and cold
(as it requires) if the same be duly performed) but if it is not so, and that
the trial be too hot, then there will be an ounce of Silver less in a Centner
of rich Copper, and the Contents will be found so much poorer, but because such
a Knowledge and Government of the fire cannot be described, but is learned only
out of much Experience, therefore do I rest here: But yet know thus much, that
if the Proof on the Coppel does grow high and clear, then it is hot, but if it
does go flat and darkish, then does it go cold;
There must in the Copper Assay in all Trials, the middle way is to be observed,
and the true contents will be found: although young Assayers do much esteem
their own Works, and do slight knowledge of the fire, yet it is certain, as the
Copper for silver by such means is right assayed, so must it be done with all
other Copper Trials, and he that is well acquainted with such Copper proof in
the fire, he will want nothing in other Trials, as has been said.

Of the Grain produced from the Assay.
Thus, when the Grains of such two trials have twinkled, fresh and clean, then
take the Coppel out of the Oven, and take the Grains off, while the Coppel is
yet hot, so they will part clean from the clear, and the Coppels which bring
the yellow subtle Littarge always with it. Provided it has had its due Heats
and Colds (as has been said before) but if it has had too great heats then
there will be no Littarge and it is not good to trust to such Trials, but
when the two Assay Grains in the drawing up of the Scales are of a like
weight, then is it a sign that the proof has been well made, but if they
differ, although the Trials have been diligently performed, yet there is no
certainty to ground upon it, and it is better that such be made anew; but
forget not when you do intend to dravv up the Proof with thy weight, to put
it in the scales with thy weight lead grain of the Assay lead, and to beat it
off from thy proof grains, although it be very small.

Another way to try Copper for Silver.
One may as well lay the vveigh'd copper first upon the coppel, and let it
glovv well, and afterward the due weight of Lead, which is as well; only
the coppel must first be well vvarmed, otherwise the Lead will leap upon it,
and the proof become false, which cannot be by the former way, because if the
Lead which is set first alone upon the Coppel should leap, it may then quickly
be made still again, if a live Coal be laid a little while on the top of it,
and afterward put the Copper upon it, so it will not hinder the Trial.

Proof Instruments to have great care of
Further, every Assayer ought to know when the Coppels are not made of good
Ashes and well prepared, for hereby they become tender, and will rob the proof
of some Silver; likewise, when he does use a new Assay-Oven, to which he is not
used, and does not know well the Degrees of fire in it, so it is better that he
may learn first to know well the nature of his Coppel and Oven, that he may
trust to it, and this may be done in the following manner: Take a Copper Ingot,
of which a Centner contains about forty Loath, or twenty Ounces of Silver (which
in many Trials has been found of a certain Content) and of this make one or
two Trials one after another, as often as you do intend to change your
Instruments; then, if you find the first contents, you are certain of your
Instruments, and there is no fault in them.

black-iron-streamy-slacky and raw Copper they are not to be assayed like the
abovenamed good Proving of the black and raw Copper
Copper upon the Coppel, therefore when you do intend to try such, beat them
small and weigh of them two equal Centners, put each of them in a particular
clean Test, place them in an Assay-Oven, and when they are glowing through, put
to every Trial its due proportion of Lead, to wit, sixteen Centners (like them
before) and make them warm, and so they will begin to slack, but you must not
let them slack too much, for then the Lead will enter into the slacks, and
there will remain too little Lead with the Copper, and so cannot go clean off,
but if the proofs be right boyld up, then take them out, and let them cool in
the Tests; afterward separate the dross from it, and cause the Lead or work to
go off upon the Coppel, as cold as can be, yet so as that the proofs (as has
been taught before) may not congeal too soon, but appear pure and bright, and
hereby you will have the true Contents, because such unclean coppers when they
are not boiled up at first, but enter raw upon the Coppel into the Lead, then
they do slack upon the Coppel and fret on it, and the proofs must be hotter,
so that the true contents cannot be exactly found out.

The weight of the Coppels.
Further also, I cannot leave unmentioned, That the Coppels after the proving of
Copper do always come heavyer out of the fire, than they were set*in at first,
which thing although it brings little profit to a Refiner to know; yet it is
to be vvondred, what the cause of it might be.

CHAP. XVIII. To try Bell-metal for Silver.
BELL-metal, of old broken-Bells (which is sometimes rich in Silver) must be
tried Bell Metal.
like unto the black raw Copper; but because of the Tin that is in it, it must
be boiled up stronger, therefore there must be to such Trials, four parts more
of Lead than to Copper, by which also the Lead does loose more: Or, weigh of
such Bell-metal only half a Centner, and allow to it so much Lead, as to a
Centner of Copper, so it will slack clean, and there will remain enough of Lead
with it, (after it is boiled up) to drive off in the Coppel.

CHAP. XIX. How old Silver-plate or Coin is to be made into Grains.
For what the Graining of Silver is profitable.
GRAINING of Silver is done for the most part when bad, broken or other
forbidden Money (coined in Hand) that the same may be all melted together and
afterward to Assay it, and to fit it for better coining, that also the bad
Money may be rooted out of it: this is to be done thus; When there is much of
it to be granulated, then must there first be a furnishing of necessary
Instruments, viz. Crucibles and Wind-Ovens, that one may easily granulate a
great quantity of Silver in Plate or coin, and when you have all Necessaries,
then set the crucible empty into the wind-oven, a good hand-breadth higher than
the grate, and cover it with an Iron* cover, cover the crucible all over with
coals and ashes, and upon them live coals, let the fire kindle from above
downwards, then you need not fear, that it will be cracked (as it happens
sometimes crucible Why the Crucible so easily breaks
has been set thus in the fire, and that the fire has well kindled downwards,
so that the crucible is red hot all over, then uncover it, and see if it is yet
whole, and has no crack, which is soon seen in the glovving heat, then put
in the Silver that has been first weighed in the crucible, and cover it, put
coals over it, and give it a strong heat, that the Silver may sink, then may
you put more Silver, if you have it into the crucible, and give it fire again,
that it may sink, and also follovv it with the Silver, until the crucible be
full, when that is done, then give it fire enough, so long till the Silver in
the crucible begins to drive, and when thou see it drive then throw upon the
Silver (in the Crucible) coal-dust, or Ashes that the Silver may be covered
with it all over; stir it well about with a glowing hot iron hook, and
afterward with a small warm Crucible take the Silver out of the greater
Crucible, and pour it in cold water.

To granulate the Silver round.
If you will have round Grains, then pour the Silver through a wet Broom, but
if you will have your Silver hollow and thin for separation then stir the
water with a stick well about and pour the silver into the boiling water,
so will it become hollovv and thin, or granulate it over a Waltzen.
Role, (which being half in and half out, the water will run about, so will
it be hollow, after it is granulated; then pour the water off from the Grains,
and dry them in a Copper basin over the fire.

granulated; the Crucible is to be set likewise into the wind Oven, and first
kindle the fire by degrees, that it grow warm, that you may see if the Crucible
does remain whole, because How to govern the fire.
if the same in the first kindling does remain whole, it will hold well in
melting, provided the first be well tended, so that the Crucible may not stand
naked, but that it may have a like heat, because the place that is left naked
the cold does work upon it, and in that part does easily
break, therefore it is necessary to put the coals sometimes down about the
Crucible with an iron Instrument, that the Crucible may by preserved, and when
the Crucible is glowing warm and whole, then put with an iron Instrument (which
is made purposely for it) the old Silver therein, that the Crucible may be
heaped full, and put the cover upon it, and afterward coals, and give it
convenient heat, and the Silver will easily sink down, and still go on in
putting in Money so long till the Crucible be full with the melted stuff, and
then give it a strong fire or two, that it may be fully hot in the Crucible,
and when you see that it does cast a black Scum upon the Crucible (which scum
you must take off with a Scummer full of holes, and let it be cold) then sift
it through a fine hair seeve, that the grains of Silver which have been taken
(with the scummer) out of the Crucible may be put to the other Grains; keeping
the black dust that falls through the hair Seeve, because there is yet silver
in it, which afterward you may make to profit; when you have taken all the
scum from the Crucible, then cast again some clean coal- dust upon it, give it
fire once more, that it may be very warm, and drive it, if it be not so, then
the contents of the grains comes not alike, and it happens sometimes, that that
which is not alike must be granulated again, which can not be done without
loss, therefore be careful at the first, and do not hasten too much with it,
so when it is full hot in the Crucible, then may it in the same manner (as has
been taught above) be taken out of the Crucible, and be cast through a wet
Broom (which has not many small twigs) into the water, or, if there be much to
be cast, then have two Brooms to cast through, that the one after the other may
be dipped into the water, this is the common way of granulating, and it is the
best way to do it, by which the grains have an equal content, and near finely
round.

CHAP. XX. To granulate out of a Kiln.
granulate (now used) called Granulating out of the Kiln, and is thus: Cause a
Kiln The manner of performing it.
to be made of Potters earth (a little above a Span diameter within) which must
have Iron-hoops, and the middle ring or hoop must have a long Iron-handle, and
at the end of the handle a ring; likewise the Kiln is to be cut out on that
side toward the Bellows, and when there is an Intention to granulate in the
Kiln, then it must be set before the mouth of strong Bellows, and coals put in
it, and after let the Bellows blow into it, that it may glow well; and then the
old Silver (with an Iron-ladle) must be put on the top of the Coals, and the
Bellows must blow always, so will it melt easily; and put still more silver,
and let it flow: do this so long till as much Silver is in the Kiln as it can
hold* stir it well about, after that, Take the Kiln with the coals in it, from
the Bellows, and take it with the handle upon thy arm, and the ring which is
at the end of the handle in thy hand, by which you may govern the Kiln, and so
granulate it out of the Kiln, through Brooms as has been said before.

This is a quick way to granulate, but the Contents of the old Silver is
sometimes not found alike, and it grainings or granulatings: A quick way of
granulating.
Now as often as there is need to melt in such a Kiln, it is necessary to do it
alvvayes well over with a good Clay, that may hold well in the fire, otherwise,
when the Metal is warm, it may flow through it.

It happens also often, that if a Crucible does leak or or run out; and in that
case sweep all clean together, put When the Crucible does break.
does swim at top, take off, and throw away, and pour other water on it, this do
so long until the water does go clear off, then out of the Residue pick out
the course sand and stones, and stamp the rest in a Mortar and searse it
through a hair seeve, that which does not pass keep it, because it is good, but
that which goes through, vvash that again in a long Tub made of Firr, that the
residue of the good may be got out: because where much is to be granulated
there will be sometimes some Mischance, so that a Crucible may run out, and
cannot be rectified again without loss and damage. The follovving Sculpture is
thus

Deciphered.
1. The Grain or granulating Kill or Kiln. 2. 2. The Wind-Oven of Potters-stuff
upon a Trevet or three-foot Frame. 3. Another Wind-Oven of Potters-Loam with
Iron-Hoops, on a three-foot Iron-trevet or frame. 4. The Crucible in which the
Silver is to be melted. 5. The crucible in which the melted Metal (that is
taken out of the fire) is to be put. 6. The copper*Bason in which the
granulating is performed. 7. An iron-roaster on which the Silver is heated and
roasted. 8. He that tends the Grain-Kiln. 9. The Broom- holder for Granulation.
10. The granulating Vessel. 11. The Bellovvs to the Grain-Kiln. 12. The
Instrument used by him that tends the Grain-Kiln or Furnace.


Sculpture VII.


CHAP. XXI. How the grained or granulated Silver is to be assayed for fine
Silver.
Silver has different Contents, therefore according to its contents The
different Contents of Graind Silver.
the Addition of Lead must be: but that there may be a true Understanding of the
difference, so the Addition of Lead (according to the Contents) must be taken
thus, viz. to that which contains fifteen Loath of fine Silver, the Lead must
be 5 or 6 times the quantity, and to that which is burnt Silver, (and is 15
Loath and three drams in the Contents) to such there needs but four times the
quantity. But if the Grains are from 12 to 14 Loath, then take to one Mark, ten
Marks of Lead, and upon 14 Loath Contents, take The different Quantities of Lead.
nine quantities, from 9 unto 12 Loath Contents, take 16 quantities; and from one
to eight Loth-Contents, take 18 quantities: and although upon some Contents
there might well be one or two quantities more, than one too little: so that
the Proof may have its due of Lead, and if the proof is right governed there
will be no want.

Grains or old silver, then set first the Coppels into the Oven, and not Assay
Grains.
above two silver Trials at a time: Let them be well neale'd and heated, and
then put the weight of the silver or grains, to two equal marks of thy penny
weight, place each of them into a small Test or put first the prepared Lead for
the proof upon the Coppel, and let it begin to work, and after it, also the
weighed grains; govern the fire by covering the Furnace, as also by putting the
Instruments under the Muffle, that the proof may go off alike, and pretty cool;
cause afterward the Grains to shine bright, yet not over hot, that they may
not bolt or fly out, else the proof will be false.

Further, know also, that the Grains which are rich in Copper (and can endure
much cold in trying) must be kept coldest, and afterward let it shine clear
(if the Contents be truly to be found) and that which is not rich To assay rich
Grains.
in Copper, with less coolness will leave its subtle Littarge on the Coppel (as
has been said above.) But the Burnt silver and the very rich Grains cannot
endure the cold
because it has no streamy Copper with it, and the proof would easily congeal,
and if this should happen there would be no Remedy afterward, but it must be
done again, therefore such proofs must go off a little hotter.

When the Proofs have too little Lead.
But if it should happen (by not minding it) that to one poof, there should be
one or two quantityes of Lead too little, then the Proof will not shine clearly
at all; which is easily to be seen by the Grains, when there are little Spots
upon them: as also black and wrinkly, and not very clean, such Trials are
false, and must be begun anew.

When the Proofs do go too hot.
Also it is to be noted, That if the proof do go too hot, then the Lead will
carry more than ordinary, of Silver with it into the Coppel: and what one has
in the beginning of the proof, that he will find; only have a Care that the
Grains (in the end) may be clean and clear, so you will find the true
Contents.

To make assay grains fine.
When the Grains are gone off clean, then they must be struck off from the
Coppels while they are vvarm, so do they go off clean from the Clar, but if
there should yet stick something about it, then press the Grains with clean
flat tongs, and the unclean will fly away: Further, Brush it with an hard
Brush, clean off, and when they are very clean, then weigh them one against
another, if they be alike and do stand even at the Globe of the Balance, then
is the proof right: weigh then one grain by it self, and see how many Loths,
Drams and Pence, it has by thy Assay-weight, that you may find by it, the true
Contents, and see that the Lead-grain be always abated, though it be never so
little.

CHAP. XXII. How coined Money in great or small Sorts may be Assayed.
Gross Money, as Dollers and new Rix Gilders, try them Of Dollers and rix
Gilders.
thus, Take the piece you do intend to try, beat it flat at one end, upon a
smooth clean Anvil, that it may be cut with small Sheers used for Silver, and
so cut it into little pieces, and weigh them according to your Grain weight,
two, alike Marks, put this into a small Test, and make a Trial; if it be
Dollers: put nine quantities of pure Lead, and to the new Gilders, put eight
quantities, cause them to glow off in a reasonable heat) and cold (as you have
been before instructed) and such proofs (when they are governed well in the
fire) do yield a pretty deal of fine and subtle Litarge on the Coppel, which
the unexpert Assayer knows not.

Littarge on the Coppel, if they To assay with coverd Assay ovens
be not done in Coverd Ovens, of which Trials many Refiners do know nothing (as
has been said) therefore they
do seldom bring a Proof to its true contents, for they know not how they must
order their Coppels according to the quantities of Lead, which is of no small
Concern, that they may not have too many nor too few Ashes, because, if there
be too few Ashes, then the Coppel will become soft, because of the much Lead
which they suck in, which easily does draw the silver with it into the Coppel,
so the Contents is lessened, and if there be too many Ashes then the Coppel
will be too big, and take too much room in the Furnace, and are not so
convenient for use.

To assay single and double Stivers.
Concerning single and double Stivers, they must be Assayed in the following
manner, Take two or three and cut them with Sheers into little pieces, and
weigh two equal Marks, or pieces or parcels according to the Grainweight, and
take great care that you have some of the outside for the Trial to both alike,
because the proof
that has most of the outside will be found richer in the Contents than the
other that has not so much of the outside.

The Lead quantity.
Put to each Mark or Proof eighteen Quantities of pure Lead, cause them to go
off pretty cool, and at last to shine clear, which then also does leave subtle
Littarge upon the Coppel, yet not so much as of the Dollers; then if the Grains
are of an equal weight, the Proof is right, draw one of the two up, with the
Grain-weight, and as many Loths and Grains as you do find, so much is there
Content in a Mark of fine silver.

white Pence, Reinish and other Pence the proof To Assay Pence.
is thus; Take twelve of them, and cut of each of them a bit or two for a Trial,
only take notice that you do take of such Pence, some bit where it is thick,
and of some where they are thin, that to each Trial there may be some of the
thin and some of the thick Bits: add to each Trial eighteen Qantities of pure
Lead, and cause them to go at first fine and cool; and lastly, to shine bright,
so will the Grains be alike; but, if in the one Proof there be much of the
thin, and in the other much of the thick Pence should come, then the Grains
would not be alike, but often times the proof in which much of the thin Penny did
come, that fine Grain will be almost two Grains more; and the other so much
less in which most of the thick did come.

This is not much minded by some Refiners, but when their Grains do differ,
then they do take the middle of it, but it is better the proof be right and
that by diligence, the proofs may come out alike, because the To find the true
Proof in small Money.
so is the proof now adays better to be found than to melt a Mark of the Money
in a Crucible, and so soon as it begins to drive, to cast it into an Ingot, and
then to make a trial of it so (without question) the true Contents will be
found, and agree with the other proof made of the thin and thick Bits.

I must mention also, that some Refiners and Assayers are about to prove Coined
Money with the Low Dutch Penny weight (which is not amiss) because the Contents
do agree with the Grain-weight; as for Example, Suppose you have assayed new
Gilders, according to the Grain-weight, and have found that the Mark does
contain fourteen Loath and sixteen Grains, but according to the Low Duch
Penny-weight, twelve pence and four grains, these twelve pence and four grains
make just so much as 14 Loath, and 16 Grains, and so both of these are of one
Content, yet of two Denominations.

To Assay the Silver, according to the Common Centner weight.
If it should happen that an Assayer should be in such a place where he has no
more then one Centner-weight, nor could have any more, and there should come
before him Grains of coined Money, or a Lump of Silver to try, how much a Mark
of the same does contain (of Loths, Drams and Pence, or of Loths A loath is Half
an ounce.
and Grains) of fine Silver, he must take out of the Centner-weight sixteen
pound, and let them be a Mark or sixteen Loths, the eight Pound, eight Loths;
the four Pound, four Loths; the two Pound, two Loths, and one Pound, one Loths;
after that, the sixteen Loths two drams; the eight Loath one dram, the four
Loths, two Peny-weight: the two Loths, one Penny: and one Loath, a Heller or
Halfpenny.

If he has then assayed a piece of Silver according to such weights, then may
he find the Contents easily upon Loths, Drams or Pence, but concerning new
Gilders, which commonly do hold fourteen Loths sixteen Grains, they will hold
in such a peny-weight fourteen pound, and 28 Loths, or a little more (which
would be according to the abovenamed Directions) also fourteen Loths, three
Drams, two Pence, and almost half an Heller or halfpenny, do carry 14 Loths
and 16 grains.

Gold take to 24 Carats 16 pounds of the Centner-weight, and assay the Gold To
assay the Centners upon Grains.
according to it, but it is better if an Assayer has by hand the Assay-weight,
already parted to make use of the same, because to mind this does require an
expert Assayer, for an unexpert one will easily err.

CHAP. XXIII. How Burnt silver Pieces and Plates are to be cut out.
burnt Silver, then first cut a piece out at the top, with a small half-round
Chissel, not quite Burnt silver Pletes.
in the middle, nor quite at the end, then turn that piece of Silver, and cut in
like manner a piece out of the bottom, that it may not be all from one side,
but opposite to the piece that was cut at the top of the other side, that is to
be cut on the back side.

Mark for a proof, put them together in the Proof- Scales, that is into one
Scale, and into the other put the whole Mark, Plates.
opposite into the other Scale, if it be not just alike, as it should be, then
make it so, that the Scales may stand equal (and assay as you have been taught)*

Blink Silver.
Clear Silver may also be cut out also above and below in like manner for to be
assayed; and so the Contents will always be found just when the Proofs have
been well made.

CHAP. XXIV. How Silver Touch-Needes are to be made.
silver Touch-Needles (which are also called Proof-Needles) they are generally
made and used by all Refiners and Guardians, and they that deal in Silver: by
which Touch all Silver-Contents may very nearly be known: Now to make To make
them.
deal bigger than common Assay-Weights: And then take good fine Silver, and of
it make the first Needle, (and make a Mark on it) viz. 16 Loath of fine: And to
the Second Needle, take 15 Loath of fine Silver, and one Loath of fine Copper: and

To the Third 14 Loath of fine Silver and 2 Loths of Copper. To the Fourth 13
Loath of fine Silver and 3 Loths of Copper. To the Fifth 12 Loath of fine Silver
and 4 Loths of Copper. To the Sixth 11 Loath of fine Silver and 5 Loths of
Copper. To the Seventh 10 Loath of fine Silver and 6 Loths of Copper. To the
Eighth 9 Loath of fine Silver and 7 Loths of Copper. To the Ninth 8 Loath of fine
Silver and 8 Loths of Copper. To the Tenth 7 Loath of fine Silver and 9 Loths of
Copper. To the Eleventh 6 Loath of fine Silver and 10 Loths of Copper. To the
Twelveth 5 Loath of fine Silver and 11 Loths of Copper. To the Thirtenth 4 Loath
of fine Silver and 12 Loths of Copper. To the Fourteenth 3 Loath of fine Silver
and 13 Loths of Copper. To the Fifteenth 2 Loath of fine Silver and 14 Loths of
Copper. To the Sixteenth 1 Loath of fine Silver and 15 Loths of Copper.


To try them
When you have weighed all these, then put every Needle's proportion into a
Crucible, and do not let it drive much, for thereby the Needles may prove
false: but so soon as the Silver and Copper in the Crucible begins to drive
then stir it with a dry Splinter (or stick) and cast each proportion into a
small Ingot, out of which the Needles are to be made, which you may shape as
you please, and put a mark or distinction on each Needle, according to the
Contents of each, thereby to see how many loths of fine Silver a Mark does
contain, that you may not be deceived by the Touch, but thereby make a right
Judgment.

Needles half Loath.
Some do part and divide the Needles into two halfloths, which is left to every
ones Freedom, and there is enough in it, where the Touch may not be certainly
known by the loath, Now when thou do intend to use the Needles, then upon the
Silver which thou have made, scrape a fine shining stroke, and also make
another stroke on the Needle by it, and see which stroke on the Needle is most
like the Silver-stroke, and so you will see by them how much the Silver does
contain: and that the form of the Touch-Needles may be seen, this following
Sculpture does represent.

Sculpture VIII.
Deciphered.
1. 2. The Touch-Needles. 3. 4. The Ingots to be compared with the
Touch-needles.




CHAP. XXV. How Metals that are melted must be cut out, and assayed for Silver.
(lead which is Cast in melting of the silver Oars) some are clean and Clean
work.
pure, and others are foul and unclean; the Clean which come from the mild and
good Oars, them, you may by themselves prove like unto Lead, and take a Proof
out of it, when it is going to melt, and weigh of it at least a Centner, or else
when the work is cast forth, as much as it does weigh is to be cut and assayed
together: And keep this Order, that always of the whole that is cast, a special
proof may be made, and to take it out of 2 or 3 proofs: or else the true
Content will not be found, except it be that of each cast piece the whole
quantity be weighed in, and to go off upon a great Coppel altogether; but if
you would have for a Proof some cut out of the Cakes, you may cut out of each
(especially if the Work be rich) according to the bigness above and below, to
weigh some of all, and to prove it.

missy Unclean work.
and speizy and very unclean (like Kobolt and course Wismet and other speizy
Oars) which are melted; and some among the rest are so very unclean that when
the Cakes do lie a few days, they do fall asunder: such stubborn and unclean
Oars, in general, cannot be assayed like unto the good; but when such Work has
been weighed, then cut or beat out of every Cake a piece, and weigh it so
unclean as it is, viz. of every cut, and assay as follows: Take of the work
as much as it is in weight, put it on the Test in the Assay-oven, cause it to
slack, that the Fury and wildness may be consumed, let it cool and knock it
off, and cause it to go clear off from the Coppel, but if it be not slacked at
first, but set raw upon the Coppel, then it will work upon the Coppel, and will
not go clean off, as is shown.

Some Assayers do use to take the Content of such unclean Another Custom among
Assayers.
work, and cause it to go together in a great Assay-Test or Iron-Kiln, and cast
it forth, and then weigh of it for a Trial, which is not right (although they
do think they shall obtain the true Contents) because by this running together
the Contents comes finer, and the proof is made richer, therefore the abovesaid
way is much better, by which the true Contents is found.

unclean Work is put upon the Coppel, then to imagine (when a work of it self
will not go off that to add some other clean Lead, and to help it that When
there is lead added to the work Trial.
way, that it may go off pure) is vain. For this cannot be a certain way of
their Proofs, nor are you to trust to the same: Because in the Workhouses the
Lead is not altogether without Silver, so the Silver is found in the lead that
is added (as little as it is in the other Contents) which becomes so much
richer.

Harth trials
Likewise as it has been said, of casting and working, how they are to be
tried, so it must be done with hearth Trials, they which are overlaid with
Silver and richwrought Lead, and taken from the Hearths, let it be good, or
unclean, only that at least, the half of the whole weight may be weighed and
tried, so will you find the fine Silver very near, yet not altogether fully,
because the unclean that was at first in the Work, and has been weighed with
it (before the Harth* proof was taken off the work) when it is in driving was
dissolved and taken off; as also sometimes the Proof is taken off too hot, and
sometimes too cold, by this may every Assayer understand the Contents: and
which (although, as has been said, in comparison of the Silver that is brought
forth) is not much out of the way.

CHAP. XXVI. How Tin is to be assayed for Silver.
TIN among the rest of Metals does enter most freely into Lead, but the
strength of the fire will not permit it to remain therewith, because as soon as
there comes great heat to it, then does it go again, and rise upon the Lead,
and becomes altogether together stubborn, so that with no force of fire,
besides other help, can it be brought to a true Vp-boyling upon the Test,
because the Tin does often times contain much Silver, and the Trial of it is very
necessary: Therefore was I the more willing to instruct young Assayers of the
Trial of it, which is done thus: Weigh two equal half Centners of the Tin, and
to each half Centner, a Centner of good sound Copper, and sixteen quantities of
pure Lead, put each half Centner with its Copper and Lead upon a Test, each by
themselves: Begin first with a slow heat, and when it begins to drive upon the
Test, it will begin to rise, then let it go very cool, and take two Centners
off the abovesaid Lead-glass put it also to it, upon the Test, and the
Lead-glass will cover it all, and will not suffer the Tin to rise so much: and
when you have let it go cool so long (till the risen Tin upon the Test does no
more look bright, but black and dark) then give it again as much Heat as you
can, and boil it up (as you do an unflowing harsh Oar) and when it has slack'd
well, then stir it with an hot Iron-hook, let it stand a while longer, until
it be boiled up very clean, then take it out of the Oven, suffer it to cool,
beat the slacks off from the work or Lead, and let it go off upon a Coppel: if
then the Tin does hold Silver, there will remain a grain upon the Coppel, draw
it up, and you will find the Contents.

The Leadgrain to this Trial.
To such a Proof must you make a Lead-Grain on purpose, thus; Take a Centner of
the Copper of which you did add to the Proof, cause it diligently to go off
upon the Coppels with the Lead quantity: and keep the Grain of Silver that
comes from it which (in the drawing up of the Proof- Grain all times to the
Weight) is to be laid and abated, else one cannot be certain of the Contents:
and after this manner in Tin the right Contents is to be found.

Assayers are of another Opinion, to beat the Tin thin, and weigh of it two
half Centners, and put every one upon a Test by it self in the Assay-oven, give
Another way to prove the Tin.
it a gentle heat that the Tin may be wasted into Ashes; and into the same Ashes
(yet every one apart) they put 16 Centners of Lead and two Centners of the Flus
upon a Test, and boil it up like unto an Hard-flowing Oar, and let it go off
upon the Coppel, this proof is also right, but it requires a little more time
than the former, although the Tin does also rise upon the Plate (yet it may
easily (by governing of the fire, when it has first cooled and afterward yery
hot) be forced to slack cleanly.

CHAP. XXVII. How to separate Iron and Steel from Silver.
Iron very rich in Silver, the reason is, because the Hammer-smiths do not mind
the small contents in it, also they do not know that it contains any Silver,
and so, that Silver in melting comes among the Iron: to prove this, that the
certain contents of the Silver may be given in: File the Iron very small (which
you do intend to assay) weigh of it half a Centner, and add to it a Centner of
yellow Brimstone, and let it go off With Brimstone.
mingled well together and set it in a gentle heat, that only the Brimstone may
flow and penetrate the Iron, and that it may be brought out of its substance,
and let the Iron cool again in the Test, grind it again upon a Stone or Iron,
and mingle two Centners of Flus, or Lead-glass among it; and add to it twelve
Centners of Lead, cause it to boil up (as you are wont to do, with a hard
flowing OAR) and in the end the work that comes off, let it go off upon the
Coppel, and you will find the Contents of the Silver.

With Antimony.
Some Assayers do use to prove Iron for Silver another way, namely, they weigh
the Iron (although it be not fyled small) viz. half a Centner and put it in a
Crucible, and add to it a Centner of Antimony, let them go together, then let
the Crucible cool, and put that which did drive in the Crucible upon an
Assay-Test, let it smoke away, and grind it again upon an Iron-plate or Stone
very small; mingle it with Flus (with an addition of the Lead as has been
showed in the proof before) then cause it to boil up clean, and let it go off
upon a Coppel, but if the Lead be black (because of the Antimony) then set it
upon the Test alone, cause it to slack (as other wild unclean Work) then it
will go off upon the Coppel.

With gross-Flint.
Others take small filled or thin beaten Iron, cut of it half a Centner, as also
a Centner of raw gross-water flints, which holds no Silver (with its due of
Lead) mingle it together and assay it (as raw Flint is assayed upon Silver) so
the Brimstone which is in the Flint will devour the Iron, that it will become
Slacks, and will then go into the Lead, and although the Flint holds a little
Silver, yet that may be abated instead of the Lead-grain, and this way of
Assaying Iron for Silver; I have found to be most fit, and it is done with
little trouble, and the contents is also found right.

Copper and Iron, as also Silver and Iron love one another To separate the
Copper, Iron, and Silver.
well, and these three Metals cannot be so separated, that a part may remain, to
do any profit with: yet by a right understanding of their Nature this is
possible; that from the two most constant among these three (as Silver and
Copper) the Iron may be separated (being as an unclean Metal to those two) also
the Copper dross, (which is separated in the Melting and does contain Silver)
may be separated; which parting is done in the following manner.

Lead-Oar has commonly Antimony with it, How the Coppery Iron which holds
Silver is to be made to profit.
which (in melting as a soft flowing Metal) does enter into it and devoureth it)
for this end, and to prevent it, a due proportion of Lead must be added to the
Iron in melting (as there shall be further Instruction given in the Fourth
Book) for the Lead Oar (by Reason of the Antimony that is in it) does work upon
the Iron, and takes the Copper and Silver to it self, which is the Reason,
that at such places where the Lead-Oar is melted, the iron rich Copper Dross
(which does contain some Silver) may be used with Lead-oar in stead of old
Iron, which is to be put among it by degrees, and so the Iron will be
consusumed, and the Silver and Copper will enter into the Lead, which to my
mind could not be employed better; but in the melting after the Gosslarish
manner, the Lead does mingle among the dust, whereby it does partake of much of
the uncleaness and wildish Nature which is in the Dust and slacks, and so is
left with it: But how the Copper is to be separated from the Lead will follow
hereafter.

Iron-stone that contains Silver.
And in this manner the Iron-stone (that contains Silver may be made to enter
into the Lead-Oar, that it may take the Silver out of it, which cannot be done
better; and this I was willing to impart for the better instructing of them,
that Assay Iron and such melting works.

CHAP. XXVIII. How Black or white Silver is to be burnt clean, and how the
Tests for it are to be made right.
SILVER-burning is to burn Silver pure and clean and deft upon a Test, and this
Deft or neat
is to be done to the Blink Silver (which is not yet clean enough) by two ways;
one way under the wood, before the Bellows) the other under the Muffle, and is
only done with Coals.

But I intend to write first of the Tests in which the Silver is to be burnt
clean; they are to be made and To prepare the Tests.
prepared thus, Take Ashes from which Lees has been made, which are not sharp
or salt: wash them and let them be dry, and keep them for your use, and when
you do intend to make a Test, first get an earthen unglazed test such as the
Potters use to make in their frames, and so large as thou would have them,
pour water in it, and make it wet all over, that the Ashes may stick the
better, then put some Ashes into it, which must first be moistened like unto the
Copel-Ashes, put it two fingers high in the Test, press it together with a
wooden Pestel, which has about eight Angles: then put more Ashes after it,
press them also down, do it so long till the Test be full, then stroke off the
superfluous Ashes with an Iron made on purpose from the test, and turn it about
the Brim (with a round wooden Ball) so as the Ashes may lie smooth done upon
the test, afterward cut it, with a round sharp bent Iron, according to the
bigness of the Silver that is to be burnt upon it, and when the test is cut
out, then must you have a small hair Seeve, and put ground Bone-Ashes in it,
and swigle or strew it over the test, that it may be white all over, and then
turn the Ball over it, that it may lie smooth upon the test, so is the test
ready.

The manner of this Burning.
When you intend to use such test, and to burn in it, then first make a
Small-coal fire upon it, that it may be dry, then set it before the Bellows
very even, so that the Bellows may blow just into it, which is to be known
thus, hold a shovel over the test, and if the blowing of the Bellows do go off
from the shovel and blows off all the Ashes and dust out of the test, it does
stand right, and then beat the piece of Blink-silver into bits, but first put a
little straw into the test, and the bits of silver upon it; Give it fire and
coals that the test and the silver may be well covered, then begin to blow, so
the silver will melt easily, and begin to drive, then put away with an
iron-hook all the Coals from the silver, and stroke the silver also clean off,
yet so that nothing may be lost, then lay split wood, or other wood for fire,
and fit for the purpose, and cause the Bellows to blow under Wood for the
burning of Silver.
the Wood upon the silver, so the silver will begin to drive under the wood, and
that lead which did remain among the silver will be drawn into the test: only
consider* when such split wood is burnt upon the test, then put more wood by or
upon it, that still the silver may be burnt with a fresh flame, and so will it
be sooner clean, while the silver does yet go upon the test, and it must be
stirred about with a round bowed Iron-hook, and made glowing hot, whereby the
silver may be clean, or else it will retain some lead underneath.

The content of burnt Silver.
But that the Silver may not be Burnt so much, but may have a right and true
content, namely, fifteen loath, and three drams, (which commonly the burnt
Silver is to have) then you may in the mean time once or twice, with a well
pointed Iron, (thrust a little into the Silver) and take a proof out (which
will hang easily about it) then beat it off, and see if it has much yellow
Litharge, or beat it upon an Anvile, and if it be Deft, then the Silver is well
burned, if not put the proof in again, and let the Silver drive longer upon the
Test, until you do find the proof upon the Iron, white and deft, but the Silver
upon the Test cannot be overdone, because the Test grows soft from superfluous
heat, and take more Silver to it than it ought; all which is well to be
observed, and diligent exercitation or use is needful, if one will burn blinck
Silver upon a certain content.

How the Silver does cool.
And if by negligence, the Silver (before it is done) does become cool, put
again Coals upon it, begin it again and burn it that it may be right, for the
hard burnt Silver do (in Coining) hurt: of which afterward a great damage
will follow.

Silvers that are not burnt too high.
Some of the Refiners in the burning of Silver do put upon every Mark of Silver
a half Loath or Dram of good Copper that the Silver may not come too high, but
upon their just content, not that it remains with the Silver, but because it
goes together with the Lead in the Test, that the same burnt Silver (as we have
heard) may not become of such a high content; this is a good intention in such
places, where the Silver for Payment upon a certain content are given in, and,
without proving, accepted, and there reasonable diligence in burning may be so
observed, that none of the parts may be wronged and hurt.

Coppery Blinck Silvers.
Whole Coppery blinck Silvers, such as they make in the Refining Houses, may be
burnt very Deft, but they will remain too light on the Content, to the same
must be put a little Lead, (as much as it will permit) as sometimes likewise
may be done to the Silvers which are melted of speizy and Cobolt Oars for their
Wildness and uncleanness sake.

Silver taken out of the Test, then is it to be fully quenched, whereby the
Ashes will fall easily away, which stick about When the Silver burning is
finished.
it, and the rest of the Ashes must be taken away cleanly, with a strong Brush,
and let the Silver be dry, and when the Thornels (if there be any) and the
Silver has taken hold on the Ashes, they must be beaten down with a Hammer,
that the piece on all sides may be smooth.

But that the Reader may have a larger understanding of the Silver Burning,
also how the France, and Test, with all other things appertaining to them, are
to be formed, is clearly to be seen by the following Sculpture, which is thus

Deciphered.
1. The Burning Furnace. 2. The Test which is put into it. 3. How the Silver is
burnt on the Test. 4. The Bellows blowing. 5. The Iron-plates Luted over with
Clay and used against the heat. 6. A Fork and Hook to stir the Melted stuff or
Metals, as also for Iron-proofs. 7. An un-used or unwarmed Test. 8. A Test that
is in warming. 9. A Roaster or Iron, on which the burnt Silver is made dry. 10.
The Water-Tub over which the burnt Metals is brusht and cleansed. 11. The Ball
and Pestle for making Tests. 12. The Block upon which Silver is beaten with an
Hammer. 13. The split-wood for the Silver burning. 14. A Test that has been
used and Broken. 15. A three footed stool for several uses. 16. A Tankard to
put Water, into Fig. 11.


Sculpture. IX.


CHAP. XXIX. How to burn Silver under the Muffle.
BVRNING of Silver which principally is used in lower Saxony) requires a
singular and better Diligence than the Common silver burning, and also
particular Tests and Muffles: The Tests you must make thus: Let the prepared
Tests to be made with with Iron rings.
Hoops be of Iron, of the bigness as you intend to burn a great or small piece
of silver, they must be high of a hand square, but at the top a little wider
than at the Bottom, in one of them put in the prepared Test-Ashes, and fill it
to the top, still beating down gently (with a broad Hammer) the Ashes about the
Brim; and so further and further till you have beaten down all the Ashes that
are left, or are too much upon the Test, stroke them off with an Iron, and then
overturn the Rings and test alike upon a little Ashes, which is to be laid
under; then take them with your hand out of the test, till it is half empty,
and make the Ashes small again with your hands, then press the test full again
with a heap beating it down also with the Hammer, as is before directed, and
the rest of the Ashes also stroke off with an Iron, then turn the test again,
and make the Ashes smooth with the Ball, then the test is prepared: Now the
tests after this manner prepared are much better and stronger than they which
are beaten into the tests.

The Muffles for Silver burning.
Concerning the Muffles which pertain to this Silver-burning, they are to be
made over little round sticks after the bigness of the upper part of the test,
and are to be cut out in the like form with the tests; and other pertaining
Instruments which the Sculpture following will show.

If now you will burn Silver, then put the Test with the Ring between four
square burnt Stones in Sand or Ashes, as deep that the Sand may be even with
the test above, in an Oven for it prepared, in which several tests may be put
together, and such Wind-Ovens must have always one Wind-hole, which may drive
two Ovens, especially in such places wherein many pieces of Silver come
together, and once in one day are to be burnt.

Afterward put the Muffle on the test, which is made after its bigness, and a
burnt stone on the top, that nothing may fall upon the Silver, put coals upon
and under the Muffle, and about and upon the test, and when the test is grown
warm then put in the beaten silver, and let it begin to work, but if you would
have it soon melted, then you may blow it with Handbellows, through the
Mouth-hole under the Muffle, and then it quickly goes, and when it is melted
take away the Coals again, and let it go also under ths Muffle, stir it once or
thrice with the Iron, as you have done in the other, then it will go upon the
test, under the Muffle, all off: (just as the Silvers upon the Coppels.) With
this burning of Silver both great and small pieces may be burnt, as with the
Bellows, and without loss or any great damage upon the Content.

A clean silver burning
After this manner, I have seen at Goslar in the Workhouse (when it was kept)
upon one Test on one piece near one Hundred mark of Silver burning: If now you
will (while the Silver goes) take out with an Iron one or two provings (as is
done in the Silver-burning before) you may do it (and it is not to be despised)
but who in this ART is conversant, the same needs not so many provings, but
he knows it upon sight, when it has enough.

Muffle is burnt clear and begins to stay, one may let water run upon it in a
Copper Channel and cool it, then with strong Tongs take it out and purify it
from the Ashes, (as is abovesaid) then the Silver is burnt.

Tests to be kept.
The Tests may be kept together, because they are not without Silver, the same
in some Mine-works the Workmen use to take to themselves, but in some they
belong to the Republique: They may be made at any time to profit, and the
Silver that is in them may be melted out, as may be seen in the following
Sculpture, and is thus

Deciphered.
1. The Oven in which the Silver is to be burnt. 2. The inside of that Oven. 3.
The Wind-holes of that Oven which drives the fire upwards into the Work. 4. The
Test that is set into it. 5. The Iron Mould or Ring into which the Tests are to
be put. 6. The form of the Ironring. 7. The Ring filled with ashes for making a
Test. 8. A round Muffle. 9. A Ball and Hammer for making of Tests. 10. A person
that breaks the burnt Silver. 11. Another person standing on the backside of
the Oven who takes Care for the burning of the silver. 12. A Vessel of water
into which the burnt silver is to be cast. 13. Bellows and Instruments
belonging to the Oven.





CHAP. XXX. How Copper is to be Assayed for fine Silver.
light-content silver fine (for many times they How much Lead is to be added.
who should do it, know not fundamentally how much Lead is to be added, whereby
they do too much, or too little) therefore to such light-silvers, if the Mark
contains eight Loths of silver, then ten times the weight of Lead is to be
added, and if the Silvers contains from eight to twelve Loths, eight weights
of Lead, and then from twelve to fifteen Loath, six weights of Lead must be
added, but if the burnt silvers centent should be fifteen Loath, then the Lead
may be two weight less, but if it should be wholly cleansed, then it is better
one weight too much then one too little, that the silver may be the cleaner:
And when you have put it in the Test, let it be warm, and add two weights of
Lead, and when it begins to go, then draw in the Silver gently, and let it go
together, and when the Lead is almost gone, then add again two weights of Lead,
do this as long till the Lead is all put in; and the Silver becomes clean, and
when the Lead is done and singly added) there needs not so much Lead, as when
the Lead is added to the Silver all at once: you must not force it, but do it
as cool as it will permit, else the Silver will go more into the Test than
otherwise; when now the Silver is almost purifyed, then gently turn it with a
glowing Hook, least it retain a leady lump, or much smoke of Lead, but by this
way it may clear it self and look pure.

But as to the Coppery Silvers, if they are to be burnt fine upon the Test it
cannot be done more conveniently than under the Muffle.

Silvers which are to be burnt pure and clean with To take the smoke of Lead
from Silver.
Lead, do retain with them a smoke of Lead, if now one would bring it off, the
same must be set upon a plain plate, and blow it with the Bellows, then they
may become very clean.

CHAP. XXXI. How Silver is to be separated from Tin.
Silver-Ware, Monys, Copper, and other Metals melted together (of which A Test
for it.
the most part often times is TIN) that the same cannot be made to profit, nor
separated by every common Goldsmiths and Prover, therefore let this following
way be an instruction (as the most convenient) namely, Put a test in an Oven,
and a Muffle upon it, let both first well glow, and if the burnt matter be ten
pounds then add upon the test twenty pounds of pure Lead at once together, and
when it begins to go, then put in it of silvery rich TIN half a pound, then the
Lead will take it soon to it self, which will quickly (from the great heat)
begin to ascend, and to raise it self up; let it stand a while upon it, then
draw it with an Iron Hook clear off from the Lead, then add more TIN to it, let
it stand its time also in it, then draw it off also, and this infunding the
Lead and drawing away, do as long till the burnt matter do all come upon the
test, and if the Lead in working becomes weak, then refresh it again with one
or two pound of new Lead, that it may endure the longer in the heat; but if the
burnt matter be Coppery, it is the better; if not, you must add somewhat of
Copper, because it becomes more Deft by it, and the Lead does take the Silver
and Gold easier in than out of the stubborn TIN only.

In this work the Gold and Silver will go into the Lead, and the most of the
Copper is drawn off with the TIN, then let the Lead go clean off, (as the
Custom is) then have you the silver separated from it.

Copper and Tin (which is drawn off) to profit, it may be done thus; let such
stuff dry, and How to make the separated Tin profitable.
cause it to melt in a strong Fire, and so the Bell-caster, or Founder may
mingle it among their stuff and cast it together (as in Anno 1567. the City of
Slakenword, in the Bohemish Borders was burnt down, and within the Walls of the
City there remained not one House) when I my self did (after this manner) bring
much burnt Metals to right, and separated the Silver from it, which no body
else would take upon him to do.

To precipitate the Silver from Tin.
The Philosophers do write of precipitating, by which the Silver in common tin
may be put down, and formed into a Regulus; thus, one must set the tin apart in
a little Oven, make it very hot, and then precipitate it, and with such a
precipitation the Silver in the tin will be brought down a hand square, and the
same in the same deepness may be cut off, and the remaining Tin may be again
and again and so often cut off until the Silver in the bottom may be brought to
a Regulus, and then (though tin be with it) it will purify fully, and that
which does precipitate will not hurt the tin, but they do write nothing of it:
I signify this, for the sake of such, who have a pleasure to this Art, and are
willing to Exercise themselves in it, and so take it into their further
Meditation, that they may have hereby a way of doing it: I for my part suppose,
that because the Gold in the Silver, and the Silver in Copper; is to be
precipitated, that likewise this precipitation is possible in the tin.

CHAP. XXXII. How to drive out all sorts of Silver, that it may be Deft, smooth
and fine.
Silver in casting together from an evil smoke (or when happily a little tin
comes among it, or, that among the old Silver there has been tinny, false and
gross mixtures,) becomes hard: then is it, as A little Lead Ball.
follows, to be made Deft, again: Put the Silver upon a plain Test (which is
done over with clean and fine Clar, blow it till the Silver runs and goes well,
then add two or three Balls of very clean Lead, according to the quantity of
Silver, blow it again until the Silver does bear the Bellows, and becomes Deft;
but you must (in the blowing upon the Test) once or twice (with a glovving
Iron-Hook) stir the Silver that it may be Deft throughout, then let it cool,
and put it in a Pot together as it pleases you, and take notice, that if
somevvhat of the Copper be blovvn away, by which the Silver on the content
becomes richer, then if it shall retain the Content, which it had before, it
must (in the casting again) be helped by adding so much Copper.

To Brickle hard burnt Silver.
But hard burnt silver, (or other good silver, which might become brickle from a
leady Lump) that same Silver (if a little Lead be with it) may (in this manner
upon a plain Test) be made Deft without any addition; except it has too much
Lead with it self, then it must be made upon a plain little Test (as above is
taught) by the Silver, burning-pure and Deft.

Flus be prepared to make the Silver deft, (which does cleanse the Metals very
much:) A Flus to brickle Silver.
thus, Take sal Alkali, Nitre, Red Argol, and salt Petre, of one so much as of
the other, calcine, and dissolve it again in warm Water, and let it go through
a filter and coagulate; so is the Flus prepared.

CHAP. XXXIII. How to boil Copper from the pagment or old Silver in Coined
Money, or from thin beaten plates of Silver.
TAKE sulphur and vitriol of both alike in quantity, grind them small, and make
them a little wet with Vinegar that it become as a Pap, mingle the Coin or old
Silver among it, then take a long Linen sack, put the Money with these
additions in it, sow the Sack on the sides from the top to the bottom, so that
the Money may not lie too thick in it, pour Water into a pot, and hang the Sack
in it, that it may neither touch below, nor on the sides; boil it well ten or
twelve hours with the fire, and so much as the Water does wast by boiling, you
must add to it again with warm Water, so that the Pot may be always full of
Water, whereby the Copper will be boiled out of the Silver or Coin, and the
Silver will remain in the Sack, then wash it with warm Water and pour it
together, but the Water will boil and dry in, and the rest melt together (with
the Flus which is used to Copper Oar) thus you have the Copper which has been
boiled out of the Money, only the silver by this is not altogether fine but
retains some small quantity of Copper in it.

CHAP. XXXIV. How good proof Balances are to be made and fitted.
Balances for proving, An Assayer able to make Balances,
but he must know also when they do fail (or else become changeable or
uncertain) how to mend and help them again, so I judge it for a great piece of
Ignorance (and it is also not well,) That some who profess themselves Provers
of this ART, do often (when a little is amiss in the Balance, or worn out, or
for any other small matter) use to send to Neurembirg and other more remote
places in Germany, to mend their false Proof-Ballances, whereas they themselves
should have so much Knowledge as to make and fit them with their Proof-weights,
and Proof Instruments, so as they may be certain and sure of their Proofs.

And how to help their Defects.
Therefore, That a fundamental Instruction may be given, I will instruct all who
do love this Proof ART (especially the young Provers) because there are not
always Masters to be had, who know right well to manage such things: and to
teach how the Proof-Ballances and weights, and other Proof-Instruments are to
be made, and also (if it be needful) to mend and rectify them: and first I
shall begin with the Proof-Ballance, The Balance of the Proofseales.
which is to be made as follows.

Cause a small Balance to be forged out of the blade of an old Sword, that it
may have a little broad and thin Tongue, and throughout be pure and well
wrought, and nothing ruff or shivery be on it; this formed Balance make fast
with a little Screw, and file the thickest part, and then search the middle on
the same place, and make a little hole with a drill through it, and fasten a
round point in it, that it may stand out at both ends; fit it in, with thin
bits of Brass, and soder it (with Silversoder} fast into the Balance, so the
soder will easily flow after the thin Brass.

Irons on which the Balance moves, and afterward the little Tongue.
Tongue beaten thin upon a smooth Anvil, and glow it often in a small
Wood-fire, that it may not crack, then Wartz See the Dictionary.
search the middle of the Tongue, from the Wartz or little Iron straight upward
unto the end of the same (and its length is to be the same from the Wartz to
the end) and mark it with a stroke, then cut upon the one side of the Tongue
next to the stroke a bit of the Iron clean off, and on the other side of the
Tongue, cut some also close by the Wartz, that the Tongue may roll over from
one side to the other, then may you also cut off the rest of the Iron on that
side, when this is done, then glow the Tongue and dress it again straight
upwards, then file it (upon a soft piece of Wood, very smooth, according to
your pleasure; you may also pierce (or make holes) neatly in the Tongue near
the Balance for curiosity sake) afterward bend a little the two ends of the
Balance alike, before the Balance be quite fitted, that the two ends may be
of equal length, and then file the Balance according to shape and form, as a
well proportioned proof Balance, and so make an end; but how the filing and
other Work is to be performed, that cannot be written, but it requires a
dilligent exercise.

The Fork in which the Balance uses to hang, that must also in like manner be
subtly Filed, also the holes (in which the little Wartz come to lie) may be
thin, clean and strait through it, and must be pollisht with a smooth little
Stone, that no shivers may remain, which Fork must be so long as the Tongue,
that the Balance may not slide out of it.

Fork is prepared, then take the Fyled How the filed Balance is to be proved.
Balance, and hang it in the Fork with the Tongue downwards, and see if it be
alike weight on both sides, if you find that one side is heavier than the
other, you must help it until it does hang even, then make it smooth and clean
all over with a gentle Fyle or with a soft Whetstone, and pollish it with the
hard Haemathite.
Bloudstone, (which is called Glasscup) when the Balance is fully finished,
then prove it again, that the Fork may hang even, and that it want nothing. But
if there is no Smith, which can forge the Balance with the little Tongue
(because all Smiths cannot make it so well of one piece) then take a clean
steel Wire, or a forged Iron in the form of a of a Balance without the Tongue)
and soder it with silver soder, and fix the little Tongue upon it, the Tongue
may also be garnisht with Brass, afterward File a Balance for it, (as has
bin said above) but if you will not take the pains to Garnish it with Brass,
then may you take Gold-soder and soder all what is necessary about Golden
solder.
the Balance very cleanly, because this soder will flow upon the Iron
without any addition or increase, and if any thing does break upon it, it may
be neatly sodered with Gold soder, as experience will teach.

scales are used to be made blew, (that they To cause the proof Balance to be
blew.
may not rust so easily) and is done thus, cause a pretty thick Iron to be warm
in the fire, but do not suffer it to
be quite brown, lay the Balance with one end upon it, and draw it a long as it
takes color and becomes blew, which is soon done, only take notice the more a
place is thin, so much sooner does it heat and cool, therefore it is soon seen,
that such places do turn white again in fair Weather, and clear shining, and
these Balances become of a fairer blew, then if they were done in dull
Weather, as experience does manifest. Now how that forged Balance, as also the
Filed Scales are to be formed, is to be seen in the following Sculpture thus

Deciphered.
1. The forged Balance. 2. The Fork of that Balance forged. 3. The half
forged Fork. 4. Filed Scales with the half Fork. 5. The Pearl and Pendula's,
the one fastened on the top of the Fork, the other fastened to the bottom of the
Tongue and Fork. 6. One end of the Beam, (and the like is to be supposed at the
other end of it. 7. How the Balance the Perch and Pendula are to hang, on the
Wartz (or little Filed pieces of Iron,) on each side of the bottom of the
Tongue. 8. The Holes in each end of the Fork. 9. The little Hole at the end of
the Balance, (and the like is to be supposed at the other end of it.) 10. The
Scales like small dishes. 11. Pincers to take up small Weights or pieces.


Sculpture XI.


CHAP. XXXV. Of Filing or Joining the proof Balance or Scales.
FILING and Joining of proof Scales is a special Science, and is the true
Masterpiece, To fit Scales.
which is not known to every one that can make them, and is done thus; when the
proof Balance is Filed out, (as has been said before) then make, of Silver,
two flat clean and smooth scales, and also two very The weight of the Scales to
the Balance.
thin small scales, the which are called inset scales, which altogether are to
be as heavy as the Balance, or rather a little heavier than lighter, and put
fine silk Thread to them, in length of the whole Balance, from one end to the
other, such Threads are to have a neat Knot on the top, The Knots,
whereby the strings may hang to the ends of the Balance, and when the strings
are made fast to the scales, then weigh them one against the other, with
another proof scales, and see if they do weigh alike, then hang them to the
ends of the Balance, put the inset scales therein, and hang the Assay-ballance
in a Case made on purpose, and draw them up gently, if then the scales do turn
on the one side; that is, when you do press the scales down on the one side,
that the scales remain down, as also on the other side, and will not go back
but remain standing, then the fault is in the Beam, that on the same places is
fitted When the balance falls.
too high, from which the Balance falls on both sides, and will not stand
just; if you know this, then make the Beam on both sides somewhat lower, but so
that it be not higher on one side than on the other; to the rectifying of this,
you should have a little smooth plate of Peartree, upon which make a Cross
stroke, and in the midst of the Cross must be a little Hole, and upon this lay
the filed Beam of the Balance, so that the little Wartz in the little Holes,
and the Beam and little Tongue may come to lie upon the stroke, then you may
soon see how the Beam, the little Tongue, and the Ends are fitted, that so you
may help and fit it.

So when the little Beam is thus prepared, that it may stand near the Ends, a
little lower than the Line upon the little plate, then lay it in the Fork, in
its place; give it the right quickness so that it draw well and distinctly the
smallest of the Weights of the Proof-Weights (and not stop in its lodge) nor
have too much room (that is to say) that the holes below of the Fork may not
stand too far off from the little Wartz, but only that one may see through to
try it.

Proof-Scales are thus made with To make the Balance, to stand true.
the greatest diligence, see that it has its quickness, and does not stand;
also that there be no fault neither in the Beam or little Wartz, it must stand
right both with the scales and also without them, if it does not this, but goes
heavy on the one side and light on the other, there is the greatest fault,
which to mend many do not understand; but thus is it to be done, help the
Balance above on the one end, and on the other side on the scale, (that is
thus) bend the one end a little down, or a little narrower, then does it give
presently the Balance on the other side, weight, for the length, and takes so
much from the other side of the scale, that the Balance may stand in again in
the Fork, then try it again whether it do well either with a Burden or without
a burden, and that it may have its right quickness; but if it does not so, but
goes still a little at one side, then have you done too much, then help it with
bowing back of the end, and the scale; but if you have not bowed the end on the
right side, then the Balance will go more false, therefore you may easily see
on which side it is to be helped with binding and fitting them, and you may
also use this diligence, that when you have bent the end on the one side, and
that you also do the like on the other side of the scale, but make it even with
Weights, that the Balance may stand right in the Fork, by which you may see
how it does stand in either with Weight, or without, and then it is easily to
be corrected.

It requires great Pains to fit a Balance thus, for it does try many times a
Master; yea, it makes him so err, that he cannot know often times how further to
proceed: yet this way which I have here proposed is the best to such a
fittingness: and it must certainly be managed by an ingenuous, and not a dull
Soul. Thus much I thought good to signify, for the clearer Instruction, because
it is very pertinent to our present Discourse of Proving, therefore I omitted it
not.

Proof-Ballance may be preserved clean and pure from Dust, and also that in
time of use the wind The Case for the Proof Balance.
may be no hindrance, but stand firm, therefore it is to be put in a clean and
well formed Proof-Case made of wood, which on both sides is to be set with
bright and Or, oyld Paper.
clear Glass, that the Light may come into it, and that all things may well be
seen (the Form is shown in the following Sculpture: And, for convenience of the
Sight, it were best to color the Inside of this Case green, because the Fire
is hurtful to the Eyes, and by this color they are again quickened and
refreshed.

Sculpture. XII.
Deciphered.

1. The Outside of the Case for the Balance.

2. The Inside of that Case wherein the whole Balance is to hang, and be kept
from Dust.



CHAP. XXXVI. How Proof-Weights are to be made and divided, and first of the
Grains Pence and Carrat weights.
Weights is no small thing, therefore To be made of Silver or Brass.
I am obliged further to demonstrate how, and of what such are best to be made:
First, it is better they be of good Silver than of Brass, for the Silver
daubeth not, neither colors it so soon as Brass does, but remains all
times pure and clean, if now the Silver be cast into an Ingot, then one may cut
out four square pieces in the proportion and bigness (as every piece of
Proof-weight shall weigh) heavy or light, and file all such pieces pure and
clean, upon a Whetstone, draw them smooth: also every one in particular (in
respect of the Division) is with diligence to be put upon the Proof-Balance,
that if it be still too heavy, it may be made lighter, and true; and so lastly,
it may stand just. But some Provers think one should make and divide the
Proof-weights from above, that is from the greatest still to the smallest;
again, some from the smallest to the greatest; but know that it is best to be
done in the following manner.

Weights of a Mark.
If Proof-Weights are to be prepared anew, they must greatest to the smallest,
for this Reason, Because one may better and more easily have the just and
certain weight of a Mark, than of one from the smallest, as from the half-Grain
or Heller, and should make a Weight out of it, there the Mark would be either
much too heavy or much too light, in which an error is easily committed,
Therefore use, in such a dividing from above, a small Grain of seeved and
washed Copper, by which may be seen how much must be taken away and filed off
from a piece, which is yet too heavy; when now such Proof-weight is finished,
then Proof-Weights.
shall it be drawn up from below, from the smallest to the greatest with
diligence upon a quick and good Proof-Balance, and if there is yet any want,
which cannot be great, that it may be completely helped.

Now, how the Proof-weights, piece by piece are to be divided, may be seen in
the IX Chapter of this first Book.

CHAP. XXXVII. For dividing the Weight of the Centner.
Grain-Penny and Carrat Weights Carrats.
may certainly be divided from the highest to the lowest, so it may be done with
the Centner-weight, but because in the pounds there are unequal parts,
understand it thus, The Centner has a Hundred pound: the half, 50 pounds: and
Unequal parts.
the fourth part, twenty five pounds; and if one would out of it divide sixteen
pounds, (which one that is not well skilled in Division may have great labor
therein) then you should do thus, when you have made right the Division of the
Centner to the fourth part, then weigh the fourth part of the Centner with a
proof weight (it may be a Centner or penny-weight) and how much it weighs,
then you may make your account how much sixteen pounds shall weigh: (an
example.) I put, the new divided twenty five pounds which do weigh on the
penny-weight 13 loths, three drams; then I say, the twenty five pounds will
weigh one Mark, thirteen loths, and three drams, which may weigh sixteen
pounds, which amounts to nineteen loath, no dram, no penny, one heller, and do
prove a little more than a fourth part of a heller, so much then must weigh
sixteen pounds, after this weight or sixteen pounds: divide your weight with
small grained Copper, (the smallest as you are informed before) and although
the Centner had more pounds, nevertheless the unequal division of it may
likewise be found.

Now when the proof weight is all perfected then draw it up likewise with
diligence from the smallest to the greatest, as you have done with the other,
if there should be found an Error, then mend it also, so there will be small
Difference, and the Centner will remain in the desired Weight.

Proof-weights be right and just, set them aside, and make one Proof-weight
Whether the Proof-weights are made right;
more, as heavy as this, then put the made weights which pertain to a
Proof-weight altogether in a quick Proof-Ballance, and weigh them one against
the other, and if they stand even together, then you have made them right; if
not, and that thou find them not alike, then look where the Error is, and
mend it, for, whoever will be sure of his Weights, must not think much of this
Labor.

Number and Mark every piece of the Proof-Weight with a small iron or steel
Punch, how much each piece does weigh, by which it may be known: (but the
marking must be done after its made smooth on a Whetstone whereby the Shivers
which it had from the Stamp may be made smooth again) and lay them into a
little clean Box, made on purpose of wood (the form of which is to be seen in
the following Sculpture*) in which there must be as many little round or square
Holes, as there are weights, then shut the sides that it may be kept from Dust,
and that the Weights may remain clean and pure. The Sculpture is thus

Deciphered.
1. The little Case for Weights opened. 2. The same Case shut.


Sculpture XIII.


Proving of Silver Oars, and what appertains to them; and though it had
seemed needful to Instruct, How such and every particular Oar according to
their Natures and Properties, should be melted and made to more Advantage in
the great Fires of Furnaces and Smelting works: yet because, in this Treatise,
I have only purposed to write of Proofs in Small Fires, and lesser Ovens, and
because these now mentioned works are almost common in the Smelting and great
Mine-works: Therefore I am willing to let it rest here; yet some great Works
and Meltings, I have mentioned (in this and other Following Books) because thy
are not so common, and merely for the Instruction of other Assayers.

The End of the first Book.
OF Golden OARS. BOOK II.

Second BOOK describes how Gold oars are to be known, and how to Roast Boil
and Prove them; also of Washing, Purifying and Quickening the Gold Wash-works:
and further, how Touch-Needles are to be made, and to Divide the Gold-weights;
also to distill Aqua Fortis, and to rectify it: also how Silver and Gold are to
be parted by Aqua Fortis and by Fusion; and to make the Gold deft to cement it,
and give it an high Color, and how it must be cast through Antimony, and be
brought to its hight with the Ovens, glasses and Instruments which are used to
all these.

To know Gold Oars*
The Knowledge of Silver-Oars having been now treated of; We proceed to the Gold
Oars, (although they are not found in so many Kinds and Colors) which must
after their external Modes be known also, together with their proving and
ordering of them. But they have this Condition attends them, (as Experience
has taught me) That no Oar has GOLD only of it No oar by it self Gold*
self, without other incorporated Metals) unless it be apparent Section.
them, and the same Gold, which is thus to be found in these Oars is not wholly
pure and clean, but commonly Silvery, although one more than the other.

Gold in Horn Oar.
Now, the fair Gold that is found thus Intermixed or commonly standing in a
whitish Flint, and sometime in a blew and yellow Horn-stone, and also in a Blew
shiffer streamy and yellow iron, but very small and flaming with Gold, and this
is found in the Mine at Knein, two miles from the Eal in Bohemia, toward the
West, where there is also found a grenish Silvery Flint, in a firm Quarry; and
when this is ground and washed, then a fair and high Duke Gold comes out of it,
which otherwise is not seen in the Flint, at the present: I know no place in
Germany, where, out of any Oar, any higher Gold can be made.

Goldish oars (which are commonly sandy) Gold in Woolfrain. Tin, and Iron Oars.
have good Duke gold, yet not all alike, some are gross and in grains* others
are flaming and light Gold, and there is almost in all such works a heavy
Shurl, ger.
Temper (or wolfram wash) especially in Tin and Iron stone, which with the Gold
have been driven far by the Deluge, and it is both wonderful and neat, and the
work and color Why the Rivers carry Gold with them.
and difference may easily be discerned, of these sorts: and the Rivers and
Channels which do flow over such works are so seeded with it, that Duke gold in
many places is found in them, not only in remote Kingdoms and Countries, but
also with us in Germany, it is brought to profit, yet in Germany for the most
part it is poor, and cannot bear the charge of Washing.

Of the River Nile.
Nile in Egypt, which did flow into the Sea in the time of the Deluge, in
which all Sand was brought together) other Rivers and Channels have also been
seeded with Duke gold; But, to this I cannot consent, for this Reason, Because
this River is very great, and goes Ethiopia, (which is called India) in which
also is found much Gold, and it is said to be the greatest of all other Rivers,
and does flow the furthest; yet I esteem it much too small to enrich so many
Gold-Mines with Gold-sand and channels in so innumerable places of the World.

Grains which are carried away by Foreigners.
There is also with us in Germany all sorts of Grains which are found in many
Mountains and Channels, and are carried away by outlandish men; some of them
are flinted, in part brown yellow and black, and within like Glass, and in form
commonly round, and also square, of which, as it is said, Gold is also made: for
my part, I esteem such not at all, because I have assayed many times such
Grains in the Fire, and other ways tried, but could not find Gold in them. But
thus much I have from very credible Persons, who have assured me, That such
Grains have not Gold in them, nor none is made out of them, but by such persons
brought far into Italy and other places, for an Addition, out of which fine
Colors and Amel is to be made, which colors and Amel by them is thus esteemed
and sold dear, as if it were Gold, which also is agreeable to reason and may be
believed, especially because many sorts of Mines, with us in Germany, are found
which do yield glossy and fine Colors.

Gold in Iron-man Oar.
Further, sometimes with the dug Gold (which lies in flints, especially in
the Gold-Mine at the Eal in the Kingdom of Bohemia) there breaks a small gray
spissy Oar, which, after its color, is called Iron-man, that same also is not
only rich in Gold, but it is also silvery, therefore it is not to be compared
with the other dig'd Gold which stands in flints. Also there is found much
Gold flints which have not only Gold but silver also, and commonly Gold in
flint*
more of silver than gold, likewise flints which are very copery and silvery,
the silver of it is also rich in gold; as also some white flints which have no
Copper at all, and but a little silver, and are goldy, but the flints which are
coppery, and whose Silver has Gold are found commonly with small flints
intermixed.

Marcasite, of which many make Fables, Gold Marcasite.
and do write as if it were a mere flint, is very rich in Gold (because it does
not loose the fourth part in the Fire) and in roasting and glowing becomes more
and more fine: I have many times diligently enquired after it, but never
received any good account concerning it, much less could I hear of one who had
seen such a flint.

But, as far as I can comprehend, the Marcasite can and must be nothing else
than a very good Gold-oar: Now whether this Name be given it, or any other, it
matters not: But how these (one after another called Gold-oars and washed
Works) are to be proved and tried, shall plainly follow.

CHAP. II. What Proofs and Washings the Gold-washers use in Gold-works.
How much may be washed in a day.
GOLD-Washers who go abroad in the Country for Gold-washing, and get their
Livelihood by it, they have for the Gold-works a special proving, whereby they
do observe how much Gold they wash in one day, and accordingly make their
Accounts, whether the Work will bear the charge of Washing, and whether it be
poor or rich, and to this Proof they use a particular Weight, which is divided
by the weight of an Hungary-Gilder, after the worth of so much as is used to
pay for such wash-Gold.

Creicers are given for an Hungary Gilder weight of wash Gold, therefore they
Of Creicers Golden and a Peny-Weight.
make forth the greatest weight as high as an Hungury Gilder, and sign it with
92 Creicers, the second piece or half of the weight with 46 Creicers, and so of
all the other pieces, one after another, with their Worth, till to the single
penny, as follows,

92 Creicers the weight of a Gilder. 46 Creicers the half Gilder. 23 Creicers
the fourth part of a Gilder. 12 Creicers 6 Creicers 3 Creicers 2 Creicers 1
Creicers 2 Penny weight Bohemish Money. 1 Penny weight Bohemish Money.
Of Gold Grains.
By these Weights every one may be informed of a grain of Gold, how much it is
worth when weighed, therefore commonly the Gold-washers which go into the Lands
for such Work carry with them such a Weight, with a black Sichertroegel.
Sicher Troy, and a little Box full of Quicksilver, and a soft Leather, a
proof Test, and a little Balance (to all these things pertaining) then as soon
as one of them enters upon a sandy or soft Work, and works upon it: if he
finds Gold in it (how small soever it be) then does he cleanse a little of it,
and does cause it to enter cleanly into the Quick silver, and does afterward
press it through the Leather, from it, and that which does remain in the
Leather he puts upon a Proof Test, into the fire, which he does presently
kindle, either in the Creicer and penny weight, so does he make his Reckoning,
how much of such Oar he can wash and make it return to an account in one day,
and so in a Week.

To prepare Boards for Washing it.
Wash*work will recompense his labor pains and charges, then each one,
according as he is best instructed does wash the same, and make his profit
thereby, among which there are some who do wash that which does lie in the
Fields under the moist earth, as also the Sand out of the flowing Rivers or
Channels, and do wash it over a Board, in which are cut little Gutters and
wrinkles, here and there, into which the heavy Gold will descend and remains;
but part of it will wash over, especially if the work be rich and has grain
Gold; but if it does go slow, it requires more pains.

A special good wash work*
and sand, by the waterside, a special wash-Work by which, in one day near 300
weight of rubbish have been washed away, and the Gold saved: which is done
thus, There must first be made of Brass Wire a Rattar or The Bigness of the
Rattar.
Seeve as wide or narrow as the Work requires, and it is to be tied from above
downward with Brass wire, and it must be stretched fast upon Iron-stays; that
it may not bend or rise, the bigness of the Rattar is to be seven spans long,
and five wide, and in depth a good span, with a bottom that does enter two
thirds into the Rattar, and with one third part to be extended for carrying the
matter out (which is to be done over with Tin) the Rattar must also have, on
each side, little wooden pieces fastened to it, by which he may reach to the
foremost Instruments, that the gross matter that does not go through may easily
be emptyed.

Rattar must have on each side Boards fastened to it, that nothing may fall from
the Rattar, for from that place the Work passes from the Rattar, upon the flat
hearth (which is to be thirty spans in length, and four broad) and the Chanel
through which the Water does run-out must be wider than that above, and also
covered-over with Tin: to this there is also Water used more or less, according
as the Work is foul or sandy.

Wash-work serves only for Sandy-works, but not at all for the clean and deft:
yet because this work is not common to this day, therefore (for them that have
not seen it) I have delineated it in the following Sculpture, thus

Deciphered.
1. The man that works with the Rattar. 2. The middle Floor whereon that
which goes through the Rattar does fall. 3. The lower Floor whereon that which
comes from the middle Floor does fall. 4. The Plain Receiver of that which
falls from both. 5. The person that stands on a Board, and out of a
Wheel-barrow throws the Matter or Oar, into the Tunnel, which guides it into
the Rattar. 6. The Channel in which Water does run into the Rattar.





Gold-washers use upon their Of Seircing Gold Oar.
hearths the strong Timode black and russet woollen Cloth, over which they do
drive their Works, because the woollen cloth is rough and hairy, so that the
small and round grains of Gold will remain, and not run forth (as it will from
the Timode) whereby the Gold (upon the black Cloth may apparently be known,
though it be small and little.

Timode or black woolen Clothes Linsy-woolsy (half linen and half woollen;
wrought in the manner as the Timode is) upon which the The sorts of cloth to be
used for seircing it.
Gold does stick better, and such Cloths do last longer, because of the Linen
that is among the Woollen which does strengthen it, therefore it is better for
this Work.

How to use the long Rattars.
But there is another way of Washing (not much in use) which is called Driving
and Washing through the long Rattar; but according to my mind, it is not so
convenient a way for the small Works, which have great and small Gold, and are
both sand and Clay together, yet I do not much decline from the before
described Rattar-work: For, in this Labor or washing, because of the turning in
the upper and lower falls, the running Gold is preserved better, and the Gold
goes with the small common Work over the plain hearth, upon which it is
driven: and the manner of doing it is seen in the following Sculpture; thus

Deciphered
1. The Miner which caries the matter to be washed in the Rattar. 2. The Parts
of the Rattar, more visible than in the former Sculpture. 3. The Washer that
governs the Rattar. 4. The upper and lower Falls from the Rattar. 5. The plain
Boards, or Hearth) on which they fall. 6. He that stirs about the muddy water
from both Fallings. 7. The Tub wherein that which falls from the hearth is to
be washed.





To purify the Gold Slicks.
the Gold-Washing, as a Direction how the Work is to be done to Advantage. If
now a Work be rich, then it is the better, and then may easily be found and
used a manner of Washing, that the loose Gold by it may be preserved: and when
the Slick is brought into a narrowness, and the Gold drawn out with the great
Instrument, or with the slender and long one (which is called a Saxen) then may
it be quickened and pressed through Leather; then glow out and cast all
together, of which more shall be written in what follows.

I have spoken of the Gold and Seyfen or Soper.
wash-works which do need Boxes: Now I intend to write also of the Gold Oars
which are had in the Mines out of the Veins* and how that must be buckt or
washed; in which Of great Grained gold.
the dug Gold is clearly to be seen, and such must have a special way of
preparing it) namely, those Oars in which the Gold stands in great Grains,
and may be parted with the hand, or beaten in a great Iron Mortar, and, if
there be much, then set it over a Seeve, made on purpose, and so cleanse it,
and it needs no more pains, nor greater Art: and it is better than that the
Oars (without difference) were brought under the Buck, or washing place
(especially because one uses to observe such a hand parting in smaller
Metals, as Silver, Copper and Lead Oars.)

How dug Gold is mingled.
But the poor Gold Oars which are mingled with small Gold (and cannot be
separated with the hand) the same if they can be wrought without Roasting, may
be Buck'd and prepared two ways, viz. by a wet and a dry Bucking or beating;
by the wet Bucking is the Oar washed through Tin plates and Channels (and like
unto silvery Oar, driven over a plain Hearth, and afterward made clean) but in
the dry beaten Work, the Floor is driven over the plain Hearth with Woollen or
Linsy-Woolsy stuff (as above, where the Gold-work has been taught) and so
washed and made clean and quickened.

Flinty and Horn stony Gold Oars how to be used.
There are also Flinty and Horn-stony Gold Veins, in which the Gold is very
subtle and thin, and is mingled with other Water-flowing Gold Oars, the best
way of preparing them is, That such Flints and Horn-stones, provided there may
be had Wood enough in the place, Roast Oven, made on purpose, be burnt: first,
very hard and well, and when it stands in the greatest heat, pour water upon
it, that it may cool suddenly, and so the subtle flaming Gold will be, as it
were, frighted, at the incorporated Oar, and run together, and become a round
Body, and is strengthened and remains the better in washing, also it is better
preserved: likewise, the Flint by quenching does become so brickle, that
afterward in great quantity, it may easily be buckt and separated, and is not
so hurtful (after it is roasted) to the tender Gold, as before when it was raw)
because the hard Flint among the Gold-Oar does more hurt in Bucking in respect
of its weight, and the muddiness carries away some of the Gold with it, in the
mudy Water, but seeing that it is very rare to find plenty of wood in such
places where flinty, Horn-stone Gold Veins are; therefore every one is left to
try the best way.

Roast-Ovens in which those flinty Oars are roasted, Roast ovens.
and afterward quenched with water, make them thus: Give to each Oven two Else
in square, and six Else high, and cause it to be built up with stones, that the
Oven before the lower part may remain, open so high that the roasted Oar may be
drawn out of the hole (after the Oar which is to be roasted is put in) then it
must be closed up with Clay, also there must be in the Oven, in stead of the
roast, Separations, made of Tiles an Ell high, upon which the wood is to be
laid, that the Wind may go between the Tyles into the Oven, whereby the fire
may burn clear.

When you intend to roast in such an Oven, then lay into the Oven upon the
Tile-stones, short split wood, two Else high; upon which put the stony Oar, as
gross as it does come out of the Pit, but the small which are not in very great
pieces set along the sides of the Oven* that the great pieces may be in the
middle, so that the flame and heat of the fire may wind about it, and also the
heat Furnace, and such forand enclosed Heat does much more than in an open
Roast, and when the Roast in the Oven burns at the fiercest, then must water
be poured on it, and be quened suddenly, therefore such a Roast Oven for better
Advantage is to be built in such a place where water may To quench the Roast.
easily be poured into it, so the subtle Gold will run together in grains, and
the stone will become brickle (as has been said before) although the same do
become brickle only with burning, yet it becomes more brickle by quenching,
and it is done more especially for the Gold sake.

The form of such Roast-Ovens, and how they must stand in its proportion and
shape, will be seen in this following Sculpture, thus

Deciphered
1. The Form of the Roasting-ovens. 2. The Shutters to them. 3. The Inside of
them. 4. The Partitions in them, made of Tile, and a person atending at the
mouth of them. 5. He that pours Water into the top of the Oven. 6. The wood
that is used in those Roasting-ovens. 7. The Instruments to close the Ovens. 8.
The Ladder to go to the Top of the Oven. 9. The Pieces of Metal that are to be
used.





Gold-stones, then there may be made more Ovens, as also bigger, and according
as necessity requires, regulate them that the Fire may have its full force.

Thus much I was willing to mention concerning the Preparation of the Gold
Oars: But because I have not from my youth, meddled so much in it, as with other
Oars, therefore have I shortened my Discourse: and others that know better
Methods have their Liberty to enlarge.

CHAP. III. Of Gold Slicks*
Gold Oars and Gold Slicks are cleansed Of poor Gold slicks.
for to quicken: and the Gold drawn out, with the Quick silver, and has been
quickened, yet there will remain from the quickening a Slick, of which some is
poor in Gold, and some rich, yet the rich Slicks may be made to pofit and
melted like as a rich Silver Oar: But the other common Gold Slicks, especially
if they be of the Gold-Mine at the River Eal) are flinty, and that the Centner
which has but a dram of Gold, cannot better be melted than over the raw Slicks
into Slackstones; but if the Slicks be not flinty of themselves, then there
must be another flint, (which yields much Stone) added to the Slick in melting,
and when the Slackstone does not come out rich in Gold, then add more of such
Flints to it, to help the Flint, until a Centner of the Slack-stone does
contain 13 or 14 Drams in Gold, but it must not be wrought by adding more to
it, because if it should become too rich in Gold (it is to be feared that) the
Slakes would remain too rich: therefore, if there be enough of such flints to
be had, let them be added to it, or if the Slick it self be flinty, and yield
stones, then 'twere better that the Slack-stone were brought no further in
Contents, than to 10 drams of Gold in the Centner, and so the Slack will remain
the poorer: thus the Iron flaky Oars (which have very subtle flaming Gold, and
commonly the Centner of it does contain a dram or two in Gold) may return to
great Advantage.

Gold Ram or Slick (out of which Gold is quickened) which in part uses to be
very rich in Gold that sometimes it does contain a Centner from three to Of
rich slicks.
many Loths of silvery Gold, such can no better way be melted than with Lead;
yet because that same Slack is very subtle, therefore the blast in melting does
raise it up very easily, so that it does fly out, and is lost by it: to prevent
this, Let the Slick be mingled with strong Yest, and let it dry, then break it
into Bits, or before it is quite dry, cut it to small Bits, and put it into the
Oven, and so it will remain better in the fire.

To bring both to Profit.
It Is necessary I further direct, That when one has a Gold Slick, and would
melt it, and that a Centner thereof does hold from two to five drams of Gold,
and is not stony in it self, there must be other flints added so that the flint
and slick may not be thoroughly mingled together, nor run upon the slick, for by
this there will be danger, because the flint does spread it self, and gives a
little rough stone, whereby there will remain much of the Gold behind, but
weigh the flint and the slick, each by themselves, and if any of it be melted,
so much (according to the quantity, partly flint and partly slick and slacks)
must be set into the melting Oven, and it will fine it self well enough
together, and by this means (as Experience teaches) more row stones and more
Gold will be wrought out, than if such slick, flint and slacks had been mingled
together, because the work remains close together and is not spread.

CHAP. IV. How Gold-Slicks with Gold from dug Oar are to be prepared.
Gold-slicks which do contain Gold are made clean, and there is a desire to
make more profit of it, by quickening and getting the Gold out of them, then the
slicks must first be prepared in the following manner: viz. Take good strong
Wine Vinegar, put into every gallon half a pound of Alum, cause it to boil up
a little, and then let it cool, then put the Gold-slicks in a clean prepared
Vessel, and pour the prepared Vinegar upon it, that it may cover the slicks,
let it stand two or three nights in it, and work well upon it, so the Vinegar
will make a fresh ground to the flamy Gold, that it will not easily enter into
the Quick silver, and that which is yet among it of deft Oar will become slimy,
and the Gold is made less, and when the Vinegar has stood the mentioned days
over it, then separate the Vinegar clear from it, and wash the slicks clean and
fair with warm water, and let it dry, then put it in the grinding Tub or wooden
Vessel, and so much Quicksilver to it as the quantity of the Gold in the
slicks does require, and rub it well together with the hands, afterward with a
wooden Pestel, fitted for it, grind it well and so long, till the Quick silver
has taken up all the Gold; when this is done, then pour warm water upon it,
and wash the slicks and Quick silver clean, and pour out the muddy matter, and
the Quick silver will run together again: which must be separated very clean
from the slicks, that nothing remain behind, because it is more Goldish: when
this is done, dry it with a sponge; and put it in a double strong Timode or
into a fine leather (which is To press the Quick silver through Leather.
better) and force it with a strong Coard so as the Quicksilver being so pressed
will pass through such Timodes or leather, and the Gold with almost as much
Quicksilver will remain in the Leather; put this on a flat Test upon a coal
fire, and the remaining Quick silver will cooperate and the Gold will remain
alone; then glow it well and melt it together before the Bellows with Borax, so
long till it does hold the wind, then pour it into an Ingot:
The prepared Vinegar (as has been said) with Allom, is for the most part used
by all Refiners, but they quicken Gold only simply with slick, but it is better
that such Vinegar be prepared and used.

When the Gold h^lds Silver.
But if the Gold be a little silvery (as commonly wash Gold is, which do not
come out of an higher Content than they are in the Oar) beat it thin, put it in
Cement; as hereafter shall be discoursed, then it will be clean and have a high
Color.

T^ p(...) the d^^^g^d Gold.
What Gold has been picked out and is wholly dig'd (or else separated by the
hand) such Gold may be melted with Borax and cast, and if there is yet any
uncleanness then set it first upon a flat Test, let it drive with a little Ball
of pure Lead until it does hold the Blast, and afterward again with Borax
melted into an Ingot, and so it will be deft.

This manner of quickening does serve upon all slicks; (which have dug Gold)
because as the same is washed in Sand, and picked out of the Oars; in the same
manner it will come out in quickening, and does not hurt the Quicksilver at
all, and when it is forced out, then may it be used again.

Gold-washers which have had a singular manner in the Gold-washing and
quickening; Gold Oars (or Slicks) very small (as small as Meal) afterward they
have moistened it with strong, hot Salt Water, and have mingled it very well
like unto Copel Ashes, that the Salt may every where touch the Slicks upon the
Oar; and while the Salt water is yet warm and hot they have upon five pound of
the Oar poured twenty pound of Quick silver, and have mingled the Slick or Oar
several times with it, and stirred it well, so long until the Quick silver
could hardly be discerned in it, and they have afterward put the Oar into
several Vessels full of Water, made on purpose, and have stirred it, but one
Vessel did always stand lower than the other, that that which did fall out of
the upper vessel, (and so to the second or third) might be received and settle
in the fourth.

And thereby washed the most of the Muddiness away; then they have taken the
Oar and mingled it with the Quick silver, and put it upon the Mill (which has
an hollow stone) and have ground it with water, that it might flow through it,
until no more Muddiness did go from it, till all that which is come through
the Mills be settled in the Vessels and preserved, so that nothing was lost:
Lastly, the Quick silver was taken out of the Mill, and with diligence kept
together, and dried, and pressed through Leather. This Work I like well upon
great Quantities of poor Oars, in which the dug Gold is very subtle and not
flinty, and yields no stone, which cannot be melted otherwise to Advantage.

This is a neat work, and is worthy of Deliberation; But I for my part have
this further Consideration in it, That poor Gold slicks, cannot be much Charge;
because, first, the Slick must be ground, and the Charge of the Salt or
mingling, well considered, as also the Charge of the other grindings, and the
waste of the Quick silver; but lastly, to make the Gold completely clean
(besides the charges of the building up of the Gold-Mill) it is necessary to be
careful herein, for, some Gold-Oar may have so much subtle Gold, as will pay
richly for all the Charges.

CHAP. V. How Clean Gold-slicks are to be made to profit without Quicksilver.
Quick silver one may melt the clean and rich Gold slicks with grained By
Lead-glass. etc.
Lead, Litharge and Lead-glass in a Crucible with a little of Caput Mort. and
Sandover, and cover it over with Salt, and so cause it to flow well in a
Wind-Oven, and afterward cause the Regulus to go upon a flat Test, because of
the Black-stoney Veins there will be also much fine slick thrust out among the
Iron, therefore the Iron is first to be drawn out with a good Loadstone,
otherwise it will be much hindered in the upboyling, but if the Gold slick be
flinty or the like, then it must first be roasted, so all the Gold which is not
loose in the slick will enter into the Regulus of Lead, and be made to profit.

To make firm Tests for Gold.
The Test to such work must be prepared with washed Ashes, among which must be
mingled half the quantity of small Bone*Ashes, and a little Potters-clay, and
the upper part must be done over with good Clar, that nothing of the Gold be
drawn into it, and when it is all thus prepared, then water must be poured into
it, and let it suck it in, whereby the Test will be made firm and good, and
when the Gold is gone off upon the Test, then take the appearing Gold, which is
yet unclean, put it upon a flat Test, done over with a little Clar, and let the
Bellows blow upon it, so long until the Gold does endure the blast, and so it
will be deft, and then you may (if it have yet a little smoke of Lead) cause it
to melt in a Crucible with a little Borax, and cast it into an Ingot, or
presently let it go into the Cement, as hereafter you will be instructed.

To boil up the clean Gold slick.
The rich cleansed Gold slick may also be boiled up with the following Fluss,
like unto the Copper Oars: thus, Take Slick, mingle among it twice so much
Fluss, put it in a Crucible cover it over with Salt, cause it to flow well,
with a strong heat in a Wind-furnace, and there will be as much Gold Regulus in
the Crucible as there was in the slick; then cause it to cool well, and knock
the Regulus clean off from the Fluss, but because it is yet unclean from the
Fluss, therefore cause it to go off upon a flat Test with a small lead Ball,
until it melts and becomes deft: and although in the quantity of the slick, the
quickening is most fit to be used, yet there may (by this Vpboiling) be ten
pound at once melted in a Crucible, and the Gold be brought into a Regulus.

CHAP. VI. Of Fluss to boil up the Oars.
FLUSS (of which has been spoken) is made thus, Take one part of Saltpeter
and two parts of Argol (both stamped small and mingled together) cause a glazed
Pot to glow, put the matter into it, and cover the Pot quickly, so the fluss
will be presently burnt out and become a black-grey Powder; or else, when the
pulverized matter is put into the Pot, then put a live Coal into it, so it will
burn out to a Fluss, mingle also Salt Petre, melted Salt and Sandover, and
crude Argol with it, then is the Fluss ready.

CHAP. VII. How Gold may be separated very clean from the Quicksilver.
Quicksilver The use of Quicksilver in this work.
pressed through a leather and forced from it, yet there will remain commonly a
little Gold with it, especially when the Gold-slicks and Gold Oars have been
poor, and that the Quicksilver did not become rich, such Quicksilver may be
preserved for other Work of the like nature. But if there were no more such
slicks to be done, yet the Gold (which did go with the Quick silver through the
Leather) must be separated from it very clean, by an Artificial Separation, and
such Quicksilver does commonly contain two or three Loths of Gold in the
Centner, especially when the Quicksilver came from poor slicks, and How a Iron
Jug or Pot is to be made and Leamed.
such separation is done thus,

Cause an Iron Jug to be made, which may be taken asunder at the belly, lute
the lower part of the inside, about half a finger thick, with very good and
weighty Loam, (that will hold well in the fire, and not crack) cause it to dry,
set the upper part upon it, and bind them both very fast, and close together
with an Iron Wire, and then do it all over on the outside with good Clay, and
when it is dry, then set it in an Oven (which is called an Athanor with which
one uses to burn Aqua fortis) and put in it fifty pound of Quick silver (if
you have such a quantity of it) and place an Helmet upon it, and also an
earthen Jug before it, in which there must be full three quarts of Water, and
all must be luted well on the outside, and cause it to dry, then let the fire
burn by degrees to be stronger from one hour to the other, until at last the
Jug be very red, yet make it not suddenly hot, that the Jug may not burst, nor
the Quicksilver fly out, so the Quicksilver will all come over into the water
in the Receiver, which when the fire is kept in good order) is done in seven or
eight hours: when all is come over, then let the Jug cool well, and take it out
of the fire, and open it, so will you find all the Gold in the bottom, then
take it from the Loam, and let it flow together.

After this manner (now directed) the Gold which remains in the Leather
(which has Quick silver with it) may be put in and drawn off: and the Quick
silver may return to Advantage.

To refresh Quicksilver
But because the Quicksilver will become a little weak from the drawing over
(so that it will not attract so soon as in the beginning) and if you would have
it fresh again, then put it into a Vessel of Wood, draw warm salt Water upon
it, grind it with your hand well together, and dry it with a Sponge, then it is
as good again as it was before, and you may use it again: also there is no
great loss by it in the drawing it off, if the Pots and Glasses be well luted.

iron Jug, cause one to be made of earth (which will endure the fire) and lute
the same likewise with good and firm Clay, as you did to the iron Jug; so put
the Quicksilver into it, and Helmet upon it, and set before it the Jug with
water, and lute it well altogether, then force the Quick silver over it, and
you may have it again for use, but such Labor is performed with Sorrow and
danger, because if such an earthen Jug should crack or spring then the Quick
silver will be lost, and will evaporate to smoke, therefore there must not be
so much Quicksilver put in it, as into an iron Jug or Pot.

Jug an earthy blind Another way to draw off the Gold.
Limbeck (that on both sides hangs over) and therein they put water, and draw
the Quicksilver from the pressed Gold in it, and when it is a little cool, they
put it out through the Pype which is above on the Helmet, and then the Gold
will remain on the Jug.

Now, which of these (that is found most serviceable and convenient to any one)
he may use: only take notice, That if you let the smoke away and the remaining
Quicksilver from the Gold (without distillation) take heed the smoke or vapor
go not into thy Belly, because it is a poisoning and cold Vapor, which lameth
and kills: for, he will find that it will there congeal and afterward spoil
his body.

Now, that the Reader may know how the Jug and Instruments are to be made which
are to be used for quickening, and attracting, he may find exactly in the
following Sculpture, which is thus

Deciphered.
1. The Athanor or great Furance. 2. The Ovens on the sides of it. 3. The
earthen Receiver for it. 4. The earthen Helmet for it. 5. The blind Helmet with
a Pipe by which water may be poured in. 6. He that fitteth the matter. 7. He
that presses the Quicksilver through a Leather. 8. The lower part of the iron
pot or Receiver. 9. The upper part of it. 10. The Leather purse for the
Quicksilver. 11. He that causes the Gold to melt, by help of the Bellows. 12.
The Pieces of Metal.


Sculpture XVII.


CHAP. VIII. How Gold-Oars are to be proved for Gold.
flowing, the other partly harsh (as is discoursed in the first Book) Now from
the silver Oars the common Assayers have had in their proving two Processes,
namely, upon the mild and flowing Oars, viz. the Iron-streamy and bright Oars)
and such as are without flints: their Process was thus: They used to grind
their Oar or slick very small, and have weighed a Centner of the Fluss, which
they had prepared for the Gold-Oars, (as we shall discourse hereafter) and have
mingled altogether, and did put it into a clean Crucible, and covered it with
Coals, and have set it before the Bellows, and did blow about it, and when the
Fluss was melted, then have they put fifteen Centner of clean Lead into it, and
when it did begin to slack, then they take the Crucible out of the fire, and
suffer it to cool, then beat the Regulus with the slacks out of the Crucible,
and put it together upon a proof Test, in an Assay Oven, and have caused it to
boil up, and slack again, as other silver Oars; and have stirred it about with
a clean Iron-hook, and when it was well boyld up, they did let it cool;
finally, they have beaten off the slacks from the Work, and upon a well nealed
Coppel caused it to go off, but they have made their fluss, (for such proving)
of one part of Litarge, and one part of Antimony well ground together and
melted them, and when they did intend to use it with such Oars (as were not
Iron-streamy Oars) they added a little filings of Iron, that the fluss might
have something to devour and not hurt the Silver and Gold.

The flinty Gold Oars.
But the flinty Oars and slick which are harsh and unflowing they have assayed
according to the former way, only they have first roasted it, and some do
quench it in the roasting with Urine, or with a particular prepared Lie,
thinking thereby to obtain the more: But for my part, I do not esteem such
Processes, because no more (by such Labor) can be brought out by it, than by
the following Method, which I esteem more necessary, and through which the
Proof may be accomplished cleanlier, and in a shorter time: yet, because the
abovesaid Labor was by the Ancients in use, therefore I do leave it according
to its esteem with others.

Another Proving.
The other proving is done thus, take the Gold-Oar or slick, either flinty, raw,
or deft, as it happens, and grind it small: Of this weigh a Centner with thy
Proof-weight, and put to it fifteen Centners of granulated Lead, and mingle
them together in an Assay-Test, then put to it a Centner of small grounded
Lead-Glass, and set it in a warm Assay-Oven, make it first hot so long until
the Lead begins to drive, and the Oar to rise, then let it cool again, that
the Oar may roast over the Lead, and rise no more, then cause it be hot again,
so will it slack very clean, then stir it about with an iron Hook, and let it
stand a little longer, when it is enough, then take the Test out of the
Assay-Oven, let it cool, and beat the work clean off from the slacks, and let
it go off upon a Copel; when this is done, then draw up the Grain against the
Lead-grain, and as much as it is heavier, so much does the Oar or slick contain
of Gold, or Gold and Silver, which thou may know by this that when the Grain
is very white, then put it in a separating-Glass, to dissolve in Aqua Fort. but
if the Grain is too rich in Gold, so that the Aqua Fort. will not touch it,
then add to the Grain a little fine Silver which holds no Gold: so that to
one part of Gold, there may be three parts of Silver and cause this in a Copel,
with pure Lead, to drive together: After this, take that Grain, beat it flat
with an hammer, glow and dissolve it in Aqua fortis, as you have been
instructed before, then pour the Aqua fortis off, and dulcify the Gold with
warm water, put it out of the separating Glass and glow it well, when this is
done, then draw it up with the Proof Scales, and you will see how much a
Centner of the Oar or slick does contain of Gold and Silver, and by this Proof
the Assayer may know that all the Gold and Silver which is in an Oar is
certainly found, and has not need of other Circumstances, because the Lead
does take very willingly the Gold and Silver to it self.

But how the Gold is to have its due dissolution, dulcification, and what is
else to be done with it, all this I intend to declare hereafter more fully.

Hereby one may know that there is no need to take any Lead-glass for such soft
flowing or deft Gold Oars or Gold-Slicks, but it may easily be boyld up, by
governing the fire; one may also do the flinty Gold Oars in like manner, only
they are sooner and better boiled up when Lead-Glass is added.

Gold-slick-flint A fine Gold Pro^f.
and other Gold Oars very small, and weigh them off, and put it in a
separating-Glass, and pour into it good strong Aqua fortis, and they let it
dissolve as much as it will, afterward letting the Aqua fortis be evaporated,
that it may all come hard in the Glass, they beat it out, and boil it up in a
Test, with Lead, and cause it to go off upon the Coppel.

This proof I like well, and I judge, that if something more of Gold may be
obtained, that it must be done this way: only the great quantities must not be
regulated according to this Method: Therefore every Assayer is to take heed
with good Diligence, that he may order his Assayes thus, that he may always
find the Contents as near as he can, so that he may afterward in melting great
quantities, find the same according to the proportion.

CHAP. IX. How Gold in Lumps, Plates, Ingots or coined Gold is to be assayed,
and first of Touch-Needles.
Gold, there is often used much Deceit, especially Deceit in Touch needles.
by such who do buy Gold by the Touch, therefore to such Proving it is necessary
to make true Needles, without Deceit, That one may not be overreached by
touching, so as when Gold is brought to a high color by Graduation, that such
a stroke upon the Touch-needles of eighteen Carats, with good Crown Gold may be
made, and thereby may be judged.

Gold (that come from separating and have no red, but Of Gold and silver touch
needles, called red and white.
altogether white) cannot be touched upon a certainty with Touch Needles for
Gold, on the contrary, such which have much red and little white, as the
Crown-Gold, with white Needles, which are made for the separating, and washed
Gold must not be touched, much less can the Rhenish Gold, which has more white
than red, be done by these now mentioned Needles, I will therefore first
describe the Needles which are most in use, how they must be prepared and made,
and afterward the others also with this Caution, that every Assayer may take
good heed that he may so well order his Gold stroke, that he may not be
esteemed as one without understanding, and that he may not come to Damage,
because through false Needles, not only they who are unacquainted with the
several sorts of Gold, but also such who handle them daily, are oftentimes
deceived.

CHAP. X. How the white Touch Needles are to be made.
Touch Needles for Gold you shall take pure and fine Gold, although such can be
as little demonstrated as fine Silver, and I judge such Gold to be pure and
fine, which is cast and diligently blowed off, and afterward beaten thin, and
by Cement and other ways cleansed (of which hereafter) now you are to weigh
such Gold off: (for Needles) with a singular Carat-weight, which must be a
little more than a common Carat weight, and to every one must be allowed, as
follows.

Needle 24 Carats of fine Gold, which makes the first Needle: to the Second,
weigh 23 Carats and a half of fine Gold, and a half Carat, or six Grains of
white fine Silver: to the Third, 23 Carats of fine Gold, and one Carat of
white: to the Fourth, 22 Carats and a half of Gold, and one Carat and a half of
White: to the Fifth, 22 Carats of Gold, and two Carats of White: to the Sixth,
21 Carats of Gold, and two Carats and a half of White: to the Seventh, 21
Carats of Gold, and three Carats of White: to the Eigth, 20 Carats and a half
of Gold, and three Carats and a half of White: to the Ninth, 20 Carats of Gold,
and four Carats of White: to the Tenth, 19 Carats and a half of Gold, and four
Carats and a half of White: to the Eleventh, 19 Carats of Gold, and five Carats
of White: to the Twelfth, 18 Carats and a half of Gold, and five Carats and a
half of White: to the Thirteenth, 18 Carats of Gold, and six Carats of White:
to the Fourteenth, 17 Carats and an half of Gold, and six Carats and an half of
White: to the Fifteenth, 17 Carats of Gold, and seven Carats of White: to the
Sixteenth, 16 Carats and a half of Gold, and seven Carats and an half of White:
to the Seventeenth, 16 Carats of Gold, and eight Carats of White: to the
Eighteenth, 15 Carats and an half of Gold, and eight Carats and an half of
White: to the Nineteenth, 15 Carats of Gold, and nine Carats of White: to the
Twentieth, 14 Carats and an half of Gold, and nine Carats and an half of White:
to the One and Twentieth, 14 Carats of Gold, and ten Carats of White: to the
Two and twentieth, 13 Carats and a half of Gold, and ten Carats and a half of
White: to the Three and Twentieth, 13 carats of Gold, and 11 carats of White:
to the Four and Twentieth Needle, 12 carats and an half of Gold, and eleven
carats and an half of White.

Needles: yet further, if one would do it well (but it is not useful) to touch
the meaner Gold under twelve carats: or one might make the Needles from carat
to carat, so that the half carats are not brought in, for they are very
difficult to be discerned) but the Needles will be fewer in number: this now is
left to every ones pleasure: and these white Needles are to be used upon the
parted and washed Gold, as abovesaid.

CHAP. XI. How Touch-Needles are to be made and used for Crown-Gold.
Gold is not to be ordered like the former Additions: for the Italian Crowns
have more Red than the French Crowns: so that it will be necessary to make to
every sort of Gold particular Needles: for the French Crowns have almost the
half part white, (or Silver addition) on the contrary, the Italian Crowns have
their addition of one part white and two parts red (though they are not all
alike, for some part have addition almost the half part white, and some parts
more red then white:) therefore I will here set down the Division upon two
parts red, and one part white; for, if the one sort of Gold should be whiter
than the Needles (hereafter mentioned) then the half white and half red are to
be used.

Weigh then to the first Needle, 24 carats of fine gold, which makes the first
Needle: to the Second, 23 carats and an half of gold, and two grains of white,
or fine silver, and four grains of red, that is, pure boiled copper: to the
Third, 23 carats of gold, and four grains of white; and eight grains of red: to
the Fourth, 22 carats and an half of gold, and six grains of white, and one
carat of red: to the Fifth, 22 carats of gold, and eight grains of white, and
one carat, and four grains of red: to the Sixth, 21 carats and a half of gold,
and ten grains of white, and one carat and eight grains of red: to the Seventh
21 carats of gold, and one carat of white, and two carats of red: to the
Eighth, 20 carats and a half of gold, and one carat and two grains of white,
and two carats and four grains of red: to the Ninth, 20 carats of gold, and one
carat and four grains of white, and two carats and eight grains of red: to the
Tenth 19 carats and a half of gold, and one carat and six grains of white, and
three carats of red.

Needles more or less, so as they may decrease or increase from carat to carat
as one pleases: These Needles are used not only upon the Crown or Coined gold,
but also upon all other Gold, which is of such Allay, or have in them the
Addition, after the abovementioned Instructions.

CHAP. XII. The Division of the Touch-Needles, when the Metal is half white,
and half red.
Crowns are ordered which have half white and half red, The fairest Crowns in
Color.
which I esteem the finest in Color, therefore weigh in the division to the
first Needle, 24 carats of fine Gold, as also in all the Needles, the highest
best or first Needle shall be fine Gold: to the Second Needle, 23 carats and an
half of gold, three grains of white, and three grains of red: to the Third
Needle 23 carats of gold, six grains of white, and six grains of red: to the
Fourth, 22 carats and an half of Gold, and nine grains of white, and nine
grains of red: to the Fifth, 22 carats of gold, one carat of white, and one
carat of red: to the Sixth, 21 carats and a half of gold, and one carat and
three grains of white, and one carat and three grains of red: to the Seventh,
21 carats of gold, and one carat and six grains of white, and one carat and six
grains of red: to the Eighth, 20 carats and an half of gold, and one carat nine
grains of white, and one carat nine grains of red: to the Ninth, 20 carats of
gold, two carats of white, and two carats of red: to the Tenth, 19 carats and a
half of gold, and two carats and three grains of white, and two carats and
three grains of red: to the Eleventh, 19 carats of gold, and two carats six
grains of white, and two carats six grains of red: to the Twelveth, 18 carats
and a half of gold, and two carats and nine grains of white, and two carats and
nine grains of red: to the Thirteenth 18 carats of gold, three carats of white,
and three carats of red: to the Fourteenth, 17 carats and a half of gold, and
three carats and three grains of white, and three carats and three grains of
red: to the Fifteenth, 17 carats of gold, and 3 carats and six grains of white,
and three carats and six grains of red: to the Sixteenth, 16 carats and a half
of gold, and three carats and nine grains of white, and three carats and nine
grains of red: to the Seventeenth, 16 carats of gold, and three carats of
white, and three carats of red: to the Eighteenth, 15 carats and an half of
gold, and four carats, and three grains of white, and four carats, and three
grains of red.

Needles more or less, or to increase or decrease from carat to carat, as you
were instructed before.

CHAP. XIII. How Touch-needles are to be made for Rhenish Gold, in which there
is two parts white, and one part red.
Rhenish Gold has also the addition of half white and The Division of Metals
for Needles.
half red, to which the Needles before set down are to be used: Nevertheless if
the Addition be two parts white, and one part red, upon such you shall divide
the Needles thus,

To the first Needle weigh 24 Carats of fine Gold, which makes the first
Needle: to the Second needle, 23 Carats and a half of fine Gold, and four
Grains of white, and two grains of red: to the Third, 23 Carats of Gold, and
eight grains of white, and four grains of red: to the Fourth, 22 Carats and a
half of Gold, one Carat of white, and six grains of red: to the Fifth, 22
Carats of Gold, one Carat and four grains of White, and 8 grains of red: to the
Sixth, 21 Carats and a half of Gold, and one Carat and eight grains of White,
and ten grains of red: to the Seventh, 21 Carats of Gold, and two Carats of
White, and two Carats of red: to the Eight, 21 Carats and a half of Gold, and
two Carats and four grains of white, and one carat and two grains of red: to
the Ninth, 20 carats of gold, and two carats and eight grains of white, and one
carat and four grains of red: to the Tenth, 19 carats and a half of gold, and
three carats of white, and one carat and six grains of red: to the Eleventh, 19
carats of gold, and three carats four grains of white, and one carat and eight
grains of red: to the Twelfth, eighteen carats and an half of gold, three
carats, and eight grains of white, and one carat and sixteen grains of red: to
the Thirteenth, eighteen carats of gold, and four carats of white, and two
carats of red: to the Fourteenth, 17 and an half carats of Gold, and and four
carats and four grains of white, and two grains of red: to the Fifteenth, 17
carats of gold, and four carats and 8 grains of white, and two carats and four
grains of red: to the Sixteenth 16 carats and a half of Gold, and five carats
of white, and two carats and six grains of red: to the Seventeenth, 16 carats
of gold, and five carats and four grains of white, and two carats and eight
grains of red: to the Eighteenth, 15 carats and an half of gold, and five
carats and eight grains of white, and two carats and ten grains of red: to the
Nineteenth, 15 carats of gold, and 6 carats of white, and three carats of red:
to the Twentieth, 14 carats and a half of gold, six carats and four grains of
white, and three carats and two grains of red:

Although now the Rhenish Gold uses not to be of so small a content,
nevertheless the Needles are thus to be made for the Allay or additions sake,
that one may by the Touch know the Mean-Gold by it, and judge of the nearest
Content.

Needles of Copper:
some few Needles with all red or Copper, for some Golds especially they which
are rich among the Coins, (the Hungarians having all red:) But when one would
make Touch-Needles upon a certain Content of gold, which with the addition of
the Allay should be otherwise than they which are shown before, then they may
be divided after the abovementioned instruction: which you are to understand
thus: Let the Contents of gold be with Allay or addition, as it will, yet order
thy Touch-Needles thus, That always gold and the addition may make together a
full Mark, as is to be seen in the abovementioned instruction of the Needles.

Needles with diligence, then let the division of every one severally be put
The Division to cast together.
in a little Crucible with a little Borax, flow it together and when it is
flowed put it quickly out, for the sooner the division of the composed Metals
flow together and come out of the fire, the better it is. Some let it go
together in a Charcoal fire, but the Divisions remain not always deft of it,
and sometimes the Coals break, and by that division does come to nothing,
therefore it is better to let it flow together in a small Crucible, whereby
there will not be so much care of running through.

The Needels to be beaten into lengths.
When the Divisions are cast together, then beat them every one severally into
Lengths, and form them according to thy pleasure, beat and cut also upon the
Needles the Figures what every one contains of fine Gold and Allay, that one
may see how many carats and grains of fine Gold, every Needle has, that in the
Touch there may be no Mistake.

If one has a mind he may soder together the ordered Needles upon copper or
silver pieces, that only the ends may be Golden divided Needles, as also
commonly of the Gold-Touch, and usually Needles are made so, else they would
come to much Money, as may be seen by the following Sculpture. The Touch Needles
of the Common Gold smiths.


Goldsmiths take not so much Pains, nor are at so large Expenses, but cut a
piece of a Duccate and of a Crown, and of a Rhenish Gilder, and soder every on
Copper piece, after this they touch their Gold: And by this they can very well
see whether the Gold have its right Content either of Duccats, Crowns, or
Rhenish Gold, but if there be a different Content, then they cannot know how
much properly the Content is less.

Sculpture XVIII.
Deciphered.
1. The Proportions of Touch Needles for Gold. 2. The Ingot to be compared with
those Touch-Needles. 3. As also by the Touch*stone.




CHAP. XIV. How the Touch Needles are to be used.
Touch-needles are prepared Touch stones
with diligence, and one would use them, there is need of a good Touchstone
upon which the Gold is to be touched, of such are found some part which are
gray and pale green, but the black ones are the best, although the same be not
all good, especially, if they are either too hard or too weak. The weak ones
have this property, that upon them no Gold does touch bright, but the Gold does
only grind on it, and becomes in the aspect weak and ruff, also the Hungarish
or other weak Gold will not touch it self right upon Touch-stones which are too
hard, for the Gold does run over it, that the stroke is not very well to be
seen, and that Touchstone is not good which does not touch the Gold, of what
Contents soever it be, with a fine good and strong stroke, that it be bright
upon it, and also the Touch-needles as long until the same stroke be like the
Gold-stroak in the color, and as high: then you have very nigh the Content of
the Gold: only, as I have given an account above, Observe well, whether the
Gold be high- grained; viz. whether it has much Copper added, or much white,
which is called Pale Gold, according to Ginnys.
this, use the Needles, which every one does not understand, and therefore he
must have the Knowledge of the righ stroke from great Practice. But as to the
hard Concerning hard and brickle Gold.
Gold, they do not give a right stroke, but they do touch all of a smaller
content than they have in fine Gold, therefore such strokes are to be judged
false and uncertain.

CHAP. XV. How the Gold is to be proved by Aqua fortis.
To cut pieces for Treal.
IF you have Pieces of Gold either in Plates or Ingotts, and would assay them,
then first cut Pieces or Plates above, at one end of it, and below at the other
end, and beat the Bits thin that you may weigh so much as you have necessity to
use for a trial, but if it is a cast Ingot, then beat it thin only at one end,
and weigh of it for thy Trial.

Gold and Gold-Gilders, you The Carat weight must be small,
must have a particular Carat-weight fitted for it, and it must be small because
of the Silver-cut, otherwise the Balance cannot carry the Cut (concerning
which shall be treated of hereafter) the dividing of the Carat weight is as
follows.

Division of the Carat-weight.
24 Carats is one Mark. 12 Carats 6 Carats 3 Carats 2 Carats 1 Carats 6 Grains
is half a Carat. 3 Grains 2 Grains 1 Grain Grain Grain Grain


If you would prove the Gold, see if it be of a rich or poor Content, and would
also certainly judge how much a Mark* of it has of fine Gold, then you must
know first (and before the nearest Content of the Gold according to which you
are to make your Trial, as shall follow.) That for such contents you shall have
two sorts of ways to inform your self, First, by the Touch with the before
made Golden Touch-Needles;) Secondly, One may make a nearer Trial of the Gold,
for, although the Proof do not remain whole in the Aqua fort* yet you may see
very near what the Gold does hold, Therefore it is best to use the Assay-proof
upon Gold contains both in white or fine Silver. When now you have Assay
proof*
found by these ways the nearest content of the Gold, then make the cut of fine
Silver (which must be without Gold;) take then the Gold and beat it with a
Hammer upon an Anvil fine and thin, and make thy cut so, that the white or
Silver, which is already with the Gold) may be counted with the Trial or fourth
part (for it must contain three times as much Silver as of fine Gold.) To
comprehend this the better, the following Example shall demonstrate it, which I
have found by the tried Proof, that of the Gold which contains 14 Carats, 8
grains of fine Gold, and 7 Carats, and four grains of white; I weigh it with
the small carat weight to two alike half-Marks, then there will be in every
half Mark 7 carats, and four grains of Gold, and 3 Carats and eight grains of
white, to which I add three times the weight of fine Silver as the gold
contains of fine gold; this is my Proportion. Now I do multiply To make the
Carat.
the seven carats and four grains (which contains the half Mark) of fine gold,
with three, and there will come 22 carats of white or Silver to the Addition or
to the Cut: from this I reckon, That of three carats, and eight grains of white
there will be as much as the half Mark had of Silver with it before, so there
will remain 18 carats, and 4 grains, and thus much fine Silver you must add in
an half Mark.

The Trial of it.
As this Silver or Cut and the half weighed Mark do make together 30 carats, and
4 grains, so much also must be the inweighed gold, of the other half Mark cut.
Put every one of these with its Cut upon a well nealed Copel, and add nine
weights of pure Lead into it, let it go off together, and see whither the
grains come alike, then lay one of the grains in the Scale, and as much as it
now weighs less than thirty carats and four grains, so much contains a half
Mark of Gold-Red-Copper, but to the fine Silver because it loses upon the
Copel, if it goes off upon it with Lead as much as the Lead has carried away,
may by a grain weight be accounted; for, understand it thus; In case every
grain did weigh after it was gone* of 29 carats, and 4 grains: also a grain
wast of fine Silver, there would be wasted one Carat upon the half Mark, then
there will come upon the whole Mark two carats; thus much Copper (or red)
contains a Mark of mixed Gold.

To beat the little Rolls.
If the grains are diligently drawn and weighed, then beat out of every grain a
fine and clean piece or Roll, not too thin, and glow it often that it may not
be shivery, and that nothing may go off; at the last glow the little Roll, and
roll it gently over, that you may see whether by the often glowing and beating
somewhat be come off: When now the Rolls are clean prepared, glow them once
more, and if they from the glowing and rolling be come hard, let such things be
mended.

Disselving.
But the glowing must be done in a golden little half Pipkin made on purpose,
that nothing unclean may come in it, put then the Rolls together in a little
separating Glass, put to it near so much Aqua fortis made for Goldproofs, that
it may go an half finger broad over the little Rolls, stop the Separating Glass
above with a hard twisted paper, that no vapors may go out, and put it thus
into a little Vessel of Iron or brass made on purpose, over a few live Coals,
that the Aqua fort. may begin to work, so will the separating-Glass become
brown, but let it not work too much or too fast, yet take it a little while
from the fire, and then put it on again, until the Aqua fortis has done its
working, and the Glass become white again: Then put off the Aqua fortis again
and put fresh Aqua fortis upon it, set it again with the Vessel over the fire,
and let it work: this is done, because if the first Aqua fort. were grown too
weak, and had lost somewhat of Silver by the Rolls, that the other Aqua fort.
might touch it again, and make it clean. Take notice also, That you may cause
the last Aqua fort. to work in great Bubbles, that the Roles may become very
clean, and put in the second Aqua fort. which has not beenused, for it has
its strength as before.

To sweeten or dulcify.
Then put clean sweet warm water upon the little Rolls, (Rain Water is the best
for it) let it stand a little, and put more warm, or rain Water, upon it again,
and set the Glasses with the Rolls over a coal fire, let it boil and work in
great Bubbles, then take it off, and casting the water again away, this do
three times with warm or rain water, that the silvery Aqua fort. which did hang
about the little Rolls be dulcified, then is it enough: When the little Rolls
are thus clean and sweet, then put them out very gently, with the last sweet
water in a glazed pot or glass bottle, and pour the water off from it, and take
the Golden Rolls with clean Pincers out of the Pot, and put them in a clean
cloth to suck the rest of the water into it, and the Rolls will look very fine
and brown.

To neal the little Gold Rolls.
Then put them into the Golden pott, and after, put them into an Assay-Oven, but
not in an exstream heating, and glow them well and they will become as fine as
a pure Gold: When this is done, Take the two little Rolls, weigh them one
against the other, and if they are alike in weight, then have you proved them
right: next, put them together in a weigh-scale, and weigh them with the
Carat-weight, and how much they do weigh, so much contains the Mark (of the
mixed Gold) in fine Gold: this only is to be observed, That the weight of the
Water, (as much as the Water has left after it with the Golden Rolls) must be
subtracted always in the Weight from such Content. But how much there will be
to substract you must search with a singular Proof, with which you use to prove
the Aqua fort. but when you have once proved the Aqua fort. then you have no
need to prove it any more, but may keep it for use: yet it is commonly found
that upon a Mark of fine Gold, as from 24 carats you must substract one and a
half, sometimes two grains for the weight of the water, and so you must
substract according to the Example of the before mentioned Proof, as upon 14
carats, and 9 grains, as much as the Golden Roll of one grain, did weigh, then
there will remain 14 carats and 8 grains of fine gold, for in the gold proof,
in many places, one uses not to give in, in buying, a half grain, but in the
coin-works they use all ways to count, and give in the half grain: If then the
little Rolls contain in fine gold 14 carats and eight grains, then a mixed mark
of Gold will contain 7 carats and four grains of white or fine silver
subtracted.

Now, the Gold of 24 carats and 8 grains of the whole cut, and 24 carats of
Gold and 44 Carats of silver, you shall find (as I have said) that the
Contents will be a mixed* mark, 14 carats 8 grains of fine gold, and 7 carats,
and 4 grains of white, and two carats of red, and these three Contents will
make together a full Mark.

Coined Gold.
other Golds, likewise the coined Gold, and one needs not the Assay-Proof, in
the coined Gold, if one knows the nearest Contents, but if one does not know
the Contents certain upon a carat, then an Assay of it must be made.

To make the true Carats.
Now I use this Method in my Cut (and commonly on the silver or Cut) to take two
carats or somewhat less for a trial which does agree with the Multiplication
(as above-heard, of the three Contents,) and it is better to take two Carats of
silver less than one too much, and so the Rolls will remain the firmer and more
entire, and there is no fear though somewhat of the Rolls were lost or torn off.

Another way to find red in Gold.
You may also find in a Gold (of which you intend to prove the red and white)
that if you make the Assay-Proof, (as above demonstrated) then cut one Mark of
the Gold more, and put it with its due of Lead without any other Cut) upon the
Coppels, and let it go off with the Try-proof, then weigh the same Grain, and
you will see what is gone off, and how much it comes out lighter, so much has
been red with it.

Thus you have the right and clear Instruction for Gold Proofs, and if you will
follow it, you will do well, and thereby not be apt to err in your proofs.

CHAP. XVI. How to prove the Aqua fort* and how much Gold it does leave in the
Proof.
Aqua fort. how much is subtracted in the Gold-Proof, The manner of Trying it.
Take Gold which is cast diverse times, through Antimony, and is brought to the
highest: and make the proportion upon 24 carats* and weigh it also in two half
Marks (as you have been instructed before) and multiply it by 3* then there
will come upon every half Mark of fine Gold 36 carats of fine Silver, then put
every half Mark of its proportion by it self, upon well neal*d Coppels, let it
go off together, weigh the grains off, and see whether they come alike, and
beat them in slender Rolls, and put them into separating Glasses, and put upon
them so much Aqua fort. as one does use to take to a Gold-proof, as has been
shown before in the Gold proof: then place it with an iron Trevet over a little
Coal-fire: Let it dissolve, and put upon it the Second time fresh Aqua fort.
set it over again; when now it is right, and well dissolved, pour the Aqua
fort. on it, and make the Rolls with warm water very clean, and dry them, and
glovv them in a little melting pot for Gold, and they will become fine, then
weigh them one against the other, and if the Rolls be alike then the Proof is
right; then lay them together, and against it thy whole mark: (after you have
weighed it) and as the Golden Rolls do come out heavier, so much is to be
subtracted in the Gold-proof upon this one Mark of fine Gold.

Another way.
Take this for an Example: I have weighed in two half Marks upon one Mark of
fine Gold, and have parted it with the Aqua fort. (as above is mentioned) and
after the dissolving, dulcifying and glowing, then the two little Rolls have
weighed one Mark or 24 carats and one grain and a half, so that the Aqua fort.
has left behind two grains, in the Proof, thus much is to be subtracted in
this Aqua fort. upon 42 carats.

Aqua fort. What the Remainder is.
is nothing else but silver which the Aqua fort. could not draw out so clean, by
which the Gold does not become so very clean and fine, which is to be seen. If
one lets the Golden part go off with a little clean Lead upon a Coppel, to
see how they become smaller or retain their weights. But if the Aqua fort. do
leave its strength or spirits with the Gold, (as some do think) then the same
could not remain nor consist upon the Coppels.

Out of which may be concluded, That by Aqua fort. fine Gold is made: But this
is sure, That a good and well purified Aqua fort. brings the Gold in parting
(especially if the Gold Calx (as shall follow) has been cleanly dulcified) to
23 Carats and 11 Grains. But it is not yet quite fine Gold, for the remainder
with the Gold is nothing else (as is said before) than Silver: (as well in the
parting the Gold, as in the Proof) else one may drive away what is left with
the Bellows, and make it clean.

fine Gold, to the Proof of the Aqua fort. then take Hungarish Gold, whose
Content Rules for it.
you know certainly, and make of the same Content the Divisions and Proportions,
then you may find what is to be left behind of the Aqua fort. and how much is
subtracted of it: But the Gold which is cast through Antimony (as is before
mentioned) is for such use much surer and better: And know, That the same Aqua
fort. after the Distilling must be purified and settled, before you do prove or
use it to the Gold-Proof, of which afterward an Instruction shall follow.

Separating Glass, and other Glass Instruments
To all such proving you must have clean separating Glasses, Tunnels and little
glass Pots for Gold to sweeten in, these are to be made of good Venetian Glass,
and the brighter, whiter and clearer they are, the better it is, that the
proofs may well be seen in them.

Iron or Brazen Instrument, upon which the little separating Glass must stand,
is to be made four footed, An Instrument for the Separating glass.
that it may stand fast, and also with a little handle, by which it may be taken
off, likewise another little foot or instrument of Copper or Iron, which must
be flat, upon which is to be set the Golden little Pots (if one will have it
set in the proof- Oven for the out-glowing) because this Proof is the finest,
most glorious and lovely, therefore all things pertaining to it must be made
and prepared with all diligence and cleanliness.

CHAP. XVII. How Silver is to be proved for Gold.
First Trial.
of Metals together, but give to every proof its due, and to write of every one
apart, how it must be done: Know then if one would prove a goldish silver upon
Gold, it must first be proved upon fine Silver, that one may find the right
Content, both of the fine Silver and also of the fine Gold: Therefore when it
is proved upon the fine (as I have taught in the Silver proof) then take the
same proof Grains, beat them thin, glow them, and weigh a Mark of it with thy
Pennyweight, and dissolve the Silver in a little separating glass in Aqua fort.
then there will remain a brown Gold-Calx: To dulcify it.
pour off the Aqua fort. very gently, then take warm sweet water (as you have
done before in the Gold Proof) and put it upon the Gold-Calx, and let it boil
over the Coal-fire in a little Culbe or bottle: now when the Gold Calx has
settled it self again, then drain the water off, and put upon the Gold Calx two
or three warm waters more, that thus the silvery water may be clean taken off
from the Gold Calx, then put the Gold Calx clean out of the Culbe, into a glass
pott, that nothing may remain, then drain the water very clean off from it, and
bring the Gold Calx in the golden little Pot clean together, and if there be
wetness about the Gold-Calx, then press it with a clean little cloth where it is
made moist, and gently on the end of one side, that the wetness may be sucked
in (only touch not the Gold Calx with the Cloth.)

golden Pot upon the Trevet in the Assay Oven, but not suddenly (that To glow.
the Gold may not leap, and the proof become false) and glow out the Gold calx,
so will it become fair, then put it again out of the golden little Pot into the
inward Scale of the Proof-Ballance, and see how much it weighs according to the
divided Penny-weight, with which you have weighed it, so you will have the
Content; now how much a Mark of Silver contains, I put this as an Example,
for I have proved, That a Goldish silver or grained Gold, of this mixed Mark)
has contained 14 loths and a dram of fine Silver, and such fine Silver has in
a dram a penny-weight of Gold, then the Content in the Goldish Silver upon a
Mark does signify that it does contain 13 loths, 3 drams, and three penny weight
of fine silver, and one dram and one penny weight of Gold.

A Second Trial.
Likewise in this manner one may also prove the fine Gold which is come from
grained Silver, if one does weigh a Mark of it, and dissolve it, and if the
fine Mark in such a proof do contain one dram, one peny-weight, and one Heller
of Gold, and is the Contents: and if a Mark of the grained Silver contains 14
loths one dram be reckoned upon fine Silver, then the Mark will signify one
dram, one penny, one heller of Gold, and of such proof it is counted, that by it
the Gold is found a little less than the former, but I leave it to every ones
pleasure to try and judge.

A third way.
Some Assayers have this Method, when they would prove a goldish grained Oar for
Silver and Gold, then they weigh the grained Metal with their penny weight, and
prove it upon fine Silver, (as it is usual) and they weigh in a grain such
grained Metal after the mentioned weight (as at first) and dissolve it raw in
Aqua fort. Gold, they substract it from the fine-Silver, and this they count
for the right proof to prove Silver upon Gold.

Difference of the Proof.
But that one may know that this their Proof is false and unjust, although
somewhat more of Gold is to be found by it, therefore I will show some Reasons
why the same Gold is not so high in Fineness as the Gold which is separated out
of the Proof of the fine Silver by Aqua fort.

First, although the Copper does dissolve, yet the green Coppery water sets it
self rather on the Gold than on the silvery water, and then the Copper which
has set it self cannot be brought off again so clean from the Gold, as from
the tender silvery-water.

Secondly, Gold comes higher out of the separation than when the silver is
Coppery, upon which the Aqua fort. does not work so easily, as on the fine
Silver: Therefore no Separater of Gold does take upon him to separate such
Silver after such proof, but all the Silvers which he separates in Aqua fort.
must first be burnt upon a Test.

A Singular Dissolving.
Goldish Silver upon Gold is the common way, and also the right Proof, by which
the true Content is to be found. Nevertheless, I must further mention a
singular proof (which is found upon such goldish silver and grained Work) by
which, in the dissolution the little grains or small cut pieces of Silver will
remain whole in the Aqua fort. (of what light Contents soever they be of Gold)
and how small and subtle soever the grains be: also that one may number all the
little grains of Gold after the number of the little pieces of Silver, how many
there be laid in the Aqua fort. and no splitting will go off from it (as in the
other proofs) yet if the grains should be weighed in, (also raw) the Gold will
remain the better whole, but this proving is to be done thus, when you have
weighed off the Silver put upon it a very weak Aqua fort. which the Silver
cannot well touch, and put it in a Culbe to dissolve over a little Coal-fire
(as is usual) and let it be very hot, that the Aqua fort. may work with great
Bubbles, and almost boil over, this dissolution do, so long until thy inweighed
Silver be almost dissolved, but that it may have the better help, put (if the
Silver be dissolved) a little more than half of new and a somewhat stronger
Aqua fort. into the Culbe, and the Silver will dissolve it self clean out, and
will split no more, although the second time, there be put to it, the stronger
Aqua fort.) but what it does will be done at first.

This is a fine way through which the Gold remains together in grains close,
but 'twill have somewhat more time than the other common proof: there are also
other ways to such proofs, as follows.

CHAP. XVIII. To prove Goldish-Silver by the Water-weight.
Artists have also proved the Silvers First Way.
through common flowing Water, and known in the Weight, whether they have been
rich or poor with Gold, This their Invention, because it proceeds from
natural Reason, does please me, and is an inductive Meditation to many other
serviceable things: Now the Water-weighing with the Silver is done thus, Take a
Balance, and put in one of the Scales the Goldish-silver, and in the other
Scale so much Silver, (which contains no Gold) as that they may be equal
weight, then let down both Scales just together into a Vessel full of clean
water, so you shall find and see clearly that that Silver which is Goldish
shall have in the water greater weight, but not so much as the Silver which
has Gold with it. The Reason of this Difference, is because the Gold in a like
greatness excels all other Metals in weight, and is the heaviest Metal;
Therefore such (as every one himself may judge) cannot swim so easily in the
water, but must much sooner sink down on the ground, than they which are
lighter: as the like is to be seen in the Lead, which goes much before Tin and
other Metals in the Water.

How the Gold is to be found by the Water-weighing.
But that I may give the Reader to understand, That it is possibly by such
Water-weighing to reckon how much may properly be in the Silver, therefore know
that such (in my thoughts) may be done and found out in this following manner.

First, Take fine grained Silver which is without Gold, lay to it good pure
Gold, put it in one of the weigh-Scales, and in the other Scale lay fine
grained silver also, so that it stands just even: then sink both together in
the water, and so much as the Silver goes before with the Gold, so much you
must supply with good Gold to the weigh-Scale in the water, then take the
Balance out of the water again, dry it well, and weigh it, and take so much
from the Silver as the Gold has drawn to it in the water, until the Balance
stands even in Aequilibrio, then sink it in the Water again, and supply again
the difference with good Gold, and then take off from the Silver; this do as
long until both weigh-scales stand just (both within and out of the water) then
you shall find that in one scale will lie so much Gold as in the other: and by
this way (if you do it carefully) you may also prove in weighing a goldish
silver, whose content you did not know.

water-weighing may also be done by Arithmetical Proportions, to which the
Demonstrations Arithmetic.
will be serviceable, but they are not to every one known, namely thus, That if
the Gold (as I have tried it) weighs against the silver in a like quantity
405 Marks, and 8 Loths, and the fine silver also the like quantity with the
Gold two hundred twenty sev'n Marks, 4 Loths; this observe well, Then take the
silver which contains Gold, lay it in one of the weight-scales, and weigh it
against the Weights which are made of pure silver, that you may know the weight
to be proper, then sink them together into the water: now, as much as it does
go for the Goldish silver, so much you must supply of with the silver weights,
then make an account and observe the Proportions how the Gold and Silver stand
together, as you have been instructed before, and I doubt not but you may come
to a right proof by this Example.

CHAP. XIX. To find without such water-Proof, whether Silver contains Gold.
First Way.
other (as has been spoken of the Gold and silver) if then you would know and
find the difference of the mixture in the Goldish silvers you must draw the
Gold through an Iron plate wherein an hole is made, into which a thin and
subtle wire is to be put, and do the good silver also through the same hole,
then cut a piece of both, equally in one length as near as possible, and weigh
one against the other with a Proof-weight, upon a quick Balance, and so you
will soon find the difference betwixt the Gold and Silver. Now, if you have a
Goldish-silver, and do draw it through the mentioned hole, and does take the
right length of it, like the aforesaid former Wire, and does weigh it likewise
upon the proof- Balance against the silver-Wyer, then you will find a
difference in the weight, out of which you may count the weight of the Gold
(as much as is in the wyers which you have weighed) then also weigh such with
the proof-weight, how much it weighs, and you may compute (after this thy
Account) how much Gold is in the whole weight of the Goldish-silver.

After this manner all other Metals may also be proved and accounted, because
they have one against the other diverse Quantities in like Greatness: likewise
in the coined Money, if it be drawn to a Wire (in the same thickness with the
Wyers before mentioned) you may find in it the Copper and fine silver by this
Rule.

The second Way.
for further Consideration, and it is necessary to be known, That there is a
difference in weight, betwixt Tin and Lead, if they be mixed together, as also
in other Metals, which I have found in my diligent searching; For, one Copper
against another, and one Tin against another, has a difference also in the
weight, else I would have proceeded further and surer with such reckoning.

Sculpture XIX.
Deciphered
1. How the Assayer stands before the Assay-Oven to prove Metals. 2. The Iron
on which the Proof is to be cast. 3. A wooden Instrument to see through into
the fire to prevent hurt to the Eyes. 4. A separating* Glass for proving Gold,
placed on a little foot. 5. He that washes the Goldish Silver in water. 6. The
Block, Hammer and stool.




CHAP. XX. How to separate Gold and Silver, and how to burn or distill Aqua
fort. and prepare Instruments and Clay for the Work.
Burning of Aqua fort* there belong many Preparations, it is necessary that of
such I write somewhat, and signify the same: Wherefore, I will first speak of
the Clay wherewith they use to Lute the Helms and Receivers, and to coat the
Separating The Clay.
Glass which ought to be prepared thus; Take good sound and substantial Clay,
wash it in water that the stones and the course sand may come off, make it into
Balls, and dry it well in the Sun; Of such washed Clay take ten parts, and two
parts of washed Ashes, three parts of clean Stone- Horse-dung, one part of the
scales of Iron, and two parts of Cow-hair beaten well, and mingle all these
together, and moisten it with warm Oxen or sheeps-blood, and whilst it is warm,
work it with an iron Instrument: one might also take, among this Clay, Venetian
Glass beaten small, but not too much: and with this Clay one may lute-over the
separating Glasses and the great Glasses, in which the Aqua fort. is to be
distilled, such as will hold in the fire: it may also serve to join together
the Ovens which are called Athanors, because it holds fast, and does neither
break nor crack.

Clay and thin mixture with which one uses to lute over the Joints of the
Helmets and Receivers, is To lute the joynings.
is to be made thus, Take the white of Eggs, as many as you think fit, beat them
well, in a Peuter dish, and take a clean sponge, and press the clear of the
Eggs into it, by squeesing it out of the sponge into the dish, and do this
until it becomes clear like Well-water, then take Milldust, 4 Loths, Bole
Armoniak, one Loath, white dried Cheese without Crust or rind, two Loths, and of
Sanguis Draconis, one Loath; Grind all these very small, and sift them through a
hair Seeve, mingle these with the whites of the Eggs, and with it, Lute over
the Joints, which you must understand thus, That such Joynings be first with
the abovementioned Clay luted over and dried well again, then this thin
mixture is to be put upon a little cloth and laid over it, and let it dry of it
self, but this ought to be done before you bring it into the warmth, or make
a fire to it, then such mixture will hold fast, and the spirits will not go
through, but if the Joynings should afterward let the spirits go out, then do
it over in the heat with Tallow, whereby the Clay will become hard and fast.

Another Clay to bodies.
Here follows another Clay wherewith to lute or glaze-over the Culbs or
bottles, which will endure the fire, Take a good washed dry Clay, a little
Dragons blood and Bole Armoniak, and add to it a third part of Potters clay,
and a third part of a half part of Calx vive, make each apart into Powder, and
moisten it with the white of Eggs, as is taught above, or with warm Ox or
Sheeps-blood, add to it so much flox of woollen Cloth or wool shaved or shorn,
as of the Bolus, mingle all well together with a stick or wand, and with it
lute over the Glasses, but* not thick, also lute over the joints with it, and
this will hold fast in the fire. Likewise other Clays are to be used to
lute-over, which do also hold well: But because these now mentioned do suffice,
I have omitted for brevity sake to set down others: therefore every one may try
which are the most serviceable unto him.

Glasses or Bottles in which one uses to separate, Venetian Glass.
and in which they put Aqua fort. are to be made of good Venetian Glass, of an
equal thickness in the midst, for if they be made too strong or thick of Glass,
they will not hold well, but they which have a right equal thickness, and are
not strong will endure the fire the better, but if the Glasses be made of other
Glass, then the Aqua fort. will work on them, and they are subject to break the
sooner, by which there comes damage, and they will be also dark and pale.

To prepare Jugs and Retorts with sawdust.
One may also cause Juggs of Potters-work to be made for Distilling Aqua fort.
or mixing Clay with Bran or clean fine Sawdust, this therefore is done, That
when the Juggs are made and burnt raw, that the Bran or Saw-dust may burn out,
and then to glaze such over
with Venetian glass within and without, that the Glass flow into the holes, out
of which the Bran and Sawdust is burnt away, whereby they will prove very firm
and hold very well in the fire, of such stuff very good Retorts are made, which
will not break in the fire, but are much better to use than the over-luted
Glass bottles, therefore such stuff is very convenient to use for Retorts: But
how great the Juggs, Glasses or Bottles must be, I conceive, that every ones
Work will teach what he may make according to it, for if one has much Aqua
fort. to burn at once, then it will require a great Jug or Retort for it, in
which the stuff is to be put, and also the Recipient must be the bigger.

Iron jugs.
Also it is in use to burn Aqua fort. in Iron Jugs which are of two pieces, and
can be done asunder, whose form you will see in the next Sculpture. In such a
Jug one may set in more at one time than in a glass-bottle; also they need not
fear the breaking of such Jugs, or that the stuff will be spoiled in it; and
the Gold has been of a better color by such Aqua fort. made in Iron.

For this and other Reasons, I judge it to be better always to burn Aqua fort.
in such Iron Jugs, than in glazed Bottles, which can but once be used, the
bigness of which must be as one may put in near 20 pounds of stuff at once, but
if one would burn less, the Opportunity will show it self, how to proportion
it, but for strength it must be the thickness of a finger, so it will endure
the longer.

Aqua fort. in such Jugs then must the joynings be well luted over, that no
spirits may Luting the Jug.
go out, lute-over also the Jug without, with thin Clay, that the fire may the
less hurt it, and lay before it a Recipient of Glass, but of such a bigness
that the mentioned spirits may have room enough in it, and that such may not
break out of necessity or force, by which there will be damage.

Jug be suffered To gain the Caput. mort out of the Jug.
to cool, and put water in it, then will it mollify the Caput Mort. put it out
gently with an Iron, and so the Jug will become clean again.

The form and likeness of such separating Glasses and earthen Juggs you may see
in the following Sculpture, thus Deciphered.
1. A luted glass-bottle covered with an Helm. 2. A luted glass-bottle without
an Helm. 3. Another sort of Glass-bottle. 4. The Form of an Helm. 5. An half
Glass, or half Absuzchal
Pipkin with one Ear, and a Mouth. 6. A Receiver with a Pipe. 7. A Receiver
without a Pipe. 8. An earthen Retort. 9. An earthen Jug or Culb to burn Aqua
fort. 10. Other kind of Bottles, Glasses, half-Glasses, Tunnels.


Sculpture XX.


CHAP. XXI. How to make Ovens to Distill Aqua Fort.
Ovens to the distilling of Aqua Fort. according to his pleasure: But there is
one Form much better, and more profitable than the other (as I have seen and
used many my self* for I find, That the Ovens called Athanors, which, as in
the following Sculpture is Athanor.
properly delineated, are the best to be used to distill Aqua fort. and they are
to be formed thus, Make a Steeple in square or round four Else high, and below
in it lay an Iron Grate, under which must be a Wind-hole, according to the
demonstration in the next Sculpture: and then make again on both sides of the
steeple, in the same wideness, according to the height of the Juggs or
Glass-bottles round or square Ovens, in which the Glasses or Juggs may stand:
Put also below in the steeple or tower, Iron-Grates, so that it may have
wind-holes below: in such By-Ovens must be left holes from the Tower, that the
heat (as you shall hear) may come out of it, and if they are about a large span
wide, and four fingers and a span high, then are they wide and high enough:
only observe, That when you do set up the high Tower, you do not make it two
thick near to the holes, but rather narrower* that the fire or heat may go the
better into the By-Ovens, then cause to such holes, through which the heat does
pass, fit Instruments of Potters-work, with which you may govern the fire as
you please.

Registers to be made of strong Iron, but they are not so good as the earthen,
for, if the Iron one become hot and glowing, then they give likewise great
heat, and if they are drawn before the fire, then they cannot well be managed
or governed by it, and there is also danger therein.

By-Oven (in which you set the Jugs or Glass-Bottles) covers made of Earth or
Potters-clay, which must be cut out also, that they close just on the neck of
the Jug or Glass-Bottle, and that the Ovens may be shut very close, and leave
Air-holes through it (being called Registers) and have Pins of Wood which go in
very close to govern the Fire by it, as you may see in the eighth figure of the
next Sculpture. Likewise upon the Tower a cover is to be set, which must be so
large that it may cover all the upper holes of the Tower; and so is the Oven or
Athanor prepared to distill the Aqua fort. But how it should be governed with
the Wind-holes follows hereafter in the next Sculpture Deciphered.
1. The Athanor. 2. The Mouth-hole over the Grate. 3. The Mouth-hole under the
Grate. 4. The Grates in the By-Ovens. 5. The By-Ovens. 6. Instruments to open
or shut the By-Ovens Mouth. 7. A Cover for the By-Oven. 8. The Pins for the
Registers or Wind-holes. 9. A Semicircle piece of Wood by which the Athanor is
to be made round. 10. The Cover for the Athanor. 11. The person that tends
them. 12. A dish of Metals to be used.


Sculpture XXI.


CHAP. XXII. How the Ingredients are to be prepared for distilling of the Aqua
fort.
distilling of the common Aqua fort. there are used only two Ingredients, Nitre
and Vitriol, which must be prepared Calcining of Vitriol.
before they are put in: first, the Vitriol must be calcined which is to be done
thus, Take at once four pound of those Ingredients, Crucible, set it over the
fire, that the Vitriol may melt to a water, Calcining of Vitriol.
let it boil gently, and stir it about continually with a wooden spatula, until
the wateriness be evaporated away, and the Vitriol begins to be thick, then
take with the wooden spatula, some part out of the Crucible while it is warm,
and grind it upon a Grinding-stone before it be cold, then take more out of the
Crucible, upon the Grindingstone until all the Vitriol is out of the Crucible
and ground small, for if you do not take the Vitriol warm out of the Crucible,
but let it be cold in it, then it will become as hard as a stone, and so
it is difficult to be brought out, neither is it easy to grind: Thus the Vitriol
is to be prepared for the distilling of the Aqua fort.

Saltpeter.
Concerning the Nitre, it needs not be calcined, yet one may set it upon a Oven
that it may be dry, and then beat and grind it fine and small, then is it also
prepared: But because it is not all pure, but some part of it is very Salt,
therefore it is first to be clarified and purified from its Salt (which every
one who converseth with Distillation of Aqua fort. certainly should know) and
that with the hand: But how the clearing should be done* see full Instruction
in the first Book.

CHAP. XXIII. How Aqua fortis is to be distilled.
In a Glass Body.
TAKE four pound of clean Nitre, and three pound and a half of calcined Vitriol
(as is mentioned) grind them very small, and put them in an over-luted
Glass-body (brushed with an Hares-foot bound to a little stick) the neck of the
Bottles being taken off, that the water may go clean over, and not have cause
to ascend, when then the stuff is put into the Bottle or Jugg, then put it in
one of the By-Ovens, on the Grate (with a Copel made for it on purpose) and lay
upon the By-Oven a Cake made of Earth or Clay, and daub it close about the neck
of the Jug, and over-lute the joynings every where with the Clay very well,
that no heat or vapors may go out of it, and let the Air-holes on the side be
open (as you see in the former Sculpture) yet not too wide (for if they are
open near three fingers wide, then it is wide enough:) But you must not put the
Bottle (as now it is mentioned) Iron-grate, as you Copels to burn Aqua Fort.
do with the Iron Jug, but in a small earthen Test (made on purpose) which has
below a little Foot which is called a Coppel: and in this put ashes or clean
Sand, that the Glass Bottle may come to stand a good square hand above the
Grate: when you have put in the Stuff set an Helm upon it, and dawb the
Joynings very well over with the Clay, which you have prepared.

viz. When the Bottle is put in, then they lay round about the Neck good
prepared Another way.
Clay, and over the Clay they lay Paper, so that the Helm may not quite stand
on the Clay, and this is done for this Reason, that the Helm, (after the
distilling) may loosen it self clean; and then they do set upon it the Helm,
and lute it over with good Clay; and lastly, apply the thin stuff upon a little
Cloth, that no spirits at all may go out.

Water in the Receiver.
You ought also to prepare the By-Oven, and likewise the Jug or Bottle with the
Helm set in Order, that the mouth of the Helmet may go out a pretty distance
over the Oven, then lay before it the Receiver, that the mouth of the Helm may
well reach into it, that you may see how the water does go, and the drops fall.

Vitriol has lost of its weight; first, in the Calcining, you must' put sweet
or flowing Water in the Receiver, else the Water will be too strong, and very
little water will remain, also lute all very well over the Joynings on the
Receiver and Helm, thus, Take some of the prepared Clay, and lay it about the
Joynings, then put in the Clay (through the joynings, in the Receiver) with a
little smooth sprig of a Broom) which will do this Service, that the first and
gross spirits (as you shall hear hereafter) may come through it; then upon the
Clay lay a little Cloth, as abovesaid, that the Joynings may every where be
luted-over, and let it be dry: Thus also you may set into the Oven, the Jugs
with the stuff on both sides the Athanor, and with one fire burn and make
perfect two or three works, and manage every one according to its necessity
without hindrance to the other, of giving or taking heat, as hereafter somewhat
more may follow.

CHAP. XXIV. How Aqua fortis is to be distilled in an Iron Jug or Pot.
Iron Jug, which is cast or hammered, and distill Of Jugs cast or hammered.
Aqua fort. in it, then put the Jug with its short feet, upon an Iron Grate or
Roaster, that it may stand firm and fast, but if the Jug has no legs, then it
must stand upon a three-legg'd Iron, proportioned to the Jug, and before you do
put the Helm on it, first place upon the Jugs neck an old broken neck of a
glass Bottle, and then put the Helm upon it, so the Helm will remain whole in
taking off: But if you have not a glazed Neck (as is said) then lute the Jug's
neck round about with the prepared Clay, and lay over the Clay a Paper (as
abovesaid) upon the Helm, and over lute it the best you can, then the Helm will
go from it the better.

Athanor the stuff with the Jug, and all the over-luting is well dried, then
put To place the same.
into the Tower of the Athanor, live Coals upon the same, with other dead Coals;
so that the Tower may be full to the top; then cover the Tower with a thick
Cover made of Potters-Earth, but you must lay Ashes upon the Tower half an hand
thick, and so fit the Cover, that no vapor at all may go out, and let the
wind-hole below, on the Athanor, be open which is marked in the beforesaid
Sculpture, with Figure 3: and shut the windholes of the By-ovens, and the
Mouth-hole of the Athanor very close, marked with the figure 2. and draw it not
open too soon with the Instruments noted at Figure 6.

Aqua fort. does begin to go, then Of governing the Athanor.
open but one wind-hole, and, if it will not go well, then draw the Instruments
a little nearer to the Tower, so the heat will go through the same space, under
the Jug or Bottle which is set in, and in which the Ingredients are, and
presently, the water will begin to run better.

Of disposing the gross spirits.
Now, if it thus proceeds, then a Vapor will come into the Receiver (these are
the gross spirits) then let them go out through the little Pin of Wood near the
Lymbeck of the Helm, then stick it in again, and lute it over the best way you
can, that no more spirits may go out, and when the drops fall into the Receiver
to five or six, so the water will go in the beginning from the calcination
stuff, with which governing, shutting and opening of the Instruments, you may
always keep the Oven in order that the water may go well. But when you put the
stuff raw, uncalcined in; then you must do it very gently in the beginning,
that the drops may fall in, to 15 and 16, etc. But it is a tedious and long
while in distilling, and there can no more water be had than of the calcined
stuff, therefore it is always first to be calcined, and when from the calcined
stuff, the drops are fallen one or two hours to 5, 6 and 7 drops, then you may
draw a little more with the Instruments which are between the Athanor and
By-Ovens, and then the heat will be stronger, and the Drops will fall faster.

Drops come but to two and three, When it does go too hot.
it goes too hot: then with the mentioned Instrument shut the under wind-hole
again, very close: whereby they will go slower again, for in too hot going
there is danger, that the stuff should ascend, and dash all in pieces (whereby
comes Damage) and although the calcined stuff does not easily ascend, yet it
may so happen in going on (especially if the Jugg be filled too much with the
stuff.)

How the drops must be counted.
And know that You must number the drops according as one beats with a hammer
or fist, or keeps a tact or time as in Music: viz. as many common strokes as
can be done betwxt the drops, may be 4, or 5, or more, they are to be called
strokes, therefore govern the sire also in an equal heat, until the water come
almost over, and the Helm and Receiver become Cherrybrown.

To force the spirits.
Then you must strengthen the fire with opening of the Instruments while the
Spirits go through the Limbeck or Nosel of the Helm and Receiver of the water,
by which the Helm and Receiver (as is said) becomes brown. Then hasten not with
the forcing of the fire, till at last, when the spirit is gone an hour to six
or more, according to the quantity of the stuff, and the Receiver be no more so
brown, then open the Wind-holes markd with the figure 8. and lay in the same
holes under the Jug or Bottle) small split Wood, and force it with the
fierceness of the flame, that the rest of the spirits may come over, and that
all strength may come into the water, so as the Helm and Receiver become white
again, and that also the Jug or Bottle which is put in, may glow near an hour
well with the Caput mort. so that which remains behind in the Jug or glass,
may have no more sharpness in it but become dry and of a reddish Brown.

When the Aqua fort. is thus distilled, then let the Athanor be opened and cool
well, and lay over (above the neck of the Helmet, where it is luted) a wet
cloth, also near the Lymbeck of the Helm over the Receiver, mollifying the
overluted hard Clay well, that it may go off, that you may not break the
Limbeck of the Helm, The Glass Limbick and Receivers to be taken off.
which may use afterward (the Receiver being first to be taken away) then put
the made Aqua fort. into a Glass, and stopped it with wax: thus you have good
Aqua fort.

You may also be instructed, That when you are distilling of Aqua fort. and
that the Coals in the Athanor are almost gone out (which happens hardly in 10
or 11 hours) then lift up the Cover from the Athanor, make it full again with
Coals and cover it, else the Fire will go out, and all will be cold, as
Opportunity it self will teach thee and make thee to remember.

CHAP. XXV. How to distill Aqua fort. in 4, or 5 Hours.
Aqua fort. and cannot have such an Athanor, then must be made a little Oven on
a wall three quarters of an Ell square, and two Else high, and put in it an
Iron-Grate. so that below there may remain a Windhole, and on this little Oven
make another little Oven, in which may be put the Jug with the stuff, cause an
Hole to go out of the Oven, which is set first into the By-Oven* lay also a
Grate in it, as you have done in the Athanor, and you may in stead of the
earthen Instrument before noted with Figure 1. use a smooth Pan-tile, and it
will do the same thing: or, if you will not spend so much time about an Oven,
then make but one square Oven, which has a grate below, and under it a
windehole, in which you may set the Jug or Bottle with the stuff, take then of
the abovementioned stuff four pound of Nitre, and three pound and an half of
calcined Vitriol; Grind both very small, and among it put six pound of Calx
viva, and let all be well mingled together (but put not so much water in the
Receiver, as above is taught.)

luted over, and become dry, then make a fire under it, and let the water go
strong over it, so that at all times the water and spirit may come over
together, and because the stuff is mingled with Calx viva, therefore you need
not take care for running over, then strengthen the fire immediately until the
water and spirits are come over.

Jug will glow so well through this Labor, that you may distill in 5 or 6 hours
an Aqua fort. to which else you must have 24 hours, but you will have but
little water, yet 'twill be very good to use for Separation.

CHAP. XXVI. Another good way to distill Aqua fort.
Vitriol for Aqua fort. it must be dried in the Sun till it be To use
uncalcin'd Vitriol.
white, then take thereof four pound, and two pound of Saltpeter, beat it
small, mingle it together, and set it in the Oven (as is done with the first
stuff) put no sweet or clear water into the Receiver: this also yields good
Aqua fort. only you must (as abovesaid) do very gently in going on, that the
stuff may not run over:

Aqua fort. good Hungarian or Goslarish Hungarian, Goslaran Vitriol, or such as
is boyld out of flints.
Vitriol, or which is boiled out of a flint, and of a fine and high color, and
not of such Vitriol of which Alum is made, for the pale Alumish Vitriols do not
yield good strong Aqua fort. Some take also one part of Copper water, and burn
Alum among their Additions, which is left to every ones freedom. This only is
needful to be mentioned, That if one take much Vitriol among the stuff, such
Aqua fort. which comes out of it, does very well work in separating, and gives
much brown spirit, nor do they improve in the separation, as other Aqua fort.
for they hold not fast on in separation.

Aqua fort. four pound of Another way.
Nitre and as much Vitriol, which of the two is the best, you may (like my self
and others) learn by Experience.

CHAP. XXVII. How to make an Excellent strong Aqua fort.
Aqua fort. Take three pound of calcined Vitriol, 3 pound of Nitre, one pound
of burnt Bruxish Alum, out of Belgia, and two pound of burnt flints; burn these
to a water, the first water let go, until the Helm begins to be colored, cast
it away, lay the Recipient again before it, and lute it all over well again,
and let the other waters go over (as I have taught above) at last, force all
the spirits over with a strong fire: this water keep in a good Vessel, and put
to it, in an overluted glass Bottle, 6 Loths of Nitre, 4 Loths of Vitriol, and
two Loths of burnt flints, and one Loath of Verdigrease, and one Loath of
roasted Antimony, and one Loath of filed Iron, and half a pound of white Lead,
and let all these be beaten to small powder, and put upon it, of the Water now
distilled, a little and a little at a time (for it uses to make a Noise until
it is all put in) then cover it very well, let it stand some days in a Celler,
and stir it every day twice, then set it in and distill it as an Aqua fort.
only that the Helm may soon come upon it, and let it go as long as 'tvvill go,
for it will begin of its own accord to go; then give it very gentle fire, and
dravv it most gently over so long till all the water is brought over, then
augment the fire, the fiercer the better, until the spirits with great heat
are all come over, (which hardly is done in two days and two nights) like as
you have done before with the Aqua fort. then let the Oven be cool, and take of
the Aqua fort. and cleanse it from the feces, and preserve it in a sound Vessel
which holds well, for it is an exceeding strong water, and use it.

Gold, in the Separation, is to be obtained, than More Gold by this way.
by common Aqua fort. Experience will manifest it; for my part, I believe it
not: and for such Hopes without ground, I was neither willing to except, nor to
try in distilling.

A Lute upon which the Spiris do not work.
You may also be instructed, That to this Water you had need of a great
Recipient, wherein the spirits may have room; and, if you will take off the
Recipient, and lay it before again, then you may lute over the Joynings with
lute made of two parts Clay, and one part of Quick lime, and moistened with Rape
Oil, and lute it: such a Clay the spirits do not touch, but the other which is
used, by some, to lute with, they touch, and thereby are made always leaky,
and never holds well.

CHAP. XXVIII. How to distill an Aqua fortis, called Aqua Regis, which
dissolveth Gold, Copper, Iron, Lead and Tin; also Mercury sublimate and Arsnick.
Ingredients.
PROVIDE good Aqua fort. which is distilled only from Saltpeter and Vitriol,
and purified with Silver from its dregs and faeces, and in which one may
dissolve Silver as necessity requires, put it into a sound well luted glass
Bottle or Culb, and add 8 Loths of melted Salt, which Salt in flowing must not
run*over, but as soon as it flows must be put out, that it may remain in its
strength and virtue, and only come off from the phlegm or superfluous moisture;
now, as soon as the Salt comes in it, then lay the luted glass Bottle with the
Aqua fort. and Salt side-wayes in the Oven in which one uses to distill Aqua
fort. but thus, That you may lay to the Bottle the Recipient also, and lute it
well, then it will soon begin to go off, by its own Virtue, then draw the phlegm
over with a small fire, and strengthening the fire more and more, at last force
the spirits to come over, as is usual in distilling the Aqua fort. and you must
drive the spirits much longer because of the Salt.

To draw over by degrees.
Then you may find that by this way of distilling by degrees, there will be a
fine yellow and stronger water, because the spirits will not ascend too high,
(as over the Alembeck:) But it requires good diligence and observation to
prevent the water from running over: This Aqua Regis when it is thus burnt, may
presently be used, and has no need to be purified from its feces.

But how to distill it by degrees you may see in the following Sculpture, thus
Deciphered,
1. The Tower of the Athanor, in which the Coals are to be put. 2. The Oven in
which the Bottle is to be placed. 3. How the Bottle is to ly in the Oven. 4.
The Glassy Helmet, made for it. 5. The Recipient or Receiver. 6. The Pot full
of Materials prepared. 7. The empty Pot. 8. The Person that tends the Athanor
and By-Ovens.


Sculpture XXII.


CHAP. XXIX. To distill Aqua fort. in Retorts with other Advantages.
Aqua fort. in Retorts is no old Invention, and no long Labor, but a short
way; if Retorts may be had which are made of one piece, and will hold Aqua
fort. and Oil; then lute such over with good and sound Clay, let it be well
dry, put in it the Ingredients or stuff, which shall be calcined and mingled
with Calx viva, and lay the Retort in an Oven made on purpose (whose
Description shall follow hereafter) and fill a Receiver with water before it,
then make a fire in the Oven (and speedily stuff, because it is mingled with
Calx viva, will not run so soon over, because the spirits Calx viva hinders the
running over
and water are to go over together, at last force the spirits with Fire, so that
the Retort may glow bright, near two hours, at least: In such a Retort you may
distill the Aqua fort. in 5 or 6 hours, but it will not yield so much water as
through the Alimbeck, but it will be strong and good for use.

For want of a Receiver.
If you cannot have a great Receiver (as it often happens) to the distilling of
the Aqua fort. then take a great Waldenburgish Jug, or one made of the like
Clay, (that it may hold Aqua fort. lay that before as a Receiver, and make the
Process, as now is signified, such an one I esteem better to the distilling of
Aqua fort. in Retorts, than in a glazed Receiver.

But when you will use it (in stead of the glazed Receivers to lay before the
Jug and Helm) then you must have a neck of a glass Bottle: Lute it well over in
the Jug, so that the Neck may reach out of the Jug near a Span, in the same
Neck lay the nossel of the Helm, and lute it also well over, so you may see in
the neck of the glass Bottle, how the drops do fall, and govern the fire
accordingly.

Earthen Receivers with Glass.
Some who distill Aqua fort. do make (on purpose for the Receiver) great Jugs
with great Bellies, of good and solid Clay, so that near the Jug*s neck, are to
be cut in it square holes, then they fit to it square Glasses of good Venetian
Glass, and then they lute over the Jugg with a thin Clay made of Varnish and
Bole Armoniack, and cause it to be dried well, and when they will lay the Jug
before, then they place the Glasses to the Jug and Nossel of the Helm, so that
they may see the drops fall well, and that they may govern the fire as it To
sit the glass spouts to the Helm.
should be.

Also it often comes to pass, that the Helms have not always right spouts, they
are either too high or too low: Now, these you may make your self, as
follows, viz. slake a Coal-fire upon a Test, hold the spout so as that it may
be only warm, then nearer and nearer; at last, lay it on the glowing Coals, and
the nosel will glow, then bow it in the fire, as you would have it, but you
must not take it so quickly out of the fire again, lest it break in pieces,
according to this way others are to be bent and fitted like Pellicans.

Ovens are to be made and prepared in which Aqua fort. is to be distilled: if
it To set By-Ovens to an Athanor.
now should happen, that one would at once resolve to distill more than two at a
time: then for such the Athanor must be made somewhat greater and larger than
for others, but not much, yet may serve three or four By-Ovens, which are to be
governed with one fire, only the Instruments which in other Athanors are drawn
on the sides, in this must be drawn upwards, and hang them on the wall by
nails, as the following Sculpture does show.

Another long Oven.
Besides this, one may make another Oven to distill Quantities, in which four or
more Jugs may be set in length one after another: so that the Oven stands
free, and you may always come to lay one Receiver on one side, and also
another on the other side; for this Reason, not only that it may not hinder one
the other, but also that on the backside under every Jug may be laid wood, and
that the spirits may be forced strongly.

Besides, such an Oven must have on the lowest part but one hole, in which the
fire upon a grate is to be stored with wood, and under the grate one wind-hole
more, and the same must not be opened, till the water is almost over, that one
may strengthen the heat; likewise on the upper part, as on the head must be
placed wind-hole, that the fire may have its draught in the length.

Aqua fort. in such an Oven, then first calcine, and prepare the stuff
afterward; put it into the Jugs, and the first Jugg which stands next the fire
mingle with Calx, then there will not be so much danger, that the stuff will
run over: After this, when the water is almost over, then open the wind-holes,
which are always to be behind by the Jugs, and force the spirits over,
according to every stuffs necessity, by this you will have also good Aqua fort.
and may distill much of it at once, but how the Oven is to be formed you may
see at the figure 7. in the next Sculpture.

Aqua fort. I find it necessary Strong and weak Aqua fort.
to mention, That some conceive, if they have too strong Aqua fort, they will go
as far in separating one Mark, as of two Marks with weak Aqua fort. which
cannot be: the Reason is, that though the strong Aqua fortis do touch strongly,
yet it cannot take more Silver to it self, than the Aqua fort. has wetness: I
say then,
That an Aqua fort. which is of a middle strength, and made of good stuff does
more in separating according to its worth, than a very strong water, for the
weak water endures longer in the operation, on the contrary the very strong
water consumes away suddenly, and leaves off the sooner. The following
Sculpture Deciphered.
1. The Tower of the Athanor. 2. The two sides or By-ovens in which the Jugs
are to be set, with the Stuff. 2. 2. 3. The Glass Receivers. 3. 3. 4. The
earthen Jug or Receiver. 5. The Oven for the Retorts. 6. The little Receivers
to be added to the great Receiver, that there may be room for drawing the
Spirits. 7. The Long Oven. 8. The By-Ovens, by which the spirits are to be
forced into the Aqua fort.


Sculpture XXIII.


CHAP. XXX. How Aqua fort. is to be separated and cleansed from its Feces.
Aqua fort. is distilled, (according The way.
to the Instruction given) then it is not to be used raw, as it comes from
distilling, but it must be first cleansed and precipitated from its feces, that
it may be pure and clear, and this is done thus, If the distilled Aqua fort. be
two pounds, then put near 2 loths of it into a little glass Vial, and dissolve
in it half a dram of fine silver, and while the Solution is yet warm, put in,
the other new burnt Aqua fort. so it will become white and thick as milk, stir
it once or twice a day, every day, then let it stand one day, and one night
till the feces do settle in the bottom like a Calx, when it is become wholly
clean and clear, then put it off, and you have purified or precipitated the
Aqua fort. for
the separation prepared; only take notice that the Aqua fort. distilled in an
Iron Jug. does not give so much feces, neither is it so unclean as that which
is burnt in a glass Bottle, because the Iron-Jug is a Metal of it self, upon
which the Aqua fort. does partly purify it self, and it likewise gives to the
Gold a higher and finer color than the other: Keep the feces clean together,
pour it off, enter them into the Lead, and let it go off upon a Copel, so you
will find the most part of the Silver in it, which you have used to the
precipitation.

To bring the feces to profit.
Some use this Method, viz. They do precipitate the new distilled Aqua fort.
with Hungarian or Bohemish Pence, or such like Money, which to the separating
is all one, only the Aqua fort. remains not so clear, fine and white, but
because there is Copper in it, therefore the Aqua fort. becomes a little green:
for this Reason, this Aqua fort. settled with Coppery Money cannot be used to
the Gold-Proof, for the Copper which is in the water sticks rather to the Gold
Calx than to the Silver, and then it is not easily washed off so clean: which is
prejudicial to the Proof: but, if after the first settling, the Aqua fort. be
unclean, then you may settle it once more, and then use it to Separate or prove
Gold, according to your pleasure.

CHAP. XXXI. How weak Aqua fort is to be made stronger.
Aqua fort. as easily may be done, To Prepare iron.
when the Joynings are not well luted over, so that the water will become too
weak, and in the separating will not touch the Silver: such weak waters may be
made stronger by two ways: First, set in again a new stuff of Nitre, and
calcined Vitriol, and put the weak Aqua fort. in the Receiver before it, and
distill the stuff: after this make the spirits to go well over, so the Aqua
fort. will become stronger, that it may be used well and safely in separations.

Second preceding.
The other way isshorter: thus, Set the weak Aqua fort. in a glass Bottle or
Culb, which must be luted over upon a Coal-fire, heat it till it begin to boil,
then the wateriness of it will boil off, which you may often prove while it is
boiling, whether the water do become strong enough. Or, set the weak Aqua fort.
in a Bottle, which is luted over in the Athanor, or in another Oven, (in which
one uses to burn Aqua fort.) and put an Helm upon it, and draw off from it the
Phlegm or superfluous wateriness, until the Helm begins to be brown, fo the weak
Aqua fort. will become stronger and is fit for use.

Phlegm which is drawn off you may retain, for To draw off the phlegm.
if you do distill another Aqua fort. then you may use it in the Receiver again,
for this phlegm is much better than common water.

CHAP. XXXII. How Gold and Silver in the Aqua fort. is to be separated.
The Preparation.
TO separate Gold from Goldish Silver in the Aqua fort. Know that the Silver
must first be burnt clean upon a Test, then cast it into an Ingot, and beat it
thin upon an Anvil, and cut it into little lamins or thin pieces, bovv them
that they become hollovv, glovv them in a Crucible that the Aqua fort. may
touch them the better, such glovved Lamins when they are cold, put them into a
luted neck separating Glass, and put not above five or six of those
Mark-Goldish-silver Lamins in at once; (because of the Danger in breaking,) and
if you have much Silver (for they take much room with the Bottles) then put
upon it so much of the purified and settled Aqua fort. that it go over the
Silver a good large Finger, and as soon as it begins to work of it self, put
the separating Glass with the Silver upon a warm Sand in a great earthen Test
of good stuff upon an Athanor, that the Sand, may always remain hot, and when
the first Aqua fort. has work enough, that it will touch no more, then put
away the Silvery Water into another luted Bottle, but not too hot, that the
Bottle may not break, and put upon it other good Aqua fort. which has not been
used, set it in warm Sand, and let it work the second time, but a little
stronger than at first, until it will work no more: Then put it clean off to
the Silvery Aqua fort. and put upon it the third time Aqua fort. and set it
upon the hot Sand, and let it work strongly, and with great Bubbles, until all
the Silver be dissolved from the Gold, which will come out very clean through
the three waters now mentioned: But, if one had more to separate, one might use
the last water upon other Silver, and put it upon it the first time, for it
will touch and work so that somewhat of the Aqua fort may be spared.

The Second Proceeding.
Know also, that upon one Mark of beaten Silver, there will remain one Mark and
a half of good Aqua fort. and upon a Mark of thin graind Silver, (because the
Grains remain somewhat thicker, and not so light as in beating) two Marks; now
when the Aqua fort. has separated and attracted all the Silver from the Gold,
then put the Silvery Aqua fort. together in a Bottle, as abovesaid, and upon
the Gold or Gold Calx (which remains in the Bottle) clean, boiling hot water,
so that it go well over the Gold, and put it over again, let it boil well with
the Gold calx, then put it off in a particular Vessel, clean and Gold, and put
upon To dulcify the Gold. Calx.
it another clean hot water, let it boil with it, do this until the water goes
off from the Gold very clean and clear, and has no sharpness at all in it, and
that it take to it self the remaining Silver which the Aqua fort. has left
behind with the Gold in the moistness, till it comes clean, this is called
dulcifying, but that you may be sure that you have the Silver sweetened clean,
prove it thus, let fall a drop in a Coppery clean dish, and if it do not stain
it, then it is dulcifyed clean, such sweet waters are all to be put together,
because of the Silver in it, and use it for precipitation, (of which you shall
have an instruction hereafter) When the Gold calx after this manner is taken
clean off, then hold in your hand the Bottle, and put the Gold or Gold calx
very gently out into an half Glass Bottle, with the last clean water together;
then put it again into the Bottle or Culb, and hold your hand before it again,
and turn the Culb so that all the remainder of the Gold (together with the
water) may flow against the hand, then put it finely and gently to the other
Gold in the half Bottle.

To glow out the Gold Calx.
When all the Gold calx is settled in the half Glass Bottle, then drain the
water off cleanly, and put also the Gold calx (being moist) into a clean
Crucible, and set it on the fire, and let the water softly evaporate, and boil
in; then set the Crucible warmer, and at the last very hot, that the Gold calx
may glow clean out, then the Gold will receive a fine color, let it be cold,
and weigh it, then in the casting all together nothing will go from it.

Now if you will cast together the glowed Gold calx then mingle it with a
little Borax, and put it in a new clean Crucible, (but rub it at first very
clean with chalk) and set it in the Fire, and when the Crucible gloweth, blow
to it that the Gold may come to flow, of this you may use a little in the
Fluss, and when you will cast it, then lay To cast the Gold.
a clean little Paper upon it, which is Luted with Venetian Soap and Wax, and
while the Paper yet burns upon the Gold, cast it out under the Flames, so it
will receive no scum, but will casts it self also clean, but if you will cast
an Ingot, then make the Ingot warm, and Lute it with Wax, and then quench the
cast Ingot with Urine, and so the Gold will become fine and deft.

Golden grained or Gilt Silver, and you would separate it in the water, then it
must be first burnt clean upon a Test, and the burnt Silver must be Grained,
(for it would be a hindrance to the Separator, if all Silver should be beaten)
especially in a great quantity, yet he who has time and opportunity, will do
better to beat the Silver, or cause it to be beaten, whereby the separation
will be done sooner and with less Aqua fort. (as above is signified) but if you
want time and opportunity to beat it, then take the burnt Goldish Silver, and
set it in a Crucible in a Wind Oven, and grain it with a split or round stick,
or stir the water with a stick fast about in the Vessel, to make the Silver
cast it self into Bubbles, whereby it will To separate the Silver for
granulating.
grain it self thin and hollow, and when it is drayn'd, then dry and glow it,
and put it in the separating Glass, and put Aqua fort. upon it, that it may go
over it pretty well, and set an Alimbeck upon it, that it may begin to move of
it self, and, when it cease working, then set the separating glass upon the
Copels in the sand upon the Athanor, and let the Alimbeck or Helm stand
continually upon it, and what Water goes off from the Aqua fort. keep that
same by it self, for it is in the distilling of the Aqua fort. to be put into
the Receiver, and is better than common Aqua fort. and you must still govern
the fire in the Athanor by strengthening and weakening it as the work requires:
and of this graind Silver, put 9 or 10 Mark of it into a bottle at once, for it
will not take so much room as the beaten, yet if there were a quantity to
separate of the Golden silver, one may prepare more of such Athanors than Aqua
fort* for the granulated Silver.
one, that diverse of the Bottles may be set in at once, but you ought to observe
this, that one must put upon the Graind more than three times fresh Aqua fort.
for the thick Grains sake, that the Gold may be pure.

Glass Bottle should break, and the Silvery Aqua fort. run into the sand, it is
not When a glass Bottle breaks:
quite lost, for one may boil most part of the Silver out of the Sand again with
warm Water, and that which remains in the sand may be mingled with that which
is swept off, and passes through the melt Oven, and be made to profit, but of
such danger there is little Fear upon the Athanor, especially if you have good
separating Glasses, and also are careful.

To dulcify the Silver.
When the Silver is separated clean from the Gold then sweeten the Gold Calx
well out, dry, glow and cast it together (as often as has been mentioned) and
know, if you have been diligent in separating and sweetning it the Gold which
comes out by the separation, will be 23 Carats and one grain; but commonly it
comes to 23 Carats and 7 or 8 grains.

Caution, That you must not The Content of parted Gold.
let the Aqua fort. evaporate too dry upon the Gold (as many times it happens by
Negligence) whereby the Silver can not set it self on the Gold Calx again,
which afterward the other Aqua fort. will hardly touch, and therefore so soon
as one part of the last Aqua fort. be poured from the Gold, one should quickly
cast upon it hot flowing water before it be cold, that the Silver To shute into
Cristals.
may not settle it self too hard on the Gold, and turn to Cristals, and though
hot boiling water will dissolve those Crystals, yet it is better, it may not be,
but be soon dulcified.

When the Aqua fort. remains Silver.
Likewise, if it be neglected so that the Gold should come too white out of the
separation, and were not of a high Content, then it is by the Cement (as in
next Sculpture is signified) to be perfectly cleansed. But that you may
understand the Labor of the Separation, and how the Ovens and separating
Glasses use to stand, you will also see in the following Sculpture.

Sculpture XXIV.
Deciphered.
1. The Tower of the Athanor. 2. The Side-Ovens upon which the Copels are
placed on Sand. 3. The Glass Bottle for Separation covered with Helmets, 3. 3.
4. The Receivers which are laid to the Helmets. 5. How Aqua fortis is by them
to be drawn from the Silver. 6. An Iron Instrument by which the Glasses are to
be taken out and in. 7. The Person that attends the Operation of the Glasses,
in figure 5. 8. Another person to take off and put on Glasses upon the shelves.
9. The Ingredients prepared, in a dish or pan.




CHAP. XXXIII. When the Gold is abstracted, how the Silver is to be brought
again, out of Aqua fort.
Silver from the Gold, through Aqua fortis, and the Aqua fort. has sucked the
same into it self, and if one would bring it again out of the Aqua fortis; this
may be done several ways. The common Method is this (which is used by most
Goldsmiths) if they separate but a little silver, and require no great pains,
then they take the settled water with which they have purified the Gold (as is
said before) and put it in an half Bottle made of Copper, to the silvery Aqua
fortis: only observe the right measure, for if the settled water be but little,
and on the contrary, if the silvery Aqua fort. be too much, then it will begin
to work too hard in the Copper Bottle: to prevent this, put into the Copper
Bottle, to the settled water, and to the inweighed Aqua fort. a little more
warm common flowing water, and then it will not so much hurt the Copper-bottle;
and the Silver will quickly and apparently fall down in the Copper Bottle: Let
it stand a while, then put the Copper Bottle (together with the water and
fallen Silver) over the fire, let it boil a little, then the Silver will the
better and closer come together.

When this is done, then cause it to settle and pour the clean water off (which
will be fair, clear and transparent) put the silver Calx into an half- Glass
bottle, or, if it be much, then into a clean Kettle, and pour clean warm water
upon it, two or three times, until the silver Calx be clean and pure, and see
that the Silver always settle well, and preserve it carefully together, that
nothing be lost.

silver Calx must be dulcified, is Because the sharpness which the Aqua fort.
has left in Why the Silver Calx is sweetened.
it may come out of it, for the sharpness does rob some of the silver in the
fire by drawing over the Helm as shall be shown.

Now, when the water is drained from the silver Calx then put it in a clean
Copper half Bottle, and let the water of it boil off and evaporate, that it may
be very dry, then put it in a Crucible, set it in the fire in a wind-Oven or
before the bellows, according as it is more or less: make it not too suddenly
hot, that if there be left by the silver Calx, any Spirits of the Aqua fort.
that they may evaporate before the silver Calx flows, and the waste of the
silver may become the smaller, which waste is not often small, and comes all
from the spirits, for if they could be retained in the separating Glass then
little would go off from the Silver.

The content of the Precipitated Silver.
After the melting together of the Silver in the Crucible, then grain it, or
cast it in an Ingot, as you please, this is the old manner of the Goldsmiths
and common Separators to cleanse the silver out of the Aqua fort. and this
silver which is thus settled out of the Aqua fort. is not fine silver: but it
works on the Copper from which it is to be cleansed, and the stronger the
water is in cleansing, the more it will touch, and mingle among the silver
Calx, and it holds commonly a Mark of cleansed silver, and this thus cast,
holds near 15 Loath of fine silver.

To bring the blew water to profit.
The settled blew water is to be used again with profit when you distill Aqua
fort. and have put the prepared stuff into a Jug (whereof Iron ones are best)
then put of this blew water two pound upon ten pound of calcined stuff; as soon
as this is done, set the Helm upon it, for it will presently go off it self,
without any fire, and lay the Receiver before, (without any sweet Water) lute
it well every where, and let it first go over the phlegm, then increase the fire
till all the spirits are driven into the water (as is said, when we spoke of
burning the Aqua fort.) then you may put this blew Aqua fort. into a great Culb
glass, which is cut off in the Neck, and luted over, and evaporate the moist
phlegm with the fire, then it will become stronger, and so put it to the stuff
in the distilling.

But the Aqua fort. which comes of it, when the blew water is put upon the
calcined stuff has not so much feces in cleansing and seething down, and is
not so unclean as other common Aqua fort. which is burnt of other stuff,
because the blew water becomes Metallic by the Copper in the precipitation,
and has purified it self in the Jug or Bottle.

To precipitate Silver in an earthen vessel.
Know also, That one may in a glazed or earthen Vessel (if it be good, and will
hold Aqua fort. and Oil) cleanse the used silvery Aqua fort. and the silver
precipitated in it, namely, one must put such Aqua fort. together with the
clear water, (as aforesaid) mixed in the glazed or earthen Vessel, and lay in
it red hot pieces of Copper, and set the Vessel warm, then the silver will
quickly fall to the Bottom, but it is better to cleanse it in a Copper Vessel,
which may be done in a coppery or Lamins, then the silver will come clean out
of the water, as Experience teaches. Iron Lamins in the Precipitation.


CHAP. XXXIV. How Aqua fortis drawn from Silver may be used again.
Silver out of Aqua fort. and to draw off Aqua fort. so that it may be used
again for Separation, is a singular ART and Dexterity; it is thus, Put the
Silverish Aqua fort. in a good glass Bottle which is luted over, and wherein
Aqua fort. may be distilled, set it in one of the Ovens which are for
distilling, and luted over (but in an Athanor is the best, and not so
dangerous, as in a common Oven) let it be dry, then put the silverish Aqua
fort. through a long glazed Tunnel, warm and not cold, into the Bottle, then
set a Helm upon it, but not so strong luted over, lay the Receiver before, and
lute the Joynings over so that you may take the Helm off again, (as you will
hear hereafter.) And being thus set in, then dress the Athanor, and put fire
and Coals in it. And by the Instruments (of which we have spoken above:) first
give it a gentle fire, and let the phlegm go over 9 or 10 beats or times (as
before) and when the water or phlegm is almost over, then shut all the
Instruments on the Athanor, and take off the Helm again, and fill more silvery
water through the long Tunnel, warm into the Bottle, (else it may break and do
hurt) and put the Helm on again, and lay the Receiver before, it but lute it
not too strong (as at the beginning) and let the water go over again gently.

In this manner it is to be done the second and third time with the silvery
water; and when you think it be silvery enough in the Bottle, or have no more
to put in, and the flegms are over, then take off the Helm again, and cast into
the Bottle (to the Silver or Stuff) a piece of Tallow as big as half a hazel
Nut, then the Silver will not ascend in the Bottle, put on the Helm again and
lay the Receiver before it, and lute it all over well, and the best thou can:
then let the fire go on the stuff again, and make the fire fiercer (as you see
convenient) At last, give it a strong fire, and force the spirits, near 12
hours, pretty well, yet not too high in the beginning, but by degrees increase
it, that the spirits may go over with great force, and that the Culb may glow
very bright, let it stand in the fire, near two hours* that the Silver may
almost melt in it, then the spirits will come all into the water, and the
Silver freed of them, for if they were not clean forced from the Silver, but
remained by it, they would hurt it in the casting together, and draw it away;
which may be seen apparently upon the Coals, that there will lie thick leaves
upon it: They therefore who are ignorant of this, do many times work with
danger, and great loss of Silver.

silvery Aqua fort. into the glass Bottle luted over upon the Athanor in deep
Sand, and draw the phlegm (as now is mentioned) gently over, by which may be
seen how it governs it self in the Bottle, and how the water decreaseth, and so
have more care in putting in more water: finally, the spirits will be forced
over, and the Silver be glowed out in the Bottle, yet the last out-glowing is
better to do in my mind, as above in the Athanor.

cold, and take off the Aqua fort. in the Receiver, which you may use again
very well to separate, especially to the Gold-proof, and has no need of
further cleansing: then take out the Silver which was left in the Glass, and
put it into a Crucible, and cast it together.

Gold-Separators have also this manner in drawing over the water, that they do
add to the silvery Another way to draw over the Water.
Aqua fort. in the separating Bottle, if it be six pounds, then one pound of
the stuff, of the Aqua fort. (viz. of Nitre, and calcined Vitriol, as above is
signified) and do not put it into the Bottle until the water be almost gone
over, and if the spirits begin to go over, they lute it again very diligently,
and keep the Fire (as is necessary in burning of the Aqua fort.) that the
spirits at last may come over too: and yet they do think that the Aqua fortis
will receive a virtue and strength again from the added stuff, and is better
for use in separations; then they force the Silver with the Caput Mort. (which
yet is but little) into a Crucible, and cast it together: Whether now this way
be better than the first? Experience must teach: So then you will have a good
and right Instruction concerning the Silver and Gold separation in the water;
and it is a complete way of separating; especially if one be provided with all
things necessary to it.

CHAP. XXXV. How to separate Gold and Silver by Fusion.
How to understand Separation by Fusion.
AS it is an excellent piece of Art to sepapate Gold and Silver (in Aqua fort.)
viz. The rich Gold containing Silver; so is also the Separation by Fusion upon
the poor Golden Silver, where the Mark contains one penny and an half of Gold,
to two or three drams, which is an handsome and profitable separation; so that
I know no better way: but upon the rich Goldish Oar, that way is not to be used.

Fusion is to be understood thus, That, because the Gold in the poor Content of
Goldish Silver is largely distributed, (through the Addition of Gold in the
Fusion in a little Silver) it may be brought into a narrowness; namely, as when
the Goldish Silver is thirty Mark, and one Mark contains a dram of Gold, then
the thirty drams of Gold (which are in the thirty Mark of Silver, will bring in
two Marks of Silver, and then separate it in the Aqua fort. which is a very
great profit, because that one has not need to refine all the thirty Marks of
Silver, and then to separate them in Aqua fort.

goldish Silver, which is poor of Gold, put it in a Crucible, let it flow, and
grain it in the water, and if it be but wrought Silver, and not fine, it is
nothing: then weigh the graind Silver, and prove it upon fine Silver and Gold,
how much it contains, that you may keep this Account, that there remains
nothing behind on Gold or Silver, and also can certainly know, how much the
waste has been in the Silver by the separation.

grain a little wet again, and take to every Mark of Silver, four Loath of
yellow small beaten Sulphur, put also the grains wet into a glazed Pot, and put
the Sulphur upon it, mingle it well together, and cover the Pot with a Cover,
then lute it well over, and make a gentle fire round about: so that the sulphur
may melt on the grains.

When this is done, Let the Pot cool, and break it in pieces, then you will
find the grains and the Sulphur burnt very black together, beat it asunder, and
take heed that nothing of it spring away. After this put the grains (thus with
the Sulphur prepared) into a good Crucible, and upon the Grains put also a Mark
of wrought Silver, and half a Loath of Copper; but if it be burnt silver, then
take to every Mark two loths of Grained Copper, and set the Crucible in a Wind
Oven, which is made taper-wise with good and sound Clay under the Iron grate
before, toward the wind hole, that if the Crucible should run over, yet the
scoria's or dross of all the stuff may flow out of the Oven into the hole under
the wind-hole, then there is no need to gather it so largely dispersed; and,
that also the Grates may be taken out and laid in again: After such Crucibles
are set in, then cover them with an Iron-cover very close, let the stuff flow
well, and when it is flowed, uncover the Crucible, and stir it well with a
glowing Iron hook of a finger thickness, and cast the Silver first down with
grained Lead, viz. that you may spread the grained Lead upon the stuff in the
Crucible, in which the Gold will cast it self down with some little silver,
then put Precipitation, or casting down*
also upon it some of the stuff (as is directed hereafter) and stir it once with
the Iron hook, then cover the Crucible again with the cover, and let it stand
thus a while in the stuff, then uncover it again, and cast it down with grained
Lead and a little grained Copper; do this three times, and always use
afterward of the mentioned fluss; but take notice, if you have in the Crucible
20 Marks of silver, that you may not use of the fluss (to three times casting
down) above 10 loths, and one and a half of grained Lead, and 4 loths of
Copper; for if you should use more, then the silver Regulus might be too great.
Now when you have precipitated, or cast it down the third time, let the
Crucible stand with the stuff a long time in good fluss, then take it out of
the fire, and cool it, and beat it asunder, and of 20 Marks of silver you will
find in the bottom, a Regulus of near 6 Marks weight, or something lesser, in
which there will be as much Gold, as in 20 Mark of silver.

When the Scoria's contains Gold.
Metal, then prove if you find the scoria's or dross upon the Silver, and the
Silver upon the Gold, and that if the scoria's does contain Gold, set it again
in a new Crucible, and let it flow, and use your casting with the grained Lead
and a little Copper (as before) but not so much, unless the scoria's were rich
in Gold, and then one uses much of the grained Lead and Copper, whereby the
silver Regulus will become the greater, and the Gold will come better together;
especially observe, that if much Gold be in the silver, then use at first most
of the lower casting, that you may precipitate all the Gold, and when you have
all the Gold in the two Regulus's, and do find When the Regulus is poor in Gold.
that they are still too poor in Gold, that is, if you have not in the same a
fourth, or at least a fifth part of Gold, by which the Gold in separating did
not remain whole, then set in the Regulus again, grained and prepared with
sulphur (as at the first time) and put the same ashed grains in a new Crucible,
and spread a little Copper upon it, and cover it with fluss, and put a cover
upon it, and set it, thus covered, again into the fire in the Wind-oven, and
let it flow well, then precipitate it again with grained Lead, and use to every
one of the castings the fluss, (hereafter set down) and stir it well about with
an Iron hook, now that the silver Regulus be not too great, and not so much (as
that you need to separate it in the Aqua fort. in vain,) you may help it with
the lower stuff or castings, whether the Regulus be great or small, (as above
has been demonstrated) and so deal also with the remaining scoria's, when such
is yet rich in Gold; for by diligent proving one may always perceive whether
the Gold be all in the Regulus, or whether some be yet behind in the scoria's,
that you may regulate your self accordingly.

When then you have done all things in the Cruciple by precipitating and
stirring about, and have lifted out the Crucible, then cast the stuff out of
the Crucible into an iron Mortar, luted with Tallow and a thin Clay, and made a
little warm (which I judge very good) for in such a casting the Regulus comes
clean together; and as soon as this is cast out of the Crucible, then set the
Crucible quickly in again in the Wind-Oven (especially if the Crucible be good,
and, That you may trust to it) Put the stuff out of the Mortar, and beat the
Regulus from the Scoria's, and presently put the Scoria's in the Crucible, let
it flow till it does flow very easily, and cast it down again, and do it as you
are instructed at the first, then put it again into the Mortar, and cool it;
Lastly, when all the Gold is cast down in the Silver-Regulus, then take the
Regulus and burn it clean upon a Test, and grain it afterward, either in the
bubling water (as above mentioned) or cast it into an Ingot and beat it thin,
then separate it in Aqua fort. as I have taught.

separating there does belong good and sound Crucibles, in which you at once
may set in to separare near 50 Marks of silver or more, besides, I have seen a
Gold- separator in Saxony, in such a Crucible has set in, and cast down near
an hundred Marks of good burnt Silver, thus prepared with sulphur: But, because
it causes some fear to set in so much at once, therefore I judge it better,
especially, if one cannot trust to the Crucibles, that one in one Crucible may
set in no more than 50 Marks (except it were so much to separate) and then some
more Wind-Ovens must be made, and more Crucibles be put in.

Instruction of the Precipitation (with the before given manuduction) know,
That it has this Condition, viz. When there is put (after the former
Directions) much Goldish silver with sulphur prepared in a Crucible, and the
Gold is cast down with the Lead, Copper and Fluss, then the Gold will
precipitate or cast it self from above, so you may with a little glowing draw
out of the Crucible some scoria's, but not the half part, then cover the
Crucible again, and preciptate it again, and at last put the stuff (as I have
mentioned before) in an Iron Mortar, by this way, I suppose, that the scoria's
of the Gold will be clean at once.

Another Way to precipitate at once.
the poor Goldish Silver (of which a Mark contains but a Heller or Penny-Gold)
this following Method of Separation in the Fusion, first, that one must put
into a Crucible of the graind Gold, with sulphur prepared as above is taught)
near 50 Marks, and let it flow well, then precipitate it with graind Lead, and
a little Copper and when the Precipitation is right done, and the scoria's with
all the stuff cast together with the precipitated Silver, and the Regulus and
the Gold put in another hot Crucible, and again out of the same, into the
first, and then to cast it into an iron Mould of an Oval form, well washed with
Clay, and dried again, so that it may flow in breadth, and the silver Regulus
with the Gold may settle (yet broad and thin) and then you will find, that in
such casting that all the Gold will give it self in the silver Regulus at once,
and you need not set it in the scoria's again, but it will be clean and free at
once: this now is an ingenious Method, though I never used it: because the
silver Regulus is so often cast through with the scoria's, and does spread
among the scoria's, so that the silver may the better catch the Gold, and take
it to it self.

To such casting one must have a singular iron-Instrument made on purpose to
open and close again with two handles, the same is to be holden with thick wet
Gloves on the hands, and poured out to avoid the heat thereof; Every one may
consider of this, but, I judge it most convenient, the casting of the Crucible,
as follows.

CHAP. XXXVI. How the Scoria's or dross is to be made to Profit.
The first way.
THE remaining silver which in the precipitating comes not into the silver
Regulus, but remains in the scoria's, you may make to profit, and bring it from
it; only observe this, If one uses to the precipitation much Copper and little
Lead, then the Scoria's will become rich in Copper, therefore to make such good
again, requires much Lead: But if you use to it much grained Lead and little
Copper (as has been taught in my former Instructions) then the Scoria's will
become rich in Lead and poor in Copper, and the Gold will precipitate never the
less (after this manner) into a silvery Regulus, which in the well making of
the Scoria's is very profitable, without any great damage to the Silver.

Therefore make it thus, If the Scoria's be 30 Mark which you would make to
advantage, Prepare a very flat Test, of good washed Ashes (as I have taught in
the first Book of the silver work) set it before the Bellows, that it be not
too strong, let it be warm, and then put upon it 15 pounds of clean Lead, blow
it gently, and when it begins to drive, then put continually one piece after
another of the Scoria's into it, so the Lead takes the Content of it to it
self, and the Sulphur is blown off from the Test, also the Scoria's does not
stick so much in the Test, because it is poor in Copper: But if there be not
enough of Lead, then you may add somewhat more, till all the scoria's be sucked
in: then drive it upon the Test clean off, so you will find, that not much more
than a dram is gone off from the Silver in the separation.

Another way.
Also, one may put again all the Scoria's into a Crucible, and let it flow in a
wind-oven, and when it is flowed very well, the silver (with filed Iron, or
Iron-Scales and grained Lead) is to be precipitated, stir it well about, and
with the filed Iron follow it so long, till the scoria's does touch no more the
iron Hook, then lift it out of the fire, and let it cool well: In this
precipitation (with the Iron) the Sulphur will loose its strength, and lets
fall the Silver, and thus with this precipitation the most part of the Silver
settles it self in the Crucible, which with the remaining scoria's is easy to
be brought to profit, especially because it is rich in Lead.

Now, because I am just come to the scoria's, I must (in kindness to the
Reader) mention somewhat of its rare The Scoria's is malleable.
nature; for first, When the Scoria's is cast into an Ingot, while it is yet hot,
it may be hammered and beaten, as one pleases, like Lead.

figures and medals which will look like glassy Oar, and if one cast forms of
it, and turn it over, and lay it upon a gentle coal-fire, till they are warm,
then
set it over a coal-fire, and the silver will glow out of it, as if it grew in
the Mine, and, 'twill look lovely and fair: and this I signify, that any one
may use it at their pleasure, and, like an Artist, know what is to be done
therewith.

CHAP. XXXVII. How to make a Fluss for Precipitation.
Litharge, Glassgall, and melted Salt, of each a like quantity, How to make it.
small beaten, and filed Iron, and a like quantity of graind Lead, this Fluss or
fluible Composition makes the scoria's deft, so that the Gold will settle it
self the easier, and precipitate gently, and not suddenly; and if you will use
it, you may do it the more safely in the Precipitating with the Graind Lead and
Copper, lest the silver Regulus be too great.

Separation in the fluss requires diligence.
with the Separation in the fluss all in all, which is well to be observed, for
it requires a more singular and exact diligence in the Aqua fort. than in other
separations, as you will find.

The use of the Test.
Concerning the old used Crucibles and Tests, which come from such separations,
they are to be kept together, for they are not without Silver, and to make such
serviceable, set one of the old Crucibles in the Wind-Oven full of Lead, let it
drive gently, and lay the pieces of the used Crucibles one after another in it,
then the Lead will draw all that remains of the Scoria's to it self, and
becomes as washed: and you may use the same Lead, in stead of other Lead, or
add but a little of it upon the Test, and then you may make it be profitable;
for the more you keep all things together the less is the damage of the
Silver: but all is to be swept together, and washed at once alike, and then
melted for your advantage.

Separation a Crucible runs out, (as it often happens) then is this stuff and
scoria's (because it is heavy, and remains in the water) like another Silver to
be searched and found out. But, that you may see the Wind-Ovens (with all the
appertaining Instruments and Vessels to this Labor severally formed) I have in
the following Sculpture for this end delineated them.

Sculpture XXV.
Deciphered.
1. The inward part of the Wind-Oven. 2. The outward part prepared. 3. The
holes next the wind-holes. 4. The Pot in which the Sulphur and graind-Mettals
are prepared, with a fire under it, and a person attending it. 5. A single
Crucible, and a cover to it. 5. 5. 6. The iron Tongs, by which Crucibles are
put in, and taken out of the fire. 7. The Instrument in which the Crucibles are
to be set. 8. The iron Vessel into which the stuff or melted matter is to be
cast. 9. The person attending the Wind-ovens.




CHAP. XXXVIII. How to make good and sound Crucibles for separating the Fluss.
Crucibles to the Separation in the Fluss, therefore I will give here a little
Instruction how they are to be made: The chief and that of most concernment is
good Clay, that holds well in the fire, of which may be made good Crucibles.
When you have such Clay, let it be well dried in sieve, put among it the tenth
part of small beaten flint-stones, which is burnt and washed: and half so much
small ground Chalk, or in stead of that Glimer or Tallow, or in stead of these
burnt Water-flints small grownd, mingle all these well together, and moisten it
a little; work it well together with your Feet, and after with your Hands: then
take smooth pieces of Pear Tree, or other strong wood, suitable to the bigness
of the Crucibles; which may be taken in two parts asunder, on which may be laid
two iron Rings or moulds, beat and press the Crucibles into the same, but let
the upper part of the Crucible be first well oiled over, that it may the better
go out. After the preparation of the Crucible, let it be dry in the Frame, then
the Crucible will go out whole, for if the lower part be oiled, then the wet
Crucible might with the upper part, lift up it self out of the frame, and
hardly remain whole; or, take one part of Potters clay, a fourth part of good
Clay, and a fourth part of the above mentioned flind-stones: but you must
observe whether the stuff or Clay be too fat or dry, and those Portions which
you take unto it, and so you will have good Crucibles which will not fail.

Crucibles having three feet, below, upon which stand the Ovens, and need not
be set upon a foot of the Crucible; such Crucibles I much esteem of, for the
heat may easily come without hindrance of the thick bottom, that the Silver or
Metal in it, may become sooner hot, than in such Crucibles which must be set
upon a thick foot, they stand also and hold better and longer in the fire than
they which are set upon particular feet of Crucibles, especially when the feet,
as well as the Ashes of the Crucible are not so very dry, then it draws the
bottom of the Crucible, and the Moistness to it self, and cracketh it very
easily, and by this may be seen that out of a common three-footed pot (used for
boiling and casting Copper and Brass) in an hour and a half you may always
make warm and cast a Fluss of 12 pounds in a Wind-Oven; yea, one may well cast
some Fluss out of it, especially, if one have tongs to it, to lift the Pot out
of the Fire. I was willing to mention this as an Instruction, and the form of
such Crucibles you will find in the following Sculpture.

Sculpture XXVI.
Deciphered.
1. The lower part of the frame of a Press, for making Crucibles. 2. The shape
of the whole Press, and how the Crucibles are to be forced under it. 3. The
iron-Rings or Hoops about the Frame. 4. The shape of Crucibles to be made in
the Press. 5. The Handle by which the Screw of the Press is to be turned.




CHAP. XXXIX. Of Cementing, and what it is.
ART through which one may draw and separate from the Gold, Silver, Copper,
Brass, and other Metals, by a moistened Powder, that the Gold may remain
separated from its Addition and Allay: But it is only to be used to such Golds
which are not much more than half Gold, for if the Silver and Copper be more
than the Gold, to this the other Separations are better, and it is done with the
same in a shorter time, and with less labor and expense: and according as the
Gold is rich or poor, the Cements is likewise to be prepared.

Cement there appertains such stuffs and matter as will work upon the Silver
and Copper, because of their sharpness, and consume them as a sharp Salt
species, among which is to be taken Verdigrise, calcined Brass, and such like,
that they may give a fine and grateful color to the Gold, or else Lapidem
Haematitem, Crocum Martis, Tutiam, or calcined Vitriol; which Ingredients, how
to be put into the Cement, is left to every ones Liberty, but he must observe,
that he take nothing which is contrary to the Gold, or that may make it unclean
and do hurt. The Powder of Tile is to be used in the Cement, that it may
attract what the other Ingredients do scarify, and loosen, as Silver and Copper
from the Gold with their sharpness and moistness, which else would stick and
hang about the Gold, whereupon the Gold becomes fine and clean.

Therefore I have set down some Cements which I have used and found very good;
But, because in this Art of Cementing there is necessary a particular Oven,
which holds fire long, therefore I shall first mention how it is to be made,
with its Form.

CHAP. XL. How the covered Oven for Cement is to be made.
Cement, there is no better way, than to prepare such an Oven as in the
following Sculpture; and although there may be other Cement Ovens, yet I
conceive that this is the most profitable; for it will hold about 24 hours such
a continual fire, that there needs not any attending of it, and it is done
thus: Make a square of Tile-stones, the inside an Ell wide, and an Ellhigh, to
the edge (where the Oven is to be tapering) and then from the same edge to the
Tower of the Athanor is to go half an Ell high, and that the Tower of the
Athanor be an Ell and a half or two Else high, and the inside an Ell and half
wide, and so the whole Oven three Else, or three and a half high, and there
must be on the foreside of the Oven two Mouth-holes, the lower a third part of
an Ell long, and a sixth part of an Ell high, through which the wind may go,
but the upper an Ell and half a quarter wide, and so high; and by the same
Mouth-hole there must lie (in the inside of the Oven) an iron Grate, with an
edge, as in the next Sculpture marked with Figure 3. and out of the same Grate,
before the Mouth-hole in the Oven, an earthen plate upon which a Muffle as high
as the Mouth-hole is to be placed, and then under it the prepared Cement comes
to stand pure and clean, or else the Pot with the prepared Cement is to be set
in it without the Muffle: you must also make four smoak-holes upon every side
one, as in the next Sculpture at figure 4.

Cement in the Oven, and the Cement Concerning the Cement oven.
is set in, then put in above in the Athanor (or Tower) live Coals, and fill it
after with dead Coals; then cover it so as no Air may go out of it, only leave
the Mouth-hole open (marked with the Figure 1.) and the air of smoak-hole,
(noted with figure 2.) that the fire may begin, and have air; then shut all the
other air or wind-holes close, and let open only the uppermost hole of the
Tower near the cover (noted with figure 5.) About the bigness of a little
finger, that the Cement be not too hot, and not to suffer any damage.

Oven you may keep a Fire 24 hours, (as abovesaid) that there needs not much
waiting on it, nor casting fresh Coals into it, for the Coals in the Athanor
will follow one another, and keep the fire all the time in due heat (as you
please). But if there be cause to continue the heat longer than 24 hours, then
put more Coals into the Athanor, and so keep the fire as long as is needful.

Cement ovens which have been used formerly, those I leave in their esteem; and
when you have tried both, the Difference will be found.

Oven to the Cementing, then put the prepared Cement between Tile-stones in a
clean Coal-fire, and let it glow its time (as hereafter) but so that it may not
melt. Thus, you may do all the cementing: but be diligent, and careful of the
coals: Now the form of the cement Ovens may be seen in the Sculpture following.

Sculpture XXVII.
Deciphered.
1. The Athanor and lower Mouth-hole. 2. The upper Mouth-hole. 3. The Edge upon
which the iron Plate does lie on the iron Grates. 4. The Registers or Air-holes
above the Grates. 5. The little air-holes near the top of the Athanor. 6. The
stopples for the Registers or air-holes. 7. A Test fitted for the Athanor. 8.
9. Cement Pots. 10. An hook to stir the Coals. 11. A person that attends the
Furnace and works.




CHAP. XLI. How Rhenish Gold is to be Cemented.
How to prepare it.
RHENISH Gold (to cement it either in Ingot or Plate) must be beaten thin, (the
thinner the better) and cut it in littles pieces, as broad as Crowns. But if it
be Rhenish Gilders which you would have cemented and clean, then beat them a
little thinner, but if there be not much need of that, then beat them whole:
Upon such beaten Gold, or Gold Gilders the Cementing is to be done thus, Take
The first Cement Powder.
16 Loths of powder of an old dry Tile (not too hard burnt, neither too sandy)
then 8 Loths of Salt, and 4 Loths of white Vitriol, grind these Ingredients all
together small, and moisten them with Urine or sharp Vinegar, like Copel Ashes,
so is the Cement powder prepared.

Then take that which you intend to cement, glow it first in the fire, and let
it be cool, then spread some of the Powder in a Test or Pot, which is to be of
an equal wideness, a finger thick, and lay the Gold (which you must first
moisten in urine or vinegar) upon the cement Powder, one piece near the other,
as broad as the Test, then spread upon it again some of the moistened Cement
Powder half a finger thick, and upon it (as now is mentioned) the urine
moistened Gold, lay one lay upon another, until the Test or Pot be full, cover
it over with the Cement powder the thickness of one's Finger, that one may see
the Gold: then put over it another Test, or cover very well luted, that no
vapor or spirits may go out; then set the Test (or Pot) with the Gold, and
cement, thus prepared, in a Cement Oven: and observe, that it may stand in like
heat 24 hours, and glow brown, that the Gold may not flow in the cement (to
prevent Damage) for, if it should flow in the Cement, then the Silver and
Copper which the Cement has extracted, may suck in the Gold again, and thereby
all pains of beating and Cementing will be in vain.

Gold has stood in the Cement 24 hours, then shut the Oven every where, and
let it be This second Cement.
cool, then take it out and open it, and wash the Cement Powder off with warm
water, then the Gold will be found very near 23 Carats on the Content; and if
you will have it higher Gold, then do the Gold over again with another singular
fresh Cement (to which take 16 loths of Tile-pouder, and 8 Loths of Salt, and 4
loths of white Vitriol, one loath of Saltpeter, and one loath of Verdigrise) and
let it cement again (as before) 24 hours, do this till the Gold is very clean,
and high to your delight: It is done well in a few hours, but when you have
spare time, let it stand the 24 hours, it is then better and surer; But, how
much properly every Cement makes the Gold better, the proof will show.

To cement Rhenish Gilders whole.
If one lay Rhenish Guilders whole in the Cement, and cement it, then there will
not only come silver off from it, and Copper, but it will come to be of the
Content of the Hungarish Gold, yet they retain their Impression and
Circumscription, only they become lighter as much as Copper and Silver have
been in them: in this manner is to be cleansed through the Cement, a light
Gold, in an Hungarish Content: only observe, if you have according to cemented
Gold at last in clear water or lie, until all the sharpness come off from it,
so it will become cleaner, than by washing only.

This you must do with all Cements, so you will receive Gold as high as your
desire is.

CHAP. XLII. Another Cement upon light or mean Gold.
Cement must be made of two parts of the powder of Tyle, and one part
Hungarish, or other Salt; but to the other shall be taken two Ingredients, viz.
of Virdigrise, Lapis Haematites and calcined Vitriol, as much of the one as the
other, and Urine boiled very dry and small beaten, thus the Gold will become
high and fine.

CHAP. XLIII. A good Common Cement for all Golds*
The Ingredients.
TAKE fourteen loths of Tyle-powder, 4 loths of Haematites, one loath of Crocum
Martis, one loath of Verdigrise, six loths of white Vitriol, and three loths of
Saltpeter; Grind them all small, and the Gold with Urine moistened, and as
before after the first Cement, to be cemented, and it gives a very fine Gold:
Some use among this and other Cements, Antimony and Sal Gemmae, this is left to
every ones freedom: but Reason tells us, That if one cement the Gold right, as
it may be, with 2, 3 or 4 of those Ingredients, and, that it is not needful to
take above 7 or 8 of them, for, I have found it so: But, if you will do
something more for the Graduation sake, it may be done, for it is certain, That
every Gold which is very clean and high, brings his right Gold-Graduation and
fine natural right Gold-colour with it self, but one may give the Gold (besides
this) a high color, that it may excel with this color all other high Golds.
But in my Judgment, the same looks not so lovely, as a Gold which has with it
self a high fine Color.

CHAP. XLIV. More Instructions for Cementing.
Gold is cemented, and almost clean then some do use this Method, The
Composition.
they put the same Cemented Gold into an other Cement made of four parts of the
Powder of Tile, one part of Sal Armoniack, one part of Sal Gemmae, and one of
Salt, all small ground together, and the Gold moistened in Urine, and put it
into a Cement Test (lited as above) and clarified 12 hours: until the Gold
becomes very clean: But why they use Sal Armoniack among it (which uses to
touch the Gold) I cannot tell: therefore know, That it will not do it raw,
especially when it is mingled with the watery Salt, (as here) but it purifieth
rather that no other Metal (which is made loose of the other Cement, and yet
partly does hang on it, and in it) may remain.

cement, and yet are not willing to beat the Gold thin, they put it in a
*Another way.
Crucible, and grain it in a water, and when it falls thin and hollow, (as is
mentioned in the silver work) they mingle such Grains with the cement Powder,
and cover it also with it, that the graind Gold be not seen, and set it in, as
they have done with the Cement before, and when it has stood its hours, they
make the Grain clean from the cement Powder by washing it with warm water, and
set it in again, with the fresh cement-Powder. But because the Grains cannot
fall all alike thin in casting, but some are thicker than others, which the
cement cannot quite bite through, like the thin Grains, and then they grain it
(when it has been twice thus in the Cement) once more, then it will come among
the other again, and the cement will work the better, and purify the Gold.

cementing is best upon the light brickle To cement the brickle Gold.
Gold, which suffers not it self to be beaten. And though the Gold must be
graind once or twice (yet it is better, first to make the Gold deft with much
pains) and then to beat it thin: Therefore when the brickle grains are set in,
once, four or six times, and has stood in the cement, and is become clean, and
of an high content, to thy desire, then is it deft enough: For all Brittleness
and uncleanness of Tin or Brass the cement draws out of the Gold; And the
Copper and Brass is much sooner and better drawn out of the Gold, through the
cement than the silver. In this cement the Gold suffers a great damage, for
the silvers will still contain the Gold which is melted out of the cements.

Another manner.
One might also cast the clear or light Gold in thin leaf's (like as is usual in
the coin-works in casting of small Money) and then to lay the cast Ingots in
the cement in pieces, which when they are cemented twice, and so become more
deft, then one may beat them a little thinner, and cement them, and follow them
with beating and cementing till the Gold becom's very deft, and so you may beat
it thin, and then it will become high enough in the Content. By this way the
Gold may be better holden together, and the Graind may be brought out of the
Cement; and will not go into the Gold, nor will any Gold come into the Cement.

When the Gold is thus made pure by the Cement and brought upon the Content, as
one would have it, then make it clean from the Cement (as above) and do a
Crucible over with Borax, put the Gold in it, and let it flow, force it off
from the Bellows or in a wind-Oven, until it appear very bright, and holds
the blow, so is it deft, then lay a paper anointed with Wax or Tallow upon it,
and while it yet burns, cast it in an Ingot* which is done over with Wax, and
is warm, then quench the Gold in Urine, so you will have fine Gold and deft
Gold.

cementing, and have much of the used Cements in which To bring the Cement to
profit*
is the Silver, and Addition which has been in Gold, then melt the same Cement
with other sweepings which is not Goldish through a melt Oven, and bring it to
profit, so that the Silver which the Cement has sucked in out of the Gold may
be made again to profit, for the Cement takes no Gold to it.

Cement of which the Philosophers and Alchimists do write, by which one may
change Copper Philosophic Cements.
into Silver, and Silver into Gold, those I leave to their worth, for such
belong not to these Cements. For
in my Books I write nothing else, but what is natural and approved, upon which
one may trust, and not labor upon a vain hope.

CHAP. XLV. How to graduate Gold.
The first way.
GRADUATING Gold (that is to give the Gold a higher Color above its fine
natural Color, to become more red, its right high Gold color) is to be done
thus: take good Rhenish Gold, add to it as much fine Copper, cast it together,
beat it thin, and cement it off again that it may have its first Gold-weight,
then set to the Gold, and so much pure Copper again, and cast it together, beat
it thin again and cement it the second time, and so do until the Color
pleases thee: By this Process, some think the Gold may come to such an high
Color, that it will exceed the Copper in color, if it were thus cast 30 times
with the Copper, and cemented off again, only that one must use the Cement
(written hereafter) which is much better than a common Cement: namely, Take the
Powder of Tile which is well dried in the Sun, and common A very good Cement.
Salt once dissolved through the Filtre, purified and once glowed, make out of
every one, a part of small powder searsed through a hair fieve, and then put in
Roman Vitriol, first rubified, as follows: Take good red Vinegar distilled
through an Alimbeck, and in this dissolve the Vitriol, and purify it through a
Filtre, fair and clear, and let it evaporate upon warm Ashes till you find it
fair, then put it in a new Pot, set it betwixt Coals, and stir it about with a
little wooden stick, till it becomes blood Red, let it be cool, and grind it
small, and then it is rubified: also take Verdigrise, and dissolve it in
distilled Vinegar, and distill it by Filtration, and let it evaporate, and glow
it, as you have done with the Vitriol: Take also so much Sal Armoniack,
dissolved in red Vinegar: and of these now mentioned powders, take of one so
much as of the other, mingle them well, and sprinkle them with the Vinegar
wherein the Sal Armoniack was dissolved, so is the Cement prepared.

Gold with the Copper, alike in weight, and then to cast it through Another
Sort.
Antimony, and then blow it off and purify it, and again with the Copper, and
so mingle and cast it through so often till the Gold receives thy desired high
Color: I believe also, That if one can have good Antimony, that it will give
the Gold an higher Color.

Graduations may be done thus, That one may make a Powder of two parts Copper,
and one part of Sulphur; Calcine them together till no blew flame goes off
them, so you have a Graduation Powder, grind it: and when this Powder is used,
the Gold will be of a little lighter Content.

How the Gold smiths may Gild.
Of such high Graduated Gold, and how to be used, many of the Philosophers do
write, but it is nothing to this, for in my Judgment, when it is indifferently
brought high, it may be most convenient for the Goldsmiths to use for guilding,
that they may reach the further with it, because of the Color, yet it is free
to every one to make Experience of it.

CHAP. XLVI. How to make brickle Gold, deft.
Art of the Coin-workers and Goldsmiths and other Gold-workers, and indeed it
is a fine and useful Art, not to every one known, and is necessary to be know
to all Goldsmiths: For there are several ways to make the Gold deft, only one
is more easy and better than the other. And I will here show some ways, which
partly I have tried my self, and out of which every one, according to his
occasion may take Instruction, to use that which will be most convenient for
him.

Hungarish Crowns or Rhenish Gold.
When you have the brickle Gold (it may be Hungurian Crowns or Rhenish Gold) and
would make it deft, then do it thus: First, Cast the brickle Gold into an
Ingot, then put it in a Crucible in a coined Oven or before the Bellows, and
give it a strong fire, and observe when the Gold sweateth, and will soon flow:
Then cast good purified Salt petre upon it, so the Gold will Salt Petre.
burn, because of the Salt petre, and quickly flow, and as soon as it flows,
then the Salt petre will quite cover the Gold, then you must not drive it hard,
so as you may not see the Gold under the Salt Petre, but pour it out under it,
into an Ingot, luted with Wax, so is it Deft; Calx viva.
some use among the Salt Petre, Calx Viva, it does the same, and the Gold
becomes deft.

But if it should be neglected, that the Gold in the settling in, might flow in
the Crucible, before the Salt Petre were cast upon it, then pour it out again
into an Ingot, and put it in again, for else it will not be smooth and deft
although you do cast much Salt Petre upon it; but if the Gold (as in the
Rhenish Gold sometimes happens) were not too brittle, that it at once does not
become very deft, then put it in the second time, and it will become deft,
although there may be Brass in it.

Salt Petre, and that it appears and may be seen under the Salt Petre, then
it is not deft, for the brittleness drives it self again out of the Salt Petre
into the Gold, therefore it is to be observed, That the Salt Petre be cast upon
it in the right time, and also the Gold cast out again, in the right time, and
so you will have deft Gold*

CHAP. XLVII. Another way to make Gold, Deft.
By a flat Test.
CONCERNING the good Gold, or of Hungarish Content, if the same be brickle, then
take a flat Test, made for it on purpose, that the Gold may have room upon it,
Lute it over with pure Littarge, and set the Gold upon it (yet you must not set
in it, at once, above two Mark) and set the Test with the Gold before the
Bellows, and drive it; But if it will not endure the blowing, then add a little
Ball of good clean Lead, and drive it again, until it will endure the Bellows
and become deft, then put it in a Crucible, and cast it into an Ingot, and
quench it in Urine, and so the Gold will be deft, one may also cause the Gold
to flow with fresh coals, upon a flat Test, and then drive it, and this also
does well.

To bring the Gold clean out of the Crucible.
But if you will cast such Gold (if it be good or light) out of the Crucible on
a Plate, then take a Paper, and dawb it over with Wax and Venetian Soap, cast a
little piece upon it, and while it yet burns, lift the Crucible off, and cast
the Gold out under the flames, and so it will remain warm and have no scum, and
cast it self clean, that nothing may remain hanging on the Crucible.

When the Gold is brickle by an evil Vapor.
If a good or Hungarian Gold becoms brickle, because of an unclean Fire or bad
smoke, then it may also be made deft, upon a flat Test, with the Bellows, or
one may, when it is cast into an Ingot, lay in one of the before written Cement
Pouders, an hour or two, and so it will become deft.

Or melt it with good Venetian Borax, and drive it before the Bellows, till it
endures the blowing, or in defect of all these Ingredients, if a Gold be only
brickle by an evil smoke, then make it deft with Venetian Soap, and let the
Venetian Soap burn upon the Test, then there will remain a gray Powder, which
you may use instead of the Borax, and so the Gold may be cast clean.

Brickle Gold in the Fluss, Mercurium Sublimatum.
Mercurium Sublimatum, and blow the Gold with it, and it will be deft (which is
a good way) others on the contrary use yellow Sulphur, but the Gold must be
cast out soon after it, or take Antimony, and cause it to flow in a Crucible,
and when it is flowing, then they cast as much Sulphur, Antimony, Glass.
Sulphur and Argol in it, and let it stand so long in the fire, till it becoms
a Glass, and with this Glass the brittle Gold is to be driven deft.

Goldsmiths use a Powder, made of Brass calcined and Verdigrease, but it should
not be so, for both these species are Metallish and go in the Gold, by which it
becomes higher or meaner.

Gold Deft upon the Copel.
WHEN you have good Gold, set it with Lead upon a Copel, and let it be very hot
that it may stand pure and clean upon the Copel, but before it hardens upon it,
put it with the Tongs gently on the Copel, that the Gold may simper and quiver;
do this till it becoms hard and stands still, then it is deft, but if it
harden upon the Copel, before it be moved, then it is not deft, but all such
Gold receives a pale color of the Lead.

Gold Deft, which are often used of many, yet I will not set them down (for
brevity sake) but leave it to every ones freedom, to follow mine or their own
Instructions, only I desire they would dilligently observe my meaning, not only
in this, but in all my Books, and not neglect Alterations
the Work it self, then I hope they will find it right, as they desire, and the
Work will judge it self. For such a thing cannot well be so pictured on paper,
as thereby to judge and comprehend all out of the writing, but by reading
Instruction comes, and by Practice the Experience.

CHAP. XLIX. How to cast Gold through Antimony.
Through fine Gold.
IT is an old Invention to cast Gold through Antimony, so that the Gold by it
may be made very clean and fine, and therefore, they have supposed, this to be
the only means, and none else besides, by which such may be done. Now this is
true (when the Antimony is good) that the Gold may be brought out very high,
and almost fine out of the same, so that it will become the finest Gold that
is, and no Cement can be made like it. But because Antimony is not all alike
good, but some much better than the other, therefore the Gold becomes some
finer than the other: so it is not well to trust to this, that the Gold should
always come out sure and very clean. And although the casting through Antimony
be used sometimes upon many Marks of Gold, yet it is not taught so, that all
such with it may be brought out very fine, and upon the highest Content, but it
may satisfy, if it be brought in the quantity, upon the Content of good
Duccats, for by the higher driving, the Antimony comes into the Gold, and
without a singular Care in purifying of it, it goes much more off, than by
Cementing; therefore the best casting through is upon a little Gold (to bring
such almost very fine and to the highest) which is done thus, If the content of
the Gold be of 16, 17, 18 or 20 Carats, and you would make it very pure and
fine, then take one part of the Gold (if it be of a pretty rich Content) and
two parts of good clean Antimony (because the clean Gold is sooner to be cast
through) put it together in a a Crucible, blow it, let it flow, and when well
flown together, then pour it into a warm Cup, made of Iron or Brass, and
greased with Tallow or Wax, let the Antimony and the Gold be cool in it, then
you must turn the Cup, and dash it upon a stone, whereby the Antimony may go
together with the Regulus (which has settled below and looks of a gray- yellow
color) and be easily beaten out.) But that you may bring the Gold upon the
highest Content, cast such Regulus once or twice more with fresh Antimony, and
at all times into the Cup, after set the Regulus upon a flat Test in the fire,
blow to it, and it will melt quickly, but blow with the Bellows very gently, so
that it may just blow upon the Gold in the Test, and do this until the Antimony
be evaporated, again very clean from the Gold, and that the Gold do endure the
blowing well, and becomes deft, then let it be cool, and quench it in Urine,
cast it then to thy pleasure, so you have very fine and high Gold, which is
judged fine Gold.

To cast through poor Gold.
But if the Gold be poor upon the Content, or very light, then take more of the
Antimony, and add to a Mark of Antimony 4 Loths of Sulphur, and cast the Gold
through with it, as has been said, and put in the Regulus with fresh Antimony,
the second and third time without the Sulphur: Lastly, drive it upon the Test,
that the Gold may become very clean: you may also take to such casting through,
upon every Mark of Gold, 4 Loths of Copper or scales of Copper, so it will
receive a fine color from it, but when you take Copper to it then take the
more Antimony that it may consume it and the Addition.

Another upon light Gold.
Some use to the casting of light Gold, which contains of it, from 12 to 18
carats, a singular Powder of one part Sulphur the other Antimony, and one part
of prepared Caput Mort. and take to it of Mark Gold, 12 Loths: let it flow well
together, then cast it into the Cup, and beat the Regulus from the slacks, and
cast it with half so much Antimony again twice or thrice, then drive it upon a
Test, so you have good high Gold.

Now, how the Cup, Ingot and other Instruments to the casting through are to be
formed, the following Sculpture will show.

Sculpture XXVIII.
Deciphered.
1. The Form of the Common Cup, cast in Brass. 2. A Cup made of Smiths work. 3.
A Crucible for the Work. 4. A flat Test for it. 5. The Ingot. 6. The Plates. 7.
Of Antimony with a Gold Regulus. 8. Of Antimony when the Gold Regulus is beaten
from it.




To lay t^^ Gold which is cast through the Cement.
When the Gold which is come out of the casting through, is blown clean, yet it
may retain a smack of the Antimony: to prevent this: Beat the Gold very thin,
lay it in a particular Cement made on purpose, as is mentioned in the
Description of the Cements: Let it stand some hours in it, so it will extract
such also, and becomes clean.

CHAP. L. How the Blick or light Gold, containing much Silver, is to be
separated.
THE Silvery rich Gold, especially that which comes of from melting, of which a
Mark contains from 9, to above 12 Carats off fine Gold, this is to be separated
thus: Grain it in a boiling Water (as above is said of the fine, thin and even
Silver) then prove it, so as it has a like Content, then take the Grained and
moisten it with water, and take to every Mark (of the abovementioned Pouders)
12 loths, of good yellow Sulphur, and mingle it with them, and put it in to a
glazed Pot, luted with a cover, and make a fire round about it, till the Powder
on the grained be well flown; let it cool, then beat the Pot in pieces, then
take and put the grained into a Crucible, set it in a Wind-Oven, let it flow
very well, and cast upon it a little ground Sandover, mingled with grained
Lead, let it stand a little longer, then pour it into a warm luted Iron Mortar,
and if much of it setleth to a Regulus on the bottom, and the Silver becomes a
scorias, then beat it off from the Gold Regulus, which will be yellow and gray,
but because the Silver of the first Fluss, will not all come into the scorias,
therefore grain the Gold once more, and prepare it with the Powder, and let it
flow, and pour it again into the Mortar; Lastly, take the Gold, and cast it
through only with the Antimony, blow that which is cast through upon a Test,
and cast it clean, so you will have good and Deft Gold; This casting through,
is a way if one have need of the Gold in have, else there are other and better
ways, namely, when the Gold is cast once or twice with Sulphur, that it may be
driven deft, and then cast into an Ingot, then beaten thin and cemented,
whereby not so much will go off from the Gold, but it requires greater time.

To cast the used Antimony.
The used Antimony, through which you have cast at last the Gold, retain singly,
and put it again in a Crucible, and let it flow well, and add to it filed Iron,
so much, that the stirring-hook with which you stir it about, may no more be
touched, so the Antimony, eats it self The Iron (...)s the virtue of the
Antimony.
weak on the Iron, (which it does easily touch) and does let the Silver and Gold
fall, as much as it has with it, then pour it into a Mortar, and according to
the quantity, the Regulus will settle it self on the bottom, this retain singly
or apart.

To beat down (through casting) the Scorias.
The scorias which is come from the first casting (as above is mentioned) put
likewise into a Crucible, and beat down the Silver in it with grained Lead and
filed Iron, as long until the scorias, with the Iron Hook (that stir*reth it
about) touches no more, by this time, almost all the Silver will fall down,
and of this Silver, retain also a part.

The remaining scorias with the Antimony, which is left out of the Silver and
Gold, (as now signified) being precipitated; take them together and put the
Lead upon a Flat Test, or in an unglazed Clay Dish, set two of them within one
another, and when it is entered, then let it go off upon a Test (as is usual)
and observe when the entered Lead begins to drive upon the Test and goes clean,
then put the Silver Regulus (which is fallen out of the scorias) upon a Test,
that it also may go off clean, and then this Silver Proof upon Gold, will show
how rich it is in Gold; also prove the Regulus, which is fallen out of the
Antimony upon Gold. If now the same Regulus, (which before by it self is to be
burnt upon a Test) be not very rich in Gold, then put it also among the Silver,
and separate it apart in Aqua fort. and you will hardly find a nearer way to
make such Gold clean: and although this Instruction looks as if there were an
Ambiguous way, yet it is not; but when one is in work, then it goes soon to an
end; for the Gold, thus with the Sulphur and Antimony prepared, flows easily,
and thereby many castings may be done in a day, or in half a day* yet every one
may require a consideration, how the best is to be done.

CHAP. LI. How to separate the used Antimony*
To Refine Antimony.
IN regard that the burnt Antimony keeps back somewhat of Gold, yet there
remains Gold and Silver in it, now to bring this clean out of it (which is
called to refine the Antimony) do it thus: Put the used Antimony together, in a
Crucible, and if it be a pound, then add 4 Loths of filed Iron, 1 Loath of
Copper, 4 Loths of Lead, and 4 Loths of Littarge to it, let it flow well
together, then cast it into a Cup, or let it cool in the Crucible, then set the
Antimony again in the Crucible, and beat it down with a little grained Lead and
Littarge, and cast upon it To precipitate it.
melted Salt; let it stand well in the Glass, and cast it into the Cup, then
drive off the Regulus which comes out of it, upon a Test, then you will
receive the Gold and Silver, as much as the Antimony had retained; this you may
cast once more through with fresh Antimony, and so the Gold will come out, yet
the Antimony will retain still some of the Gold, (which comes in the Silver,
made out of the Antimony) and this is to be separated in the Aqua fort. and if
it be too rich in Gold, then must be added to it, fine Silver, that the Water
may touch it.

Antimony thus, they take a part of Antimony and one part of Vitriol, one part
of grained Lead, one part of Salt Petre, three quarters of filed Iron, and a
little Copper, and this they put into a Test, and let it evaporate, so there
will remain among them another mixed matter, to this they add (according to the
quantity of the Antimony) more fresh Lead, and boil it clean up, then drive the
Lead off upon the Test, and so will it find in it self the Silver and Gold,
which the Antimony has had by it self.

Rich Antimony.
When the Antimony is very Rich in Gold and Silver, then may it be made pure, as
follows (and it is the best cleansing, only that it takes much labor and
somewhat longer time) Take the Antimony, put it upon a Test, let it flow well,
and add to it filed Iron, and stir it about always with an Iron, and cast as
much of the filed Iron into it, until the Iron, with which you stir it, touch
no more the Antimony (as before mentioned) which is then very easy to be seen;
then add to the same Antimony, Lead, and boil it clean up, by this addition of
the Iron, the wildness is taken away from the Antimony, so that then (which is
very easily boiled up) it will go clean off upon the Test, and will not work
upon the Test, which is a good way.

CHAP. LII. How Gold may be made fine and clean through Aqua Regis.
BECAUSE the Aqua Regis touches only the Gold and not the Silver, therefore I
judge the Gold may be made purest and finest by this way. Take good high Gold,
set it upon a good Test, made on purpose for it) let it go off upon it, with
clean Lead, that you may be sure no Copper remains in it, then blow the Gold
upon the Test, unless it become deft, then beat it thin, glow it, and then put
it in a good and well luted Glass Bottle, pour upon it Aqua Regis, and dissolve
all the Gold, and what will not dissolve but remain in the bottom of the Glass,
that is no Gold; then pour the Aqua Regis (in which the dissolved Gold is,)
clean off, and put it in another glass Bottle, and draw the water from it, then
the Gold will remain in the glass Bottle; cast it together and blow it clean,
and this Gold thus prepared may be judged, as fine Gold, because the Aqua Regis
touches nothing
but Gold and Copper, and if the Gold be first made clean from the Copper, upon
the Test, then can nothing else but pure Gold come out of the Aqua Regis, but
how much good Aqua Regis (as I have said) is to be made, of this, you have been
sufficiently instructed before.

Thus much Courteous READER, I was willing to describe of the Gold Oars and
their Labor, as a furtherance to Experience, and for the use of common
Mine-Workers, and young Assayers, and so leave it to further Consideration.

The END of the second Book.
OF Copper OARS.BOOK III.
CHAP. I. How to know Copper Oars.
Third Book describes Copper Oars, and how they are to be known, The Purpose
of this Book.
and then how to assay them, as also of the Black Copper; and lastly, how the
pure Copper is to be tried, and also how after the High Dutch and Hungaan
manner the Silver is to be refined out of Copper, with Instructions annexed of
a singular new way to refine Copper, and how Brass is to be made out of Copper,
and how white Iron may be made Copper.

Copper Oars are more easily to be known than Coper Oars yield fine Colors.
any other metallic Oars, as having in them varieties of Colors, so that many
more delicate colors come out of them then from any other metallic Oars. And
of these there are three sorts.

Copper Glass.
First, Copper Glass, and this is to be numbered among the deft, and smooth
flowery Copper Oars, for the Copper-Glass Oars which are bluish, (and yet
their color come near to Gray) are the richest Copper Oars, and contain the
most Copper and Silver, and yield deft and good Copper.

Secondly, the green Coppers which are rich in Copper but poor in Silver, also
the fair lazure colored Copper or blew and Green-mixt-copper-Oars contain
likewise much Green and lazure Colors.
and good Copper, but generally very little Silver.

brown copper Oars (like an iron Vein) Brown Copper.
if they be either harsh or mild, yet they are found rich in Copper but poor in
Silver: likewise also the copper shiffers (in which there are Characters or
Figures of Fishes, called Gamahes.
Snails, and other Resemblances and representations of corporeal Creatures) and
also rich in copper, and commonly do contain Silver.

Oars and shiffers that have no flinty, speizy or other harsh matter within
them, are to be reckoned among the soft flowing Oars.

Copper flint.
But there appertains to the harsh flowing copper Oars, the harsh copper Flint,
and what is splendy, mispickly, glimery or spady, as also all flint Oars by
themselves without any other Oars mingled with them, or shiffers in which the
copper flint does stand streamingly intermixed.

Copper stone.
Also the raw slack stone, copper-stone (Oven-breachers occasioned from melting
such raw Oars.)

Now, as the silver Oars are known before the proving and melting, (as to their
natures) and how they may do in the fire, so it must be known likewise with the
copper Oars, that one may help them in proving and melting: And because they
differ, therefore the raw, unflowing copper oars do not prove like the weal
flowing and mild, as will follow in my Instructions, but it must first be
shown how the Assay Crucibles also the little Ovens for proving copper Oars are
to be made, (and in case of necessity) that an Assayer himself may prepare his
stuff and Instruments.

CHAP. II. How to make Crucibles and Ovens to prove Copper.
copper Oars which are to be proved for Copper, one must have little and good
Crucibles for them, which the Goldsmiths do use: But, because they are not to
be had in every place good, and in a fit Mould, therefore I Judge it
convenient, That every Assayer do make such himself.

Crucible form.
To the making such Crucibles, Frames or Moulds of Brass are necessary (or of
Pear Tree wood, so that one may put on it an Iron ring, that the Mould may not
be so apt so break.)

The Clay.
The stuff or clay out of which you intend to make such Crucibles, prepare them
of Potters Clay, like the Tests for making Proofs of Silver Oars (as is before
signified) then take a Ball of such Clay (as much as you think fit) and press
it into the frame or mould, so that the Clay on the sides may well go up and in
the middle remain a pretty deep hole: after the manner that the Crucible is to
be: then anoint the upper part over with Bacon, or Oil; and put it into the
Frame, in which the Clay is to be pressed until it touches the top of the
Frame, then turn the upper part of the Frame downwards, and that which is put
in will easily be drawn out again; and thus the Crucible is formed in the
frame, as it ought to be, set also the frame (while the Crucible stands yet in
it) a little while before the Sun to be warmed, then the Crucible will go out
very well and sound, and, although it might be pressed out otherwise, yet it
cannot be done so conveniently as when it has stood a little near the warmth,
because thereby the Clay does shrink, so that the Crucible by that heat may
well fall out of it self.

But why the lower part of the Frame must not be fastened, the reason is, that
the Crucible may be lifted out of the upper part of the frame, and it could not
be brought off again without spoil, therefore it is better the lower part
remain ungreased, that the Crucible may be brought out whole. But when the
stuff is made very brittle, and the clay not fast, then anoint the lower part
with fat, and the Crucible will easily be brought out with your fingers, and so
remain whole.

Thus they make Assay- Crucibles, and when they are well dried, let them burn
in a Potters-Oven, or a Tile-Oven, yet let them not be set in too strong a heat
(lest they melt) and they must be taken out in time.

little Ovens, (wherein they use Little Ovens for Copper. Proof.
to take the Copper proofs) the best are prepared of Potters stuff or Clay, to
be set and used at pleasure: and make them thus, Take the prepared
Potter-stuff, and form of it a little round- Oven, the diameter nine inches
wide, with which the Proof-Oven uses to be divided, (of which Instruction is
given in the first Book) and 12 inches high, and in the midst a Belly of 11
Inches, and no bottom below, yet it must be an Inch and half thick, and as much
as the clay shrinketh, so much must be added again, and whilst it is yet soft,
it must be cut in the edges, that one may put Iron-hoops about it, and with
Cross- Bars join the upper and lower Hoops, or else it will very easily fall
asunder: Now, when this Oven is very well dried in the Sun (or warm place) then
let it be burnt hard in a Potters or Tile-Oven, and lute it well about with the
Iron-hoops and bonds (as has been already taught)

After this make a foot with a bottom, to this Oven of Potters stuff, being
three square fingers deep within, and just so broad as the little Oven below,
having a hole in the side, as wide as the breadth of a large Finger, through
which the Bellows is to blow (as you will hear hereafter) and there may be an
edge within the top upon which you may lay a little Iron-Grate, as in the
Sculpture: this foot must also be burnt in a Potters- Oven, and bound about
with iron-hoops and bonds, as the Oven: then lay the Iron-Grate in it, and set
the Oven upon it, then it is prepared as it ought to be.

Now, when you will prove in it, set it upon the Grate, in the little Oven, on
a little foot made of Poters Clay, which must be three square fingers high, but
not full three fingers broad above, upon which the Crucible is to stand with
the Proof.

Also there must be little Covers to the Copper-Proofs, which must be put to,
or luted upon the Assay Crucibles: and they must also be made of Potters-stuff,
and burnt as the other, but not by a sudden heat lest they crack: and be
careful to cover the Crucibles, that no Coals or uncleanness fall therein,
whereby the proof may become false.

little Oven be made, just in the form and wideness as before, only that it
have a Bottom and Another Form of a little Oven.
be 14 Inches high from the bottom, and that two inches from the bottom there be
two holes quite through it, in which you must fix two Iron Bars a finger thick,
and lay upon it a little iron Grate (like that before) and under the Grate let
there be made a hole of a finger wide for the Bellows, This little Oven which
also must be Hoopt about with Iron, and is in all things like the other only
this is whole, but the other may be taken asunder in two pieces.

A little Oven of Tiles.
In case you want Bellows to such Ovens, there is another Oven to be made, in
which the proofs may be proved: thus, Take burnt Tiles, join them together in a
square, about a span wide, with good Clay, and lute the joynings with it, and
leave a Wind-hole before, as wide as the Oven is, a Tile and half high, and
over the Wind-hole in the Oven, lay a little Grate of Iron, and four square
Bars, a finger thick, and a span high from the Grate, so is your little Oven
prepared, but before you prove in it, you must glow it with fire; that it
vapor not in proving, then set upon the little Grate a little foot, for the
Crucible to stand on, and when the Crucible with the proof is set in, and coals
and fire put upon it, and that it grows warm, then fan in some air with a wing,
by the Wind-hole in the little Oven, so the wind will ascend through the Grate
into the fire strongly, and the Copper-Proof will boil it self up in the
Crucible: This is an easy way for preparing this little oven, but you must
observe to do things exactly, that the Proof may be complete in the fire.

Copper Proving Furnaces (such as Goldsmiths have) to boil up the Proofs
before Proof of Furnaces.
the Bellows: but I judge because the blowing in the Furnace goes but on one
side of the Crucible, therefore the Proofs cannot be so well boiled up on all
sides, as with Bellows which go from below upwards. Also when the Bellows blow
but on one side, the Crucible is apt to break, especially when it is not good:
therefore how the abovementioned Ovens are to be formed within and without, is
showed in the Sculpture following.

Sculpture XXIX.
Deciphered.
1. The inside of the little Oven made of Tiles. 2. The same, when it is closed.
3. The foot of the Crucible upon the Grate. 4. The little Oven of Potters-Clay,
bound with Hoops. 5. The foot of it. 6. The iron Grate in it. 7. The Crucible
upon the Grate with the proof in it. 8. The Wind-hole through which the Bellows
are put. 9. The Whole little Oven open with the Bottom. 10. The Iron-hoops
which go about it. 11 12 13 The Bellows, Brush and Instruments.




CHAP. III. How to make a Fluss to prove Copper Oars.
TAKE two parts of Argol, and one part of Sulphur, grind them small and mingle
them, put it in an unglazed Pot, then put live Coals in it, when it begins to
burn in the Pot, let it burn till it gives over of it self, let the Pot be
cool, so the Fluss is prepared; then take it out of the Pot, put the Coals
away, and keep the Fluss small ground in a
warm place, so it will remain good; for, if it be set in a cool and moist
place, it will turn to oil: or, take the pot, let it be warm, pour the Fluss
into it, and cover it; thus the Fluss will kindle it self in the pot, and burn
out: this Fluss is to be used to good and deft Copper Oars: But what be flinty,
and other Oars which are hard to separate, to such this Fluss is too weak, and
there must be something added to it, as you will hear in the sequel.

CHAP. IV. How soft flowing Copper Oars are to be proved.
RICH smooth-flowing and good copper Oars (which are not flinty and speizey)
prove them thus, Grind the Oar small, and weigh of it with thy proof-weights
two Centners, and put them in a Crucible, and three times so much of the before
mentioned Fluss, both well mingled, and cover the Crucible above the Oar and
Fluss with common Salt a full finger thick, press it down and cover the
Crucible luted with Clay, that it go not off, nor Coals fall therein, and make
a fire in one of the said little Ovens, set the Crucible upon the little foot,
cover it with Coals higher than a hand breadth, let it be warm, and blow
through the hole under the Grate, that the wind may go alike round about the
Crucible, and let it stand a while in the fusion, so the proof will boil clean
up, and if the Crucible does not break, then take the upper fire off and lift
the Crucible hot, out of the Oven: set it upon a plain Tile, that if the Grains
of Copper be not run altogether, it may be helped: Then let the Crucible cool,
open it, and in the bottom you will find a grain of Copper which is fine. For
these good smooth Oars will yield fine Copper: Then draw it up with thy
proofweights, and try how many pounds of Copper a Centner of Oars does yield.
But you must observe in the proving, that you drive not the proof too hard in
the Crucible, for the Copper will burn, and drive it self very easy in the
slacks, as one may see in the slacks; (which will soon receive the color of
the Copper Oars) for when they are very red in the Crucible: then the
Copper-Proof is driven too hard, and the Content is lighter, but if the slacks
are brown, then the Proof is made.

CHAP. V. How hard flowing Copper Oars are to be proved.
Oars are not to be proved The manner of it.
as the smooth, but in another manner: thus, Take the Copper Oars, beat them as
small as the Seeds of Hemp, and and mingle them together: weigh two Centners of
it in the proof-weight, put it in a proof-Test, set it in a proof- Oven, give
it a very gentle fire, that it may begin to roast it self, then stir it with an
iron about the Test, else the Oar will turn to Ashes together in the Test, and
will not roast: and when it is stirred the first time, then give it a little
stronger fire, that it may glow well, lift it out of the Oven, and let it cool,
then put it in the Oven again, and let it roast again until it has done
smoking (and smells not of Sulphur) then grind it a little smaller, yet not so
small as Mill-dust, and roast it again till it stinks no more Sulphurish, then
stir* it once or twice with the little hook, that it may not be ashes again.

The Oar burnt quite dead.
time, let it cool, and set it the third time in the Assay- Oven, then roast it,
and grind it very small, then wash it once more that it may be burnt quite
dead, then grind it again very small, so is it prepared for the Proof. Then
divide the Oar upon a Balance in two equal parts, and put one part in an
Assay-Crucible with 3 times so much of the foresaid Fluss, and with a fixed part
of flowing Glass-Gall, mingle them well in the Crucible, and cover it with
common or flowing Salt (as in the proof before) and lute it over on the top
with Clay, that the Cover be fast, so that no Coals may fall in, then set it in
a little Oven, blow the Bellows, give the proof a strong sudden fire (a little
stronger then the former proof) and when the proof has stood in a pretty good
Fluss, then lift the Crucible out of the fire, and let it cool, and break it,
and so you may find in the bottom a Grain of black Copper, of such Goodness as
the Oar and Flint is in the melting, and may thereby get Copper, which is the
right proof of it.

flinty Oar, fairer Copper than of another, and commonly all flints which are
of an Some Copper not fit for Brass.
iron Nature) yields iron streamy Copper, therefore they are not to be used for
making of Brass.

Of this graind Copper (as it comes out of the Proof) weigh it with a Centner
weight, then you may see how many pound of black Copper, a Centner of flint or
raw Coper Oar do yield, so you may easily reckon how many such Centners, do
afford one Centner of Copper: and know therefore, that if you do weigh two
Centners of flinty Oars to the proof, if the proof should be amiss, then you
have a Centner more of the roasted Oar or flint, to make another proof,
otherwise it will be a great hindrance to roast but one Centner to the Proof.

But on the contrary, the old Assayers have used this Method, and proved every
Copper Oar or flint upon pure Copper, and thereby know how many Centners of it,
will yield one Centner of pure Copper: this I believe to be a just proof for
them, who have roasted and purifyed the Copper themselves. But those who work
the Silver in it, and sell it with the Silver, it is better for them to know
how many Centners of black Copper they may have in a roast, so they may know
how many Loths of Silver, a Centner of black Copper contains.

And among all meltings, the Operation of Copper (upon which is to be made a
proper Account) is the most pleasant and fairest Experiment; for if the Proof
be
right, then what is produced will be so too.

To boil Oars for Copper.
Therefore, if you will (with the old Assayers) prove the Copper-Oars upon
boiled Copper, do it thus, Grind the Oars small, weigh of it two Centners: if
they be unflowing or flinty then roast them (as above) in an Assay- Crucible,
and weigh to it four Centner of Fluss or Lead-glass, made of Littarge and
Flint-stones (as in the first Book of Silver Oars) and mingle them well, and
cover it with Salt, and also cover the Crucible, and set it in a little Oven
before the Bellows: and let it flow like another Copper- Proof, and when it is
cool open the crucible, and in the Bottom is the Regulus, among which is
copper, and lead together, put it upon a flat Test luted with Littarge, drive
it till the copper appears to be of a clear Green, then lift the Graind-copper
from the Test, and quench it in Water, and weigh it with thy Proof Weight, so
you may find how many pound of boiled copper you have from two centners of
flinty-copper Oar in the Proof: one may also very easily burn the copper,
especially if the Oar be poor in copper (as you may find by the Operation).
Therefore I conceive it better, to prove the copper Oars first upon black
copper, and then upon boild copper: and this way, the Proof of the light
contenty copper Oars cannot so easily be hurt.

CHAP. VI. How to prove light Coppers.
copper-Oars (especially the copper Flints and copper-Glass which are in the
Mountains or in light shiffer Mines) they must be proved thus; Take a common
Proof of the Oar, grind it well, and weigh with thy Proof weight twenty or more
centners, and draw it in a Vessel, so that therewith the light clay may be
separated from the pure slick and copper Oars; weigh the slick which comes from
it, thus, and mark how many centners yields a pound, that you may know how many
centners of raw Oar (from the Rock or vein in the Mine) do yield a clean
centner.

centners of such pure slick, and put them in an Assay-test, to be roasted in
an Oven (as you have done with the copper Oars) but that the proof may not be
false, (because the slick does use to sparkle in the first setting of it into
the great heat, especially if pibbles be among it,) therefore cover the Test
wherein the weighed slick is, with another Test; let it remain thus covered
till the slick glow well; then take off the upper Test, and roast the slick (as
you are instructed before) and then grind it very small, and divide it into
two equal parts, and mingle one of them with the Fluss (appertaining to the
copper Oars) and put it into a crucible, covered with Salt, and do as you have
done above with the harsh copper Oars, and you will find in the bottom of the
crucible, a grain of copper: then weigh this with your Proof-weight, so you may
know out of how many centners or quantities of such raw, rocky or washwork you
may make of a centner of black copper, which grained copper you may prove
afterward for Silver, and find the Content, and may order thy matters
accordingly.

copper-Oars, I have put here because experience manifests, That the Copper
Oars do not break throughout clean upon the Veins, but have much flint and
subtle copper-glass mingled with them, yet in the washing they do willingly
separate from it, and bring it into such a compass that one may know that all
the rest of the Oars from those Veins may be wrought to good profit, which
could not be, if they should be melted raw.

Shiffer which contains very little Copper, they cannot well be brought into
compass, for they rise for the most part in the Water, and are fugitives,
although some do separate in the water, and afford a slick, and thus they may
be brought into compass, and may be thus proved, and made to profit like the
other Oars.

Copper-flint will stand apparently mixed and streamy, in some shiffers which
are to be proved either raw or among others, or the shiffer apart whereby it
may be found what copper the Shiffer does yield, and the melting ordered
accordingly.

copper-Oars (as Lasure Copper green, or brown rich copper-Oars) cannot be well
separated in the water from their mixtures, for they are very light, and run
not in weight, like the other flints, but go forth in the water, therefore such
are first to be proved for Silver, if they have none (as commonly they are
poor) then it is not much to try, but if they contain Silver, glow them hard, and
suddenly quench them in cold water, then the insperged or mixed Copper Oars will
run together in little Grains (as above is signified of the Gold Oars) then
wash and grind them small, and draw it into a slick, and when it separates,
then you may in the great Work according to the quantity of slicks regulate
your self. But how these copper Oars are to be dried in the little oven, you
will be directed hereafter.

CHAP. VII. How light Copper Oars which are mixed and insperged with flint, may
be brought to profit.
THE light flinty insperged copper Oars (by reason of their hardness and
unflowingness) cannot well (in a great quantity) be melted thoroughly, or
brought to profit (the flint being so hard, and before it becoms small enough
in the Beating) it makes insperged oars, subtle, and rise in the water:
therefore there can no surer or better Method be found for such Oars, than to
roast them in an high roast Oven, made on purpose, (as before is often
mentioned.) And when it burns to a great heat, pour water upon it, and let it
cool suddenly, so the frighted Metal will run together in grains in the flints,
which are heavy, and remain fast by setting them in the water, and then they
may be washed and separated, and that which is not clean Copper will be a good
and heavy Copper-stone, that so the flinty copper Oars (when they are roasted
and are brittle) may very easily (in a great quantity) be buck'd through, and
the Metal which is gathered may be washed, or so much of it, as in one
gathering can be melted thoroughly (like raw Oar) which is to be made into ten
or more equal parts. And the roast Oven which is to be used to this Washing,
may be formed (as in the first and second Book of flinty Gold Oars) are more
fully described.

CHAP. VIII. How to prove Copper Oar from Copper-stone.
IF one would try and prove Copper Oars especially the flinty (containing much
or little Copper, called raw slack-stones, or raw Copper-stones) you must doit
thus; Grind the Copper oars or the flint small, weigh from it two Centners, put
them thus, unroasted in an Assay-crucible, and weigh to it four Centners of the
fluss made of Salt petre, and Argol (as before) with two centners of flowing
Glass-galls, mingle all in the crucible and cover it (like a copper-Oar) with
Salt, and set it in a little Oven, and boil it up also before the Bellows, and
let it be cold, then you will find in the bottom of the crucible a
copper-stone, then separate it from the slacks, and weigh it, so you may see
how many centners of the flint yields a centner of copper-stone. But if the
flint be very rich in copper-water, then there will be no stone with the fluss;
therefore try the flint in another manner, viz. Weigh it raw, and put it in a
crucible, mingle among it three times so much of clean good slacks (smooth
ground) which yield no stone, nor contains any Silver, but come from poor Oar,
cover it with Salt, and set it in, let it flow with strong blowing: then you
will find as much as the flint has in it self: But the flints that are rich in
copper-water do yield a slack-stone which is not good to be melted, for in the
roasting, it will shrink too much and retain no Silver in it self, by which
many times hurt is caused.

CHAP. IX. How to prove Copper Oar another way.
Copper-Oars that are rich or poor in copper may be tried upon copper-stone,
after this manner, Take a pound of the Oar or Flint small ground, and prepare a
little Oven of Tiles square or round of a span wide, or let it be joined with
Potters-clay, bind it about with ironrings, and lay below in it, Powder of
Coals and Clay, (as in the Melt-ovens) with a hole on the back of the Oven,
through which the Bellows may go; then put in your fire and Coals, and blow
them well, that it may glow, and set the raw Oar which is ground, in it; yet
not at once, blow continually strong at it, that the oar may melt through the
Coals down into the little Oven, and when it is enough, let it cool, and take
it out of the Oven, and beat it, so you will see what it yields of copper or
copper stone: if you find in the stones either copper or slacks like grains,
beat them small, and draw it into slicks, then will the copper and stone
separate from the slicks.

Copper Shiffer.
This is a fine Trial upon the copper shiffer and poor inspersed copper Oars,
but when the Oar does not yield stone or copper, you will see it in the slacks,
when they are not coppery, but all is turned to slicks.

When there will be no stone in the proof.
Further, if you would have such through-proofs of copper, and the flint yield
no stone, then first roast the flint quite dead, and melt it in the little
Oven, and you will find a Regulus of black copper, or such as the flint or
copper Oars do yield, which put together and weigh, and see what it has
yielded, so you may know how many Centners of flinty copper it yields from a
Centner of copper, for all roasted Oars work themselves fresh, and
separate better than raw Oars.

Oven, then one may slick it off from the copper Another way.
with a little hot Crucible, and separate it from the slacks, but what remains
in the little Oven together with the slacks, which are not flown out, must be
beaten and washed, and what is found shall be reckoned the Content.

copper flint unroasted in the little Oven, and drive it off, and see whether
it give good copper-stone or raw slack-stone; also whether the stone in the
fire be fixed or volatile: Only observe, that the little Oven must be first very
well glowed, before it be melted in it, or else it will become all cold in the
little Oven, and will not come together, as experience teaches.

CHAP. X. How to prove melted Copper-stone.
raw Copper-Oar or flint (as has been formerly shown) viz. if one beat the
same very small like Hemp-seeds, and then weigh it, and in a gentle fire upon a
Test, let it be roasted, and put in the ground pieces, until it burns it self
dead, and then let it be ground smaller, and mingle it with fluss, and a little
Glass-galls, and cover it with Salt in the Crucible luted in a little Oven, it
will boil like a raw Copper Oar or flint before the Bellows, and will settle it
self to a copper Grain in the bottom of the Crucible, draw this up and weigh
how much it contains, and make thy account upon it, how many Centners of
copper-stone yields one Centner of black and unpurify'd Copper.

namely, to weigh two Centners of Copper-stone, and mingle them with Borax and
a little Venetian Glass, and let it flow upon a Proof Test, and blow with a
hand Bellows until it appears green, so you will see how much the Copper-stone
yields of Copper: and in this Proof the Copper will become clean and pure and
most ready, and yield no black Copper (as in the Proofs above it does.)

That you may see the form of the little Ovens, and how to make the
Copper-Proofs in them, they are in the following Sculpture

Deciphered.
1. The melting Oven to try the Copper Oars from the copper-stone, and the Man
that blows the Bellows. 2. The luting it with Clay. 3. The buck'd and vvash'd
Oar. 4. The little Ovens in which the copper-Oars are to be proved with
ordinary Bellovvs, and the man that attends them. 5. The Bellovvs as they are
used. 6. A copper Instrument with a neck in which water is put, and then set
over the fire, and used in stead of Bellows (called the Philosophical Bellovvs.
See Sculpture II. Book I. 7. The Pot in which the Fluss is to be made. 8. The
Assay Crucible.


Sculpture XXX.


CHAP. XI. To prove Flinty Copper by Sulphur.
Flints have Sulphur in them (yet some more than others,) if you will try them,
and make a proof upon them, Weigh two centners of the Flinty raw Oar, and put
it in a Proof-Test, and roast it dead (as I have mentioned before off the
Copper-Oars) let it be cold and weigh such roasted Oar again, now so much as
these two Centners have lost, so much they have had of Sulphur, for the Sulphur
goes in the fire and in the air, this proof is easy, yet it is not manifested
what Sulphur it does yield, but that you may have the same Sulphur apparently;
Beat the flint small, to the bigness of an Hazel Retorts.
nut, put it in a great Retort made of the best Potters-Clay, that the neck of
the Retort may hang in water, make a wood-fire about it, then the Sulphur will
ascend from the flint, and you will find most part before in the Receiver of
the Retort, fine and yellow, but it is yet unwashed, and must be cleansed in a
strong fire.

iron Retorts when the Sulphur becomes red. But this is to inform the Reader,
That all flints burnt in iron Retorts to Sulphur do yield red Sulphur, which
Painters use to highten yellow or orange Colors, but the manner of making
Sulphur, with great Retorts do not appertain to this Treatise, therefore I have
named it only for the Proof-sake.

CHAP. XII. How to prove Black Coppers by defty or smooth Coppers.
black out of the Oars upon melting, yet some much finer and cleaner than
others, which must after be cleansed and made ready, as they which contain no
silver, and not purified, must be made ready and deft: Also to know certainly
how many Centners of it after cleansing it yields of clean Copper (which must
be proved in a little Fire.) Some think it may be known by Of Copper Needles.
special copper Touch-Needles, made on purpose: but because the black-Coppers
are not all alike, but some ironstreamy, some tinny, spizy or leady, I cannot
certainly determine concerning such Proofs: But the best way is thus, First,
cut off from the cast Copper Ingot, and weigh 2 or 3 Centners of it, and lute a
Test with small ground leady Glass, put the weighed Copper in it, and blow it
in a fresh coal fire, till it has a clean green copper Color, then presently,
take the Test out of the Fire, and take the Copper out of the slacks, and
quench it off, then cut it asunder with a Chissel, and you will see whether it
be good: then weigh and count how much the inset black Copper has yielded
ready Copper.

This Proof not certain.
This proof, although the Copper be surer to be found, than by the
Touch-Needles, yet it is not certain to ground upon; because the Proof is small
and the Copper little, therefore very easily the Fire may take away somewhat
too much if it be over-burnt, which in great Works cannot be done, and so
somewhat more of red copper will be brought out.

If you will have the right proof, and know the right Content, the same must
not be esteemed too great a Labor, to make more than one Proof of the
black-Copper, and then take the middle out of it.

You may use to this Proof, Borax, which cleanses the Metal much, and brings
the copper to be sooner ready: but, because one cannot use Borax in the great
Works, it were better this proof (especially iron-streamy Copper) might be
helped with a little clean Lead, because it is used in cleansing: and the copper
will become leady, which does much cleanse the Copper, but if the copper
Another Manner.
be leady, then there needs no lead to be added.

Some Assayers use this Method in their Proofs, viz. They take a Test which is
made moist, and make a little hearth in it of Coal Powder, mixed with clay,
having a flat smooth hole cut out: upon this they set the copper which is to be
proved, and blow it with the Addition of a little Lead-glass, this will the
sooner make it ready, but I think there is small difference in what ever is
driven off from it: but be sure you drive not the copper too hard, and yet let
it be of a right copper or blick color.

Copper flint and Tin stone may be Separated.
And, because many times copper-flints are to be found, in which almost the half
is Tinn-stone, and if copper be melted out of it, it would be very tinny and
spizy, also if it were done among other coppers, all would be spoiled in the
cleansing. To prevent this, there is a particular way, viz. that by beating and
washing one may separate both Metals by bucking or cleansing, and then melt
every part asunder, and bring it to profit; of which way I should write
something here, but because I do not give a full Instruction in these my Books
of the great Works viz. of Bucking, Washing and Smelting Metal Oars) but only
lesser Works, therefore I will here end, till another more convenient time,
when they may be further discoursed of.

CHAP. XIII. How to prove whether Lead be very Copperish.
IF you think your Lead have much Copper with it, and would be assured thereof,
Then weigh with the great weight a Centner of the Lead, put it upon a very flat
Hearth, and make a small fire of A flat Hearth.
Wood upon it, lay also a green wood before, that the Lead may go and very
gently pass away under the before laid wood: Now, when such lead has copper in
it, if only two pound in a Centner, so the copper will remain on the hearth,
and what you find is but leady copper, but if you will have it very clean, then
blow it with a Bellows upon a hearth, till it becomes ready, but in the little
proof, it is seen upon the Coppel, for when the Lead which has much, begins to
go, then touch the Copper flowers, and the coppels will become black after it is
gone off.

CHAP. XIV. Twelve necessary Instructions for an Assayer to follow.
Iron does become Copper? to which the Reader shall have this Answer, That I
have a long while supposed, because the Iron in the Coppery waters, as in
Vitriol, green Argol, and such like, do precipitate the Copper, that the Copper
only is precipitated in such iron water, and not the Iron it self becomes
Copper, yet I have seen in
Vitriol Mines, (in a Mine called Hesper) when the nails and other Iron Pins
fixed in the copper-Oar, by length of time have become a good Copper mearly by
Penetration; therefore I must conclude, That the Iron does become Copper; for
though in the Vitriol, and other copper waters, the Copper precipitateth the
Iron, yet there is not so much of it therein, as to turn it to copper: only
know this, That while the Iron in such Coppery waters does precipitate the
copper, so the copper will precipitate the Silver (if it be in it) therefore
it is fit, that to the common precipitation of Silver in the Aqua fort. that the
copper with iron pieces or lamins be put into the cleansing (as above is
mentioned) with which the Copper and silver are precipitated, and what has
been in the Aqua fort. comes out whole.

CHAP. XV. Twelve Directions how to separate Silver from Copper in the great
Work.
Refiners have kept as a great Secret, how the Precipitations are to be made
right. But because the large Works are very great, therefore One way of
Preparation does most serve for Copper.
it could not remain secret, but is now known; yet there is still a difference,
for in one Furnace it is better refined, and the prepared copper is made purer
than in the other, also the Additions are not every where alike, and then many
sorts of coppers cannot be refined all in one way, therefore for their sakes,
who either know nothing, or but a little of such things, I will write somewhat
as a tendency to that Art.

black Copper be weak, deft, hard or brickle, for if they be weak and brickle
before the refining, then the Silver will not come so soon out, but if one will
give it its just due and heat, then the copper will flow under the lead through
the Oven, and may cause hurt; therefore to the weak Coppers, there is no better
way than to mingle other hard or brickle copper among it, that the one may hold
the other.

Copper holds in Silver, by a diligent Proof, for according to it, the Copper
must be mingled with lead. And if the Contents be unequal as from 24 Loths, to
14, 8, or 10 Loths, then it must be made into a Cake by weight, near 27 pounds
and an half of rich Copper, and 55 pound of poor Copper, upon this make your
Account, how much Silver is in this 3 quarters of the Centners of Copper, and
how much the Lead contains which is to be used to the Addition, and then to
every Loath of Silver which is in the copper and lead) 17 pound of How much Lead
to be used.
lead is also to be counted; and thus, of the refined lead (which is to be
parted from the copper) a Centner will not contain above six and a half, or at
the highest seven Loths of Silver. But if the refined lead should contain more
than 7 loths, it is a sign that the Cakes remain too rich, and that the silver
is not all come forth of the copper, and that there was not lead enough to the
Addition.

Copper, and what is to be observed in the refining Furnace, I shall
demonstrate it by Examples.

Centners of lead, and three quarters of a A profitable Rule.
Centner of Copper (of a rich and poor Content) either weak, hard or brickle,
one among another, if therein is not 12 or 12 and an half loths of Silver, then
take lead Oar or other lead to it which is silvery, that you may have the above
mentioned silver in the fresh piece, and then add Lead, or Littarge, as much
that there may come to four pieces, 8 Centner of Lead, and three Centners of
Copper, and of this there will come out in parting 6 Centners of refined lead;
every Centner of which contains 6 Loths and a half of Silver, the other Silver
and lead will remain in the cakes and lead, which will almost all come to
profit again, as you will hear hereafter.

centner of Lead, viz. take three quarters of a centner of copper, and if there
be not in it 15 or 16 loths of Silver, then take to it rich lead, which may
enter in a fresh piece of such Silver: or, Take fresh and hard lead and
Litarge, so that from 4 Pieces (upon an Oven) may come 9 centners of Lead, and
3 centners of copper, of this there will be 7 centners of refined Lead, of
which a centner is to contain 6 loths and a half of Silver.

centner of Lead, and three quarters of a centner of copper, and if there be
not 18 or 19 loths of Silver, then take rich lead that it may reach the Silver
and Litarge, and hard and fresh lead, so that (upon an Oven) in 4 fresh Pieces
may come 11 centners of lead, and 3 centners of copper; and in dividing of this
again, there will be 9 centners of fine lead, and one centner is to contain 6
loths and an half of Silver.

Lead, and three quarters of a Centner of Copper, if there be not therein 20 or
21 loths of Silver, then take rich lead which came in a fresh Piece of the
silver, viz. from 4 Pieces (in one Oven) 12 Centner of lead, and three Centner
of Copper, and when this shall be separated, then 10 Centner of pure lead; and
one Centner will contain seven loths of Silver in the Keinstocks and Thornells,
and there will remain 15 or 16 loths of Silver, and they are further to be
wrought, as hereafter will follow.

viz. to three quarters of a Centner of rich copper add three Centner of lead,
and so the separating Work will prove rich: and although the Keinstocks may
also remain rich to 4, 6 or 7 loths: yet they may further be added to the rich
Copper, and the fresh pieces be so right, that the refining lead may come out
upon the true content, at six, or six and a half, or seven loths of Silver, at
the highest.

coppers (not to be rekoned with the rich) yet you must do with them as before;
but never take more than three quarters of a Centner of Copper to two or three
quarters of a centner of lead, and if such black copper contains 8 loths, the
centner of the separating work will contain two loths and an half of Silver:
and the poor separating lead which comes from poor fresh may be added again to
other fresh pieces, (as by the following Instructions may be seen) but there is
no help for it, and, if possible, the poor fresh lead may be left alone.

CHAP. XVI. Thirteen additional Instructions about good Copper.
ITEM, One piece shall have 2 Centners and an half of Lead, and three quarters
of Copper, and there shall be no more in one piece than 18 loths.

Item, Three quarters of a Centner of fresh Copper to 21 loths, and three
quarters of a centner of Lead: to three loths and a half, half a centner: to
two loths three quarters of a centner of fresh lead, and a centner of Litarge:
thus you have four Pieces of 77, and a half loath of silver, in 11 centners.

Item, Three quarters of a centner of copper to 18 loths, and an half centner
of lead: to four loths and an half, three quarters of a centner: to three
loths, one quarter of a centner: to two loths, one quarter of a centner of
fresh, and one centner* and 18 pounds of Litarge, mingled in 74 loths of lead,
do yield 10: and a quarter and an half of a centner of lead.

Item, Half a centner of copper to 15 loths of Silver content; and one quarter
of a centner to 20 loths, and one centner of lead: To 4 Loths, half a centner:
To two loths, one quarter of a centner of fresh: one centner of Litarge leaded
in 70 loths of Silver does yield 10 centners of lead*

Item, Half a centner of copper to 15 loths: one quarter of a centner to 17
loths: One centner of lead to 5 loths: half a centner to one loath and an half;
one quarter of a centner fresh; one centner of Litarge leaded in 70 loths will
yield ten centners of good lead.

Item, Three quarters of a Centner of Copper to 17 loths: one centner of lead,
to 4 Loths: one dram, one quarter of a Centner to 4 loths and an half: one
quarter of a centner to one loath and an half: and one quarter of a centner
fresh, one centner and 18 pound of Litarge leaded in 74 loths yields 10 and an
half centners of lead.

Item, Three quarters of a centner of Copper to 18 loths and half a centner of
lead: to three loths and an half, a quarter of a centner: to four loths and an
half three quarters of a centner: to three loths one quarter of a centner: to
two loths one quarter of a centner of fresh, and one centner of Litarge leaded
in 76 loths and a half yields 10 centner of lead.

Item, Three quarters of a centner of copper to 16 loths and half a centner of
lead: to 3 loths and a half: three quarters of a centner: to four loths and an
half: one quarter of a centner: to two loths one quarter of a centner of fresh:
and one centner of Litarge (or instead of it, three quarters of a centner of
fresh) leaded in 70 loths and a half do yield 10 centners of lead.

Item, Half a centner of copper to 19 loths: and a quarter of a centner to 7
loths: one centner and a half of lead to three loths and a half: and half a
centner to one loath and a half; and one centner of Litarge leaded in 69 loths
and a half, yields 10 centners of lead.

Item, Half a centner of Copper to 19 loths: one quarter of a centner to 16
loths: one centner of lead to 4 loths: one dram and half centner to one loath
and a half: one quarter of a centner fresh, and one centner and 18 pounds of
Litarge leaded in 74 loths do yield 10 centners and an half of lead.

Litarge to be had, then take half a centner of good copper to 9 loths, one
quarter of a centner of copper to 30 loths: one centner and a quarter of lead
to 4 loths, and an half centner to one loath and an half, and a quarter of a
centner fresh: thus make all times the additions upon the hard lead, that there
may be in a piece 10 centners, 10 and an half, or 11 centners of lead, also the
silver in 4 pieces, 70, 72, 74, 75, 77 loths, thus the lead does contain 7
loths of silver, happily one dram more or less.

Item, Three quarters of a centner of fresh copper to 20 loths: three quarters
of a centner of lead to 4 loths; and half a centner to two loths, and one
centner of Littarge: and half a centner of fresh lead leaded in 76 loths yields
10 centners of lead.

Item, Three quarters of a centner of Copper to 21 loths: three quarters of a
centner of lead to three loths and an half; and half a centner to two loths:
and half a centner of fresh lead, and one centner of litarge, or three quarters
of a centner of fresh lead, leaded in 77 loths and a half do yield 10 centners
of lead.

CHAP. XVII. Six additional Instructions about proving of fresh Oar, called
hard Lead.
ITEM, Three quarters of a centner of Copper to 11 loths; and half a centner of
fresh lead; 2 centner of Litarge is leaded in 8 centners, into 4 pieces,
contain 33 loths.

Item, A half centner of copper to 8 loths; a quarter of a centner to 15 loths:
one centner and a quarter fresh, is leaded in 8 centners, into 4 pieces contain
31 loths.

Item, Half a centner of copper to 15 loths; one quarter of a centner to six
loths, three quarters of a centner to two centners of Litarge leaded into 9
centners, into 4 pieces, contain 36 loths.

Item, Three quarters of a centner of copper to 11 loths and a half, and half a
centner of fresh; and two centners of Littarge leaded in 8 centners, into 4
pieces, and contain 34 loths and a half.

Item, Half a centner of copper to 13 loths: a quarter of a centner to 10
loths: half a centner of fresh, two centners of Litarge leaded in 7 centners,
into 4 pieces, contain 36 loths.

lead, as does contain one and a half, or 2 loths of silver.

Additions concerning Thornels, or parts of Oars not fully melted.
Centners and an half of Thornells, that is half separated Oars, and half
roasted, and a centner and a quarter of hard Lead: and a quarter of a centner
of Litarge, the Lead must contain 3 and a half: 4 loths, 4 and a half, till to
5 loths.

Item, to a Centner of Littarge is counted 3 quarters of Lead; and a Centner of
Littarge is counted at 135 pounds; and also upon 145 pounds of hard Lead, one
centner of soft Lead, although to some separating Works are taken 130 pound of
Litarge in stead of a centner of Lead, and 140 pound, hard Lead, instead of
soft lead.

Also there goes commonly off from 10 centners one centner and a half of Lead;
thus you may know how to substract from the additions together with the Loths,
which will be found in the centner.

CHAP. XIX. Six more Instructions concerning good and deft Coppers.
ITEM, Take Copper to 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, Loths, and of this one may make
hard Lead, being commonly taken as Additions: of which 65 pounds will yield at
all times in 4 pieces 39 loths of Silver; but if it be not enough (with the 65
pound of Copper in the Content) then one may take of the Copper three quarters
of a Centner, and at all times upon one loath of Silver 29 pounds of lead, and
this will make in one piece, three Centners four pounds of fresh lead, and in
four pieces, 12 Centners, and 16 pounds, in which are 42 loths of Silver.

Item, 65 pounds of Copper to 15 loths: one centner and a quarter of a centner
of fresh lead, and 305 pounds of Litarge, there will come upon 4 pieces 11
centners 31 pounds of lead, in which will be 39 loths of Silver; and if one
does sever it in an Oven, and with such Additions, there will come out of it 9
centners of lead, which will contain to three and three quarters of a loath, or
three loths and a half: this is together, 33 loths, three drams; so there will
remain in the Thornels and Keinstocks five loths (if well wrought) but it
consumes much lead by it.

loths, it is usual to take sixty or sixty five pounds of Copper, according as
one has poor or rich lead, and the Addition is made thus, that together in 4
pieces, may come 75 loths of Copper and lead; and upon this 75 loths, is taken
one loath and 15 pounds of lead; if then one do sever it in an Assay- Oven, it
will yield 9 centners and an half of lead; and this will contain 6 loths and a
half, or six loths three drams, and then there will remain in Thornells and
Keinstocks, 11, 12 or 13 loths, but how the Additions are to be made, is
hereafter specified.

Item, One piece shall have (with lead and copper,) 3 Centners, 25 pounds, and
four pieces; together 13 Centners, and of lead 11 Centners, 25 pounds, so there
will come in one piece 65 pounds of Copper, to 17 loths; and two Centners and a
half of lead to three loths; yet the 4 pieces will contain no more in copper
and lead, then 75 loths.

Item, 65 pounds of Copper to 18 Loths, make 47 Loths addition in the Lead.
Take one centner three quarters of Lead to 4 loths, they do bring in 4 pieces;
28 loths one quarter of fresh, and 30 pounds of hard, so there will come 11
Centners, 25 pounds of lead, in 75 loths.

Thornels which are to be severed from it, must have this Addition, Take to one
piece, one centner and a half of lead-Thornels, 1 Centner of roast Thornels, 1
centner 18 pounds of hard, and one quarter of a centner of fresh Lead, and 30
pounds of Litarge, then the lead will commonly contain 3, or 3 and a half, to 4
loths of silver.

CHAP. XX. Seven more additional Instructions about good Copper.
ITEM, if one take to a piece of 80 pounds of Copper, which may contain 15, 16,
17, 18 or 19 loths, and so there will be of 4 pieces, ten Centners of lead, and
so in one piece, 2 Centners and an half, the process is thus, Take one Centner
of Litarge, one centner and a quarter of lead, to 4 loths, one quarter of hard
lead, and a quarter of fresh lead, as it happens, yet that in 4 pieces will
come to no more than 72 loths of Silver, and take to one loath 14 pound of lead,
and this in one piece will be two Centners and a half, and 2 pounds of lead,
yet it is always better
to take much Litarge and little lead, for the Litarge does draw better to it
self the Copper than the fresh lead, likewise much Copper than little, and so
the lead will not consume so much, and there will be wrought much more copper
with less lead. Therefore if you take 65 pounds of copper to one piece, then
there will be to four pieces, eleven and a quarter of a centner of lead, and
one meltting may make just so many pieces. But if you do take 80 pounds of
copper, for 65 pounds of lead, then there will remain in the Thornels and
Keinstocks, 10, 11, or 12 loths.

Item, Take 75 pounds of Copper (rich or poor) and in four pieces 72 loths,
that upon one loath may come 14 pounds of lead into four pieces, 10 Centners, 8
pounds of lead, and this does yield commonly good Keinstocks, and if this be
thus severed, then the lead of it will contain 7 loths of Silver, and a dram
more or less.

Item, to make hard lead, take 65 pounds of Copper to 19 loths, and 200 pounds
of Litarge, and 190 pounds of hard lead, and 40 pounds of fresh lead, to two
loths; and thus there will be in 4 pieces 52 loths, and one dram, and ten
Centners, and 80 pounds of lead.

Item, take 75 pounds of Copper to 16 loths, and not more than 48 loths in 4
pieces, and to one loath 21 pounds of lead, that the most part may be Litarge,
so the lead will contain 4 loths and a half, or 5, and remain in the Keinstocks
6 or 7 loths.

Fresh Copper.
In brief, to fresh Copper one may take three quarters of a centner of Copper,
and two Centners and an half of lead, and in four pieces not above 34 loths,
this does well; and to the hard lead, three quarters of a Centner of copper,
two and a quarter of a centner of lead, and no more, and it will bring into it
33, 34, to 38 loths* of Silver.

Hungarian Copper.
Concerning the poor coppers (they are partly severed in Hungary, and contain to
five, six, seven, eight loths of Silver, or nine at the highest) they must be
so severed, that the severed lead may come upon the right Content, as a centner
upon six to seven loths of Silver, so the copper will be good, and if you add
lead according to the Content, the copper will not have lead enough, and the
Silver will not come all out, and the Keinstocks will remain rich.

Melter makes the fresh Pieces, then must all their Additions first be weighed
upon every piece apart, and then he must put the Copper and hard lead first in,
and afterward the Litarge; and lastly, the lead in the Oven, and when the
Division of one part is almost gone down, put after it a quantity of slacks,
that when he sees the same, he may know how much has been weighed (in one
piece) out of the Oven, before he put in the other, and when that goes down in
the Oven, pour the first piece out of the furthermost Crucible into the pan,
and then take care that one piece may not be heavier than the other, and so he
must still labor till he has cast all the pieces (as such practice will show)
But how the fresh Oven is formed, and the fresh pieces cast, you may see in the
Sculpture following, thus Deciphered.
1. Copper and Lead in pieces, weighed. 2. The Oven for Assaying those piecs of
fresh Oar. 3. The Copper-pan into which those fresh pieces are to be put and
melted. 4. The fresh piece melted. 5. The Melter. 6. The Vault in which the
Dust and Smoke is received. 7. The little door out of which the dust is to be
cleansed.


Sculpture XXXI.


CHAP. XXI. Nine Rules, showing how the Regulus of poor black Copper-Oar is to
be assayed, after the Hungarian Method.
poor Coppers are to be split before their melting in the separating Works, and
the content made rich, that they may the better be melted and separated.

Item, in the Sheds or Houses where The Melting Oven for them.
black Coppers (which commonly contain 5, 6, or 7 loths of Silver) are used to
be smelted there, the melting Oven for them is formed like a driving harth with
a Vault, and in the forepart thereof the fire is to be made of Birch, or other
small split firewood (as is used in Kitchins) and the melting Oven must have a
Crucible before it, in which the black Copper (when it is wrought enough and
becomes good Copper) may run out of it: On the other place of the Oven are the
slacks done off, and the Bellows are not to blow in the midst of the Oven, but
on an iron Pipe, which is directed against a corner of the Oven, in which the
Wind may blow, so that it may go through the Pipe into the spleiss Oven in the
midst of it upon the copper.

centners of black copper, of which the centner contains six loths of Silver)
when this is smelted, let the slacks go off from it; that it may be 11 to 12
centners, then 4 to 4 centners and an half, in which you must be diligent, that
you may know how to give it its due heat. After open the smelting Oven near the
foremost Crucibles, and set the copper in it, and smelt of the 38 centners of
black copper, out of the Crucibles 18 to 19 centners of good and rich copper,
but of the smelted Copper, every Cake is to be cut out, and cast into Ingots,
of which a centner holds commonly near 9 loths of Silver, the remaining Silver
you will have in what is swept off, and in the slacks, as follows.

Smelters a Work for half a week, therefore to this belongs a Master and a
Servant, and they cannot work but twice a week in an Oven, and to such
Operating in one work, there is to be used near 4 lays of Wood.

Red Copper Regulus.
The slacks that come from the abovementioned black Regulus, or which are twice
done from the copper, must be beaten small as Wallnuts, and smelted through a
smelting Oven, then draw the slacks off again from it in the crucible, and out
of it you will have a red Regulus.

Regulus, one must take 40 centners for a smelting Oven (as above is signified)
and may smelt of it 30 to 31 centners of red Copper, and of this the centner
contains two and a half, to 3 loths of Silver, which cannot all be brought out,
therefore it must be forced out with an hammer. But if it be made to sell for
Bells, then there must be smelted of this 40 centners, or 33 centners to 35
centners of red Copper, and to this one needs but one Oven, 2 to 2, and half
the proportion of wood, and it is counted by the Smelters for two Works for a
Week, as upon the black Coppers.

slacks which (of this 20 centners of Regulus) are to be done off out of the
smelting Oven (and happily 6, 7 centners to 7 centners and an half) they are to
be beaten asunder and smelted through a smelting Oven, and one may draw off the
slacks in the Crucible, and make of a Cobolt Regulus.
Cobolt Regulus, or Copper-stone, 40 centners upon a smelting Oven, and smelt
it off from 32 to 34 centners of Licbeter or spizy Copper.
Licbeter or speizy or unclean Copper, of which a centner contains one, or one
and an half loath of Silver.

brim of the driving harth, also that which is about the crucible, and some
good slacks, and beat them stamped Copper.
small with the stamp, upon which the water does run, and then the good copper
will fall on the ground, and that is to be gathered and washed and then
settled: and, if it be at hand put 12 to 14 centners upon the smelting Oven.
Likewise happily 5 or 6 centners of leady-Copper which remained upon the harth;
and if the copper enters in it, and will not out again, then put to it 18
centners of black Regulus: and smelt again 20 centners of stamped Copper (which
Copper is to contain 12 to 13 loths) and this same, being thus assayed, one may
set it upon the driving harth, and drive it off with the poor and rich lead.

What comes off at last from the stamps in the casting and settlings, is also
to be taken up, for 4 centners of this will yield a centner of copper, and such
is to be smelted with the slacks.

CHAP. XXII. Seven more Instructions for the Hungarian way of separating, and
how the first work or Instrick is to be performed.
TO the first Instrick (by which you must understand the first Schicht, work or
operation which a Master with his Servant can smelt in 8 or 9 hours) they do
take 30 centners of rich or good Copper and fresh lead, which comes from
Craccaw, of which a centner contains near one loath of Silver) 110 centners: in
all 140 centners of Copper and lead: out of which work will come 40 pieces,
this being put out of the former Crucible into a copper pan, there will come
upon one piece of rich and good Copper, three quarters of a centner* of fresh
lead, two and three quarters of a centner: And every Smelter must observe, That
the Addition of every piece come only to one piece, and that the piece may be
cast equal, that to the whole work may not come more or less pieces than were
weighed to it before (as above is signified) the slacks are afterward to be
drawn clean off, out of the foremost Crucible, and smelted again in the Oven,
and out of this will come slack-lead, and the centner will contain one loath.

Assay-Oven, and the lead which flows out of it (being in a hole) is afterward
to be cast into little copper pans, and the Centner of the same lead (according
as the copper is rich) will commonly contain 2, to 2 loths and a half of
Silver; and that which remains upon the Assay-Oven is called Keinstocks
Keinstocks.
(which are pieces yet undry'd or unroasted, and what falls down from the
Assay-Oven, and between the roast-Oven are called Thornels, of which Thornels
they do weigh 80 or near 100 pounds.

Thornells.
These Thornels are thus to be made to profit; Take 20 Centners of them from the
Assay-Oven, and 20 centners from the roast-Oven, and 40 centners of hard lead,
and Litarge, of each sort half; (in the whole 8 Centners) out of this there
will come from the Work 20 pieces: and there will come upon one piece 2
Centners of Thornels, and 2 centners of hard lead and Litarge, for it must be
thus distributed upon the pieces, and the slacks upon the foremost Crucible
must be drawn off clear, these are to be smelted apart, and out thereof will
come the slacks of lead.

Thornels The first Inlay.
are always to be set upon an Assay-Oven, and assay the lead of it, of which a
centner will contain near 2 loths of Silver, and the Keinstocks will remain
above, and what falls down betwixt the Oven is (called, as is said, Thornels)
and they do weigh near 8 pounds, as above is mentioned.

The second Inlay.
To the second Inlay, by which you must understand the second Work) the
Additions are to be made thus, they do take rich or good broken Copper, 20
centners and 20 centners of Thornels from the separating and roast Oven, one
with another, and 20 centners of Litarge, (in the whole 60 centners) out of
this comes 40 pieces, so there is to each piece half a centner of good Copper,
and half a centner of Thornels, and half a centner of Litarge, and these are to
be set (as before) always 5 pieces upon a separating Oven, and assayed, and the
Lead of it is to be cast into little copper pans, and the centner will contain
3 and a quarter, to 3 loths and a half of Silver, and the Keinstocks will
remain in the separating Oven, and the Thornels fall down: Now, this is not
used in the common work, but only when rich Copper is to be taken to The Third
Inlay upon rich Copper.
the work, or the store does increase.

To the third Work you must understand the third measure, which is called Rich
putting in: the Additions are to be made thus, Take 30 Centners of rich and
good Copper, and of the Thornels of Lead, 120 centners (in the whole 150.
centners) then smelt all through the Oven, and draw the slacks clean off, and
of these will come 40 pieces, and of one piece will come three quarters of a
Centner of Copper, and three Centners of Lead, and these 40 pieces are to be
assayed, and every time set 5 pieces on a separating Oven, and the Centner of
this lead will contain near 3, and three and a half loths, and of this there
will also come Keinstocks and Thornels like as of the second Work.

Centner more of lead than to the first; the reason is, because to the first
there has been added Crackaw lead, which has contained Silver: secondly,
because it is Copper: and thirdly, That so the rich works in the lead (which in
the working are become Coppery) may also be included.

CHAP. XXIII. How Litarge Pieces are to be made.
Shich, to 15 centners of rich copper add 15 Centners of Thornels from the
Assay-Oven, 60 Centners of Litarge, and 37 centners and a half of slacks or
fresh Lead, (in the whole 127 centners and an half: This stuff may be smelted
in the Oven by a Master and his servant in 8 hours, and the slacks being clean
drawn off, and then being cast into a pan, it makes 30 pieces; and in one
piece, will be half a centner of rich Copper, and half a centner of Thornels
from the Assay Oven, 2 centners of Litarge, one centner and a quarter of
slacks, or fresh Lead.

Litarge are to be assayed, and always 5 pieces to be set upon the Assay-Oven,
Litharge.
and out* of this willcome the lead which is called Litargelead, and one Centner
will contain 2, to 2 and a dram of Silver, and there will come also out of the
Assay-Oven Keinstocks, and Thornels, as in the second Assaywork.

Addition upon Litarge pieces is this, They take 15 centners of copper, 15
centners of Thornels (from the Assay Oven) 90 centners of Litarge, 15 centners
of slacks or fresh lead (the whole 135 centners) and out of this will come 30
pieces, and to one piece will come half a centner of rich Copper, and half a
centner of Thornels from the Assay-Oven, and three Centners of Litarge, and
half a Centner of slacks or fresh lead.

Litarge pieces are to be assayed, and set 5 pieces at once upon an Assay Oven,
and the Centner of lead which comes of it will contain two to two loths and a
quarter of a loath of Silver: of this also there is Keinstocks and Thornels, as
formerly has been mentioned.

assayed rich and poor The last Inlay.
lead are brought together, they make this account upon it (whereby they may
know to make an Inlay, (that is a quantity of it) so that a centner in the same
Inlay of rich Copper and lead in the assayed lead may contain 5 loths and a
quarter of a loath of Silver, and this Inlay is to be made thus. Take 26
centners and a half of rich copper, and 115 centners and a half of rich and
poor lead (that they may come upon the beforementioned reckoning) so that a
centner may contain 5 and a quarter, or at most 5 loths and an half of Silver;
what is done above, is with damage, and the ready copper will become too rich:
In short, 141 centners and three quarters of a centner, are also to be smelted
through an Oven, and the slacks drawn clean off upon the foremost Crucible, and
a Master and servant to make this shich or work into 42 pieces, so there will
be to one piece 5 eight parts of a centner of the rich Copper, and of all the
sorts of rich and poor lead, 2 and three quarters of a centner.

Assay-Oven, but no more at once than 5 pieces of rich lead, that one centner
with the other may contain 5 loths and a quarter of Silver, and there will
remain also upon the Oven Keinstocks and Thornels, which are fallen down, such
Thornels which come of rich lead they separate, for they are the best, and are
to be used again, and to be laid among the Litarge-pieces: Upon this poor
Contenty Copper Assaying, meditate with diligence, for it is a profitable
Instruction.

CHAP. XXIV. How Silver is to be separated from spizy and unclean black Coppers.
WHEN the speizy and very unclean Silver Contenty coppers are to be separated
from other good coppers, then they use the prepared coppers, which are deft of
themselves, though they are brickle and unsmooth, and are not to be used to all
sorts of Works: to avoid this, prepare to assay such degenerate black coppers
as follows: Take such black Coppers, and dress them like a black Licbeter
Copper with help of the lead, by these means they will become clean and deft,
and brought thus into compass, so that oftentimes of three centners hardly
remains one, yet nothing of the Silver gone off, but what has been before in
the three raw centners, and this is to be found together, and then separate
this prepared copper, with good copper, or by it self (as is usual) and in
Hungary they use this care about the poor Coppers, though not very unclean,
which in their separating is often tried, and the coppers becomes rich by it.

But that you may see how the copper Ovens are formed, and how to assay upon
them, this following Sculpture will show.

Sculpture XXXII.
Deciphered.
1. The separating Oven as it stands framed. 2. The Supporters to it made of
Copper, as they are to stand under the Oven. 3. The cast pieces as they are to
stand in the Oven. 4. The Walls of the Oven (or the four sides of it) and the
fire in it, and how the Oven is braced with iron hoops. 5. The stamped Pieces,
and coals on the top of the Oven. 6. The copper or iron little pans, with a man
putting the melted stuff into them. 7. The Keinstocks. 8. The Crane or draught
by which the assayed pieces are to be lifted out of the assay-Oven, or
otherwise disposed of. 9. Instruments, viz. Ladle, Picker, Fork and Hook. 10.
The troughs or place to cool the Instruments in water.




CHAP. XXV. Instructions for driving Lead and Copper from Silver.
IF you have enough of that rich Lead, of which a centner contains 5 loths and
a quarter of Silver, then prepare the driving harth, formed with a Vault like a
great Bakers Oven, and lute it with all diligence, and lay 100 Centners of this
lead upon it, and six centners of the richest copper, which is to be picked out
of the harth of the speize Oven, of which the Centner contains 10 to 13 loths
of Silver, (which is called the stamped Copper,) drive the work, but not quite
off, and if it make lead slacks, then quench it and retain the same lead
slacks, so in this will be near 50 marks of Hungarian Silver.

Two drive harths.
But there must be two driving-harths one near the other, and while you drive
off the one work, the other must be prepared with diligence for the other, and
then put upon it six centners of the richest Copper, and an hundred Centners of
rich Lead, which contains 5 loths and a quarter of Silver, and drive off the
work (as aforesaid) and when the Silver will almost go to it, then add the said
lead slacks in which the 50 marks of Silver are, and let the work go quite off,
thus you have 100 marks of Silver to 15 loths of fine. But such works are used
to drive them off in 4 or five weeks, that commonly one week with another, is
reckoned to make 125 marks of Silver, and it is needful to such a driving off,
to have 4 lays of wood, and you must not feed the fire upon such driving
harths with long split-wood, but (because the Oven has a singular Vault) it
must be fed with good dry faggot-wood, and let the Bellows go true upon the
work.

CHAP. XXVI. Of driving the Keinstocks and Thornels.
Assay-Oven; and if it be of rich or poor Lead, or Thornels or Litarge pieces,
put them together in a driving Oven, and let there be four such driving Ovens,
and in every one 4 Rows or lanes: upon these you are to set all sorts of
Keinstocks, near 120 centners, then make a fire of dry split wood before and
behind the Rows of Litarge, and dry the Keinstocks about 12 or 14 hours, and
that which runs first out into the Litarge rows (which will be but little) this
pour out, and it is fresh Lead, and what remains of the Thornels will fall down
in the rows, then they are to be melted to thornels, like those which are
flowen out under the melting Oven.

Item, such Keinstocks which remain above those Ovens, are not to be boiled in
the great speize Ovens (like the raw black Coppers) but must be beaten and
knocked that the shiffer and other uncleanness of them may be removed, and then
put them upon the boiling harth, and drive the copper to be pure, and when the
slacks are clean drawn off, then split the plates or cakes one after another,
this is ready and deft copper, and so the remains that are in a centner of such
ready copper will be almost a loath of Silver, and one does take to a shich 4
harths to contain near 18 centners; there are to be two such harths or
copper-ovens in the separating houses or sheds,

Copper Regulus.
The slacks which are to be drawn off from the harths are to be melted again
through a melt Oven, and a Regulus made of them, which is called a copper
Regulus, which I judge to be like the Copper, made at Swatk, set them in a dry
Oven and dry them off, from this the thornels will fall down into the rows,
these must be melted into thornels, (as above is mentioned) for such copper
Regulus must not be wrought by it self, for they are speizy, therefore you must
mingle them among the Keinstocks, which are to be dried, and you may make pure
copper of them.

Thus you have sufficient Directions how Coppers

But concerning the reckoning which (always in such Sculpture is thus

Deciphered.
1. A drying Oven. 2. An Oven soon made according to the Hungarian way. 3. A
common and ready Harth for drying. 4. Keinstocks, as they are to be picked and
beaten by a man. 5. Harths for the Hungarian speizing or working. 6. Copper
Cake, quenched in a Cistern of Water by a man, 6. 6. 6. 7. A Pipe and Tub that
lets water into the Cistern.


Sculpture XXXIII.


CHAP. XXVII. A singular way of melting in the Assaying work.
WHEN flint or Copper Oars are intended Copper, then the Oars are to be roasted
well and stick'd through; and then to make it Copper it must be burnt and
roasted again.

In such work one may surely know the Content of the raw stone, and also by the
Content of the Stone (which is stick'd through the little Proof) how much
Copper and Silver is in it.

When the stone for making of Copper is perfectly prepared and burned; then
take of this roasted Common proof (among some other) and prove it by 2 or 3
proofs upon Copper, and then the Copper upon Silver, and when the Copper-stone
in the roast is of unequal content, it is not well mingled, yet you will find
in the content, a very small difference; yea sometimes none at all, and then
see whether the content of Copper (of the roast) does agree with the content
before, which is found in the through burnt stone.

Therefore try whether you have all the Silver in the roast which was in the
Copper-stone, if there be a difference Copper roast
to 3 or 4 loths in a Centner against the other, then take the middle of it, and
make your Additions thus, In case you have found in a prepared roast (through
the little proof) that two centners contains three quarters of a centner of
Copper, and a centner of this Copper contains twenty loths of silver. Then
weigh of Addition of parts.
that which is melted 2 centners of the roast, and set them asunder, one heap
after another, and of every heap two centners of roast, and to every part weigh
its due of Lead, that may always come upon a loath of Silver, (which is in the
Copper 18 loths of lead) or if it be good, 17 pound: and are to be weighed to
the roast- heap which is weighed off, and because two centners of the roast do
contain three quarters of a Centner of copper, (and must be melted through, to
one piece) then after the common proof, three quarters of a centner of Copper
will contain 15 loths of Silver; then weigh to it 15 times 17 pounds of lead,
so upon every fresh piece will come two centuers 35 pounds of lead, and one
fresh piece will weigh 3 centners 7 pounds.

But it is to be observed (in making the Addition of the lead) that you must
know what the lead contains, viz. whether the centner had 1 or 2 loths of
Silver. Then upon the same Silver which the lead contains upon every loath must
be counted 17 pound of lead; for the Assay-work must contain but 7 loths, if
they contain more, it is a sign the Keinstocks is too rich, and the Silver comes
not all out of the Copper (as is before mentioned) therefore if one has lead
which contains silver, such cannot be taken to the rich Coppers, for the fresh
pieces are too great and receive too much lead, and the Copper will go through
the Assay-Oven with the lead to loss.

copper-stone or poor copper which may Addition of parts.
yield to 10 or 12 loths, to this it may be used; especially if it becomes good,
then the Addition must be thus: If you find by the Proof, That 2 centners of
the roast-stone contains three quarters of a centner, and one centuer of the
Copper 12 loths of Silver: then in 3 quarters of Copper, or in two centners of
roast-stone there will be nine loths of Silver; to this add the due of lead,
upon every loath of Silver, 17 pound; and because one has not other lead than
what the centner contains in 2 loths of Silver, then there will come upon the 9
loths of silver, in the copper, and of the silver in the lead to one piece, 2
centners and 1 pound of the two loths of lead: but to a fresh piece you must
not take all such weak lead, or which does contain silver, but mingle it with
the fresh lead that the silver may come out cleaner, yet for want of fresh
lead, sometimes such weak lead is taken as necessity requires.

Hard oar and Litarge
Upon the common melting Furnaces, the Additions lead: with hard lead or
Litarge, and substract the waste, what might go off in the fresh, and in stead
of the 100 pound fresh lead you must take 125 pound hard lead and Litarge; yet
the Litarge and hard lead must be refreshed with fresh lead, else, at the last
when the hard lead is too weak, there will be damage: This may be used also in
this labor and melting, if one have Litarge and hard lead that (according as
above is mentioned) to add to the 2 centners of roast the competent weight of
hard lead and Litarge, and let it go through the Oven, and then the fresh
pieces are cast right.

Spar-stones.
But possibly some person may say, It could not well spar-stones sake; yet it
must again be considered, Though the spar-stones may be leady yet they will be
very poor in silver, and therefore they are not spoiled, though they be leady
and mingled with them, and so bring them among the Copper-stones, in the
roasts, which will afford but little profit, therefore 'twill be more
profitable to melt them.

Further observe, If one would melt the stone, and beat the hard lead and
Litarge, care must be taken that hard lead and Litarge when the stone is in the
Oven; and then the lead needs not stand so long on the harth among the copper
and slacks, and thereby burn: but it were better to refresh the Litarge and
hard lead fully (after the Goslarish manner) whereby you may make (with one
labor in one day and night) 100 Centner of fresh lead which else is lost, but
when the Additions are to be made with it after it has been refreshed, then
there goes nothing more off in the little by-Oven, only that it will flow and
work through amongst the Copper, and such refreshing of the hard lead and
Litarge may be done (if one thinks it not too great a labor) that the work
might go the better.

How to make the Oven and cast the fresh pieces.
When the Melter thinks fit to shut the Melt-Oven, then he must make the
Crucible in the harth a little narrow and deep like a fresh Oven, and near that
Oven another little Oven, in which the wind may drive, and wherein he may also
warm the added lead; and when he begins to set it, and has two centners of the
weighed roast upon the Oven, then he must put in some weak slacks, by which he
may see when the two centners of roast are thoroughly done when those slacks do
come, then he stops the hole of the Oven, and draws off the slacks and stones
from the Copper: and then take out of the by-Oven the hot lead, and the Copper
in the crucible, with a warm ladle to reach into the crucible, and take out a
ladleful or two, that it may come among one another, and then he must cast into
the pan the first fresh pieces, and when it is cast then weigh it, by which you
may easily see whether the desired copper be come: and when the first two
centners of the roast are melted thoroughly, and the weak slacks do come and the
Eye or hole of the Oven is stopped, then the Melter must set up another heap of
two centners of the weighed roast, but whilst he casts the fresh pieces, the
Melter must take out again the gathered Copper which flows out upon the harth,
and warm another weight of lead in the little by-Oven, that the work may go
speedily on, and not be hindered.

centners of roast are set*in the second time, then the Melter must put in
again some of the weak slacks, and when they come, then he must stop it (as
before) and draw off the slacks, and must take the lead out of the little
by-Oven, and cast the fresh piece, thus he may melt continually as long as he
has Copper-stone to put in.

Such fresh pieces when there are enough, cast into the Oven, and they are to
be melted off, while other fresh pieces are melting and making.

The profit of this Assay work.
This melting-work is (in my judgment upon such stones which yield copper) very
profitable in comparison to the other: because you have the Silver quickly out
of the copper, with the same Expense as is spent upon the black Copper making,
and used with profit, better than when they must first be melted in the copper,
and afterward with great Expense to be wrought, and the Silver to be assayed
out of it. Upon which every one who uses to melt may further consider.

This also I think fit to mention for the Instruction of copper-Melters, so
that all who care for it may be diligent in it: for this is not only a
supposition, but proved in the great work.

What and how the Thornels (and other things which Oven and of the little by-
Ovens will be seen in the Sculpture following, which is thus Deciphered.
1. The Fresh Oven. 2. The little By-Oven for lead. 3. The fresh piece, with a
man lifting it. 4. The Separation of roasted and weighed lead, brought by a man
in a Wheel-barrow and laid in heaps* 5. The Vault for the Smoke and Dust. 6.
The Tunnels to convey away the Smoke. 7. The fresh Oven without fire in the
Furnace, or forewall. 8. The Assay-Oven. 8. 8. 9. The little Pans for the
melted Metal.


Sculpture XXXIV.


CHAP. XXVIII. How Copper is to be made Brass.
TO the Brass burning as it is observed in Cauffingen in Hessen, and as before
in the Copper different in Countries.
City of Goslar and in Ilsenberg on the Haiz, they use Goslarish Lapis
Calaminaris which is sometimes gathered out of the Smelt-Ovens, where (in
smelting the lead Oars into 10 or 12 pieces) it ofttimes lies about a hand
thick; but the Lapis Calaminaris at Galmay mountains, and other mountainous
places, (as those near the River Ach in Schwaben or Swevia, in the County of
Tyrol in Austria, and elsewhere) breaks yellow and gray, and is to be added
to the Copper to make them of a yellow Color, and which is called Brass, but
the Goslarsh Lapis Calaminaris must be roasted or burnt and ground small upon a
Mullet made on purpose, and then they prepare it as follovveth.

To prepare Lapis Calaminaris.
They take one part of it, and two parts of small Lapis Calaminaris that it
may every where suck it in, let it stand an hour and moisten together, but some
use Urine instead of water, and add a little Alum; this gives the brass a fair
color in the first fire: then they have a crooked Instrument and draw all well
together 3 or 4 times, then mingle it with a proportion of Salt, and draw it
again with the Instrument twice or thrice, thus the Lapis Calaminaris is
prepared: but they make always so much Calaminaris together at once, as will
be needful for two Ovens.

When they make Brass they make round Ovens in the ground, so that the wind may
force the fire through The Ovens for it.
the holes below in the Oven, and in one of these Ovens they set 8 pots or
pipkins at once, and let them be warm and hot, and when they are so, take them
out quickly, and put the Calaminaris in them, also they have a shovel made on
purpose, that therewith they may take up and know how to distribute near 46
pounds in such eight pots. Then they lay in every pot upon the Lapis
Calaminaris 8 pounds of small broken Copper pieces, and set-in the pots again,
and let them stand 9 hours in a great heat, and in this 9 hours are to be taken
one heap and a half of Coals, and when such Coals are burnt out, then stir the
stuff in the pot with an iron, and see how it is flow'n, and let it stand in the
fluss, and graduation an hour more, then lift the pots out of the Oven, and
pour them (if you will have a piece of Brass) all in one hole, and while the
stuff is warm, break them, yet so that they may remain and lie close together.

Britain stones.
Thus the Brass receives in the breaking a fair yellow color, but if you make
Kettles of it, and other work, then cast the stone into great pots and large
pieces purposely for it, which stones are called Britanish Stones, or Lapis
Calaminaris, (because they come thence) from which they cut afterward some
Ingots; and from them draw wyers, and beat out what they please for other uses.

Brass-burner sets in the Brass once more, especially if they will have the
color higher, but it is not with profit to be done, for the expense is more
than the gain.

The Proportion of Copper and Lapis Calaminaris.
Further, it is to be known, That the Brass receives in such burning a heaviness,
for if you put in these eight pots 46 pounds of Copper, so the Brass will
receive in
9 hours an increase of 26 pounds of Brass, so one pours out again 90 pounds
of Brass, this comes from one Oven in the week, as to 14 fires) to 3 Centners
34 pounds of Brass increase: And others say, That the Goslarish Calaminaris
brings more increase than the mountanous Calaminaris, but it makes the Brass in
the breaking gray, therefore in the glowing you must take care, that the stuff
may not run in the work; and it must only be made glowing with the flames of
wood.

This I was willing to mention in short, how Copper is to Brass, for their
sakes who know nothing of it: But how the Kettles are to be beaten, and the
wire to be drawn and extended by water, is to be seen at Ilsenberg, in their
works, and in many other places.

How the Brass Ovens, the Pots, Shovels and lifting Tongs are to be framed, and
the Britanish stone disposed of, the Sculpture following shows, thus Deciphered.
1. The Oven in which Brass is to be burnt: the shape of it in the inside, and
how the pots and crucibles are to be placed in it. 2. The little brass Ovens
are to be placed in the other. 3. How the Pots and crucibles are to be formed.
4. The shovel to take up the beaten Lapis Calaminaris stone, which is to be
mixed with Copper for the making of Brass. 5. The tongs by which the Pots are to
be set in, and taken out. 6. The holes in the Oven. 7. The pieces of the
Britanish stone or Lapis Calaminaris unbeaten. 8. The place for the workman
that sets in the Pots.


Sculpture XXXV.


Thus I conclude the Third BOOK concerning Copper Oars, and its Labor, with
other necessary Instructions appertaining to it; and the Reader may consider
further upon them: as also of other things which he may have occasion to use.

The END of the Third Book.
OF Lead OARS, TIN, ANTIMONY, QUICKSILVER, IRON, STEEL, and the LOADSTONE. BOOK
IV.
CHAP. I. Of Lead Oars.
THIS Book shows how to prove Lead Lead, and how the common The Purpose of this
Book.
or unseparable light Lead Oars are to be smelted in the great smelting Work:
next, how to prove an Oar for Antimony and for Spelter, and how to bring the
Spelter out again: Also to try Tin-stones for Tin, and Quick silver Oar for
Quick silver: Also of Iron stone and Steel stone, for Iron and Steel, with some
Instruments for Tin soap works, and trying of Tin stone in the little Oven: and
also of the wonderful properties of the Magnet or Loadstone.

Lead known from other Metals.
Now, concerning Lead oars they are usually to be well Metal oars, for they are
mostly gray, heavy, bright of color like the Lead it self, and from Bright Oar.
its brightness is called bright oar; and such bright colored White lead Oar.
Lead oars are the richest, and contain above half lead: then there is white
lead oar like a Sand-stone and red lead Red Lead Oar.
oar, like a reddish clay, these Two, viz. the white and red are heavy, but not
so rich in lead as the bright: also Yellow lead Oar.
yellow lead oar mixed with gray, which is called, the Lead ram: These and such
like Oars are counted the smoothflowing and deft oars: and the heavyer they
are, the more they yield in lead.

Flinty Lead Oar.
But the lead oars which are poor, and taken from flinty, blendy or mountainous
places, are either visibly or invisibly insperg'd or sprinkled with brightness
(like the Lead oar at Goslar) and are very heavy: yet commonly no visible
Inseperable lead Oar.
brightness in them, they are somewhat hard and unflowing, yet they do partly
separate and purify in beating and washing, but partly they do stick fast in
the water, that one with the other remain unseparated.

CHAP. II. How to prove defty-lead Oars for Lead.
The mixtures for it.
PROVING of Lead oars do require different observations (as in other oars,
therefore the pure-soft and flowing-lead oars, you must prove thus, first grind
the oar small, and weigh of it two centners, and put it in a crucible, with
twice so much fluss which is made of Copper oars) with a little Sandiver, and
mingle it with a little filed Iron, after this put also on the top of the
Crucible a half square finger high of common Salt, press it down a little and
cover the Crucible, and lute the joynings with a thin Clay, that no coals fall
into the crucible, for that will do hurt, especially in the Lead-Proof, by
reason the fluss will boil up in the Crucible, and the lead will not come
together in one grain, but in the slacks, like grains.

When your Crucibles is thus prepared with the proof, then set it in a little
Oven, prepared for the proof of the Copper Oars, put fire in it, and when the
Crucible Bellows, that How to dispose it into Crucibles and Ovens.
the proof may have a strong heat, so that it need not stand long: then take out
the Crucible, and let it be cold, then beat it asunder, and you will find below
a grain of Lead, so much as the 2 centner-proof-weights will yield; then draw
up the Proof-weights, and you will see how many centners of the bright or
deft-lead Oar will yield a centner of lead.

Iron is to be added to the melting of lead.
But to this proof must be added filed Iron, that the Antimony which is in the
raw lead-Oar may touch the Iron rather than the lead, for if it had no Iron to
consume, it would begin on the weak Lead, therefore in many places, in the
great fire, old Iron, or Iron scales, slacks and sinders are to be added to the
melting, whereby more Lead is produced: it has also this service in melting,
that some Lead yields foul and unclean work, which by the Addition of the Iron
becomes clean, for the Antimony or remaining Sulphur will give it self (in the
melting in the Lead-Kilns) to the Iron, and will come away that so the lead may
be pure.

But some Assayers pretend to set the Grain-lead Test, which in proving is
found below in the crucible, and let it drive, so it will become clean: which
is false, for the Lead being a vveak- volatile Metal, easily consumes it self
in the fire: therefore I judge that when the proof has once suffered the
fire, the Lead will become good and clean, unless the grain of the Proof be
not clean, and that there does hang on the same Lead, raw glimmer or stone,
which is a sign that the Proof has not received its due heat, which ought to
be observed by the Assayer) and then he must make the proof once more.

CHAP. III. How to prove an undefty, Lead-Oar for Lead.
BUT the right lead Oars (which have with them some flint, or other harsh
stuff) they prove thus: Beat the lead Oar into pieces, as small as grains of
hemp, and weigh of them 2 centners, and set them in an Assay test in a proof
Oven, and roast them, but make it not too hot at first, that it may not run
together like Sinders (and do just as is above mentioned with the Copper-proof)
then grind the roast-Oar very small, mingle it with the fluss (covered rindx
with salt) and you need no filed Iron to this, for it has two contrary
Sulphurs which consume one another, so that the lead will remain sure, then
boil the proof in the little oven before the bellows (as before) thus the lead
will be right in the proof.

CHAP. IV. How to prove poor separable Oar by boiling it, and trying it by
smelting.
A goodway of beating Oar.
MANY times also Silver containing Lead glimmer do break in the Oven (being
insperged with stony-Oar) but when you have a separable Oar, let it separate it
self from the glimmer in the water, viz. when the Oars are beaten that they may
be drawn in washing and cleansing to a pure Oar: of these I must mention
something for the good of the Mine-workers, what difference is to be observed
in the beating, because oftentimes by Negligence comes damage; but first of
the try-proof in the little work.

Take a common proof of the light oars, beat it small centners, more or less,
and draw it into a Tub to a clean Oar, and gently separate this from the light,
and weigh how many centners of clean oar, the washed common oar will yield; and
then you may easily reckon how many centners of common oar will yield a centner
of good oar; and this pure oar may come to be so by the beating, sifting or
washing it, (and do waste and prove, as above) but the good clean and bright
oar is proved upon lead; thus you have the content of the Lead.

Now concerning the beating in the great work, the lead Oar you know is a heavy
Oar, yet it is subtle and easy to be beaten into dust, which swims upon the
water, and goes forth; especially, if the same be in a glimmery or flinty, or
horny stone (which Quarryes or horn-stones do afford) to which add the glimmer
in beating, and make it dust, and this subtle dust (which is the best of the
Oar) does often times yield a blew, dust which will lay it self on the great
walls or stones in the washing, and comes to no profit.

A hurtful Beating.
But, some use the Beaters or Workers (which build the Beat-works) to prepare
thus the wet-works, viz. That the hindmost stamping Pestel which beats the
light or rocky Oar from behind, and beats against the lamins or plates;
understand it in this manner, That the hindmost Pestel may fall first, then the
middle one, and at last, the first next the Plates.

This beating is not profitable because it causes great damage, by reason
that the beaten stuff or rocky Oars set themselves before the Plates, so that
the graind Oar cannot well come through, but beats it self into a small or
subtle dust, and goes away in the beaten or washed stuff, therefore many
Washers esteem the dry-beat Works Difference in Beating.
better, where one may work over the Seeve, and have the great and small Oars
asunder, and also make more sorts than with the wet work, which is found that
if the wet-beaten work is built and prepared thus, the poor or rocky Oars will
be beaten back from the plates, viz. that the Pestle nearest the plates will
fall first, then the middle one, and at last, that which is behind, thereby the
plates will remain clear, and the holes will not be stopped, but the water will
carry the pure Oar through without hindrance, whereby not only more Oar will be
preserved, but also the Oar may be made great or small, and so to greater
profit: and having found this in the work, I would not leave it unmentioned
being so fit for every Mine-worker and Assayer to know.

CHAP. V. How to try common Lead-Oars for Lead, in a little Oven.
LIKE as the Copper Oars (mentioned in the Third Book) are to be tried in a
little Oven, so may it be done with the Lead Oars, especially if they are very
clean, right and good, let them be thus beaten raw, as small as half an Hazel
nut, then set them upon a little Oven, but it were better 3 or 4 pounds of such
small beaten oar might be laid first upon a Test, and gently roasted, and then
beaten and roasted again, that its great wildness may come off, and so the lead
will easily separate from the slacks without other Additions.

CHAP. VI. How the inseparable and light Lead Oars are to be assayed in a
little Oven.
CONCERNING the light-common-Lead-Oars, separable; only they must be roasted
somewhat better, and when they are thus prepared, then melt them through the
little Oven, but when the lead is In the little Oven
not come altogether, then beat the slacks very small again, and take the clean
lead from it, as you separate the stone; Now when the Lead oar is flinty (if
one be diligent) then weigh the lead which is cleanly separated, and make your
account how many centners of Oar may yield a centner of Lead; but if the lead
oar be very coppery, it is to be roasted, whereby in the proof melting the
Copper will come among the lead, therefore it must be separated upon a very
flat harth, and you must cause the lead (as above in the Copper proof
direction) to run off with a gentle fire, and so the lead will become clean,
and the Copper will remain settled, and this makes clean work (as you are taught
before.) But the little oven for proving the lead oars must be prepared (like
to the Copper Oars and flints) that you may bring out the slacks and lead very
clean, as such practice will show.

In Crucibles
But in the Assay Crucibles the proof must be thus: Take the light lead oar,
grind it small, weigh two Centners of it with thy Proof-weight, set it upon a
proof Test in the Oven, let it roast till it stink no more of Sulphur, then
grind it small, put it in a little Crucible with four centners of the fluss
(which is used to the deft lead Oar) put in it also melted Sandiver, and cover
it with Salt, lute it with clay, and let it boil in the little Oven before the
Bellows, blow more strongly to this proof than to the clean bright proof, and
thus you have the Content right.

Vnroasted.
You must also know, That every lead Oar may be proved unroasted; thus, Grind it
small, weigh two centners, use the fluss to it (according to Instruction given)
only with the Sandiver take among-it raw Argol, mingle it together, cover it
with Salt, and the crucible with a covering: Lute the joynings with clay, and
set it in one of the little Ovens, blow strong to it like to a Copper proof (as
above) thus you will find the Content of the Lead.

CHAP. VII. How to make a Lead-Proof on a Table or in a Stove.
THE Lead oar to this proof must be very clean and good, take and roast it a
little, then make a fluss of two parts of good clean Saltpeter, and one part
of small ground Coals mingled together, put two parts of this fluss, and one
part of the roast Lead Oar also well mingled into a Crucible, cast a little
glowing coal in it, then it will begin to burn, and the Lead which is in it
will flow together, and although this is an uncertain proof (not to be trusted
to) yet thereby one may learn to know the property and nature of Minerals.

CHAP. VIII. How to make Lead Oars (though they will not separate in the water)
to be profitable.
ALTHOUGH I intend not to write much of the smelting, and thus to mingle what
pertains to the smelting and lesser proving; yet I could not but leave somewhat
to signify of smelting of the light lead Oars, because it is necessary, and no
common labor, but to many unknown.

Rocky lead Oar.
The Lead-Oars which are poor, and will not separate in the Water, are flinty
Glimmer, or such as come from unseparable Oars, and yet to be made to profit
(if one have a pretty quantity of them) but not by the common smelt-work or
arched Oven, for there the wild and sulphury slacks of the oars consume the
Lead very easily, The Sulpher Slaks* devour the Lead.
that almost no Lead, or not half so much as in the little proof is found or can
be made, but only after the useful melting at Goslar, with which the light
contenty lead Oars of the same place are to be smelted in a great quantity, and
by no other ways, as by me and many others have been tried.

But that you may have a sure Instruction for this work, and how such volatile
oars may be helped, I shall therefore describe the whole Goslarish Method,
which they use in preparing their Ovens, etc.

First, I will signify what manner of Lead-Ovens there are at Goslar, and what
they contain, that one may the better find out what does follow.

Goslarish Lead Oar.
The Lead Oars at Goslar are commonly black Oars, also a white-gray flint with
insperged Copper flint, and are very shining, which Glimmer is not to be seen
in the Oar, but apparently in the melting and slacks, a Centner of the best of
that Goslarish oar (if there appear not Glimmer) does not contain above 16
pounds of Lead, but of the common Oar (mingled among the flint which cannot be
separated from it, and breaks the most) usually there is but 7 pound of Lead,
and of the lightest less: this also has an Oar Quarry which stands intermixed
with it, and this Oar is to be roasted in very great Ovens, and to every one
three fires given; and then a Centner will contain but little above 5 pound of
Lead, and one dram of Silver (notwithstanding it contains
more before the roasting) which I judge does come of this, that in the roasting
such Oars there comes among the others, light and good; and therefore the
Content is more equal, and these 5 pounds of Lead, and one dram of Silver are
for the most part melted out in the Smelting.

Two melt Ovens upon one water.
Secondly, In the same place must be no more than two Smelt Ovens to one spring
(though the Melters think (if it might be so for the Waterfalls-sake) that it
were better that every Smelt Oven should have his own spring and wheel, because
every one might order his Bellows most advantagiously, which must be with great
might and with heaps (as will be shown) to force the Oar through the Oven: yet
it is at all times set through the smelt Oven nearer the Wheel, than through
the other, and so where is more set, there is more Lead made, and with more
profit of the Coals.

Smelt ovens inward, within a wall of Smelt Ovens.
two bricks and a half deep, and two bricks wide, and the Walls above it, two
else and a half high, of Shifferstones which are not thick, that one may, when
he will, break out the Oven for the Lapis claminaris, which grows in it (as
hereafter you may hear) for the Shiffer or slackstone in the same place will
very well endure the fire, and they do lay the foundation of the same two else
deep under it, crossways; that it may go out against the bellows, yet some
foundations extend or reach to the wheel-room, but I do not approve of it, for
it they become moist thereby, or draw moistness to it self, then it is hurt in
melting, therefore it matters not a little that the smelt Ovens be right in
their wideness and hight, as also that the Foundations be in their right
places, that no water may come in, not too deep nor too moist, for if the water
go on the Foundations, then the stuff in the Lead will not separate nor work
well; also that the forms may lay right according to every kind and condition
of the Oar, neither too sharp nor too flat, which should be fitted that the
Bellows may blow in the midst of the stuff in the Oven, just near the forewall;
The smelt Ovens at Goslar have very great Bellows, of six Ox hides to one pair,
to force the Oar through in great quantities, therefore the Bellows must be
strong.

Two Crvcibles for the Lead.
Concerning the Crucible in the Oven, it must be made thus, Lay upon the
Foundation a great stone, which is called the Crucible-stone, upon this they
make a harth of Clay, mingled with little slacks, and upon it, another harth of
Clay, and when it is dry they wash the Crucible which is half in the Oven, and
half out, the middle standing right under the Wall) with burnt Oars of a thumbs
thickness, and when it is dry and well warmed, that it will glow very well, and
become firm in the Crucible like steel, then the smelt Oven is prepared till
the closing: but such a Crucible must be to the smelt Oven five quarters of an
ell deep, and without the oven, it must so bend it self that the Lead may come
to stand before the oven in the Crucible, and not in the oven.

The Closing the work in the Ovens.
When all this is done, then they put a vessel with Coals in the warm Crucible,
and upon the Coals three Vessels full with light coal-dust, which they make
thus: They make on the Wheel on the end of it a Beater or Mallet, and as the
wheel goes round about, then the Mallet falls down twice upon little hard
coals, which the servant of the Melter, when he has time does put under with a
Shovel, albeit it is a slow work, yet they make so much dust with it as may
serve two ovens, for they are not willing to lay so great a burden upon the
Wheel, but they beat no Clay with it (as they use in the dust in other
Smeltings) then they moisten their Coal-dust, and force and beat them with some
heavy thing, into the Crucible in the oven, (commonly with an iron Beetle) that
it may not come upon one another, and also before the oven, where they make it
a little higher, that the slacks may not flow out, and leave a hole open
below on the oven, under the forewall, (which is called an Eye) that one may
almost reach his hand into the Oven.

Of kindling the Fire.
After the preparation and closing of the oven, they put on the Top of it
glowing and other Coals, and after that a dray or two full of their slacks,
then coals again, upon it the burnt oar, and so continually coals and oars till
the Oven be full to the top, also they lay before it live coals, but not many,
only that the dust may remain warm near the fore-vvall, where the slacks flow
out: Now when the oven is set full, they stay till the fire burn in the Oven,
and then they begin to melt, and make the Oven wet, with vveak slacks, as in
other meltings: neither have they Iron-stones, but copper which is to lie
pretty far in the oven, for the Iron gratty slacks will devour the Iron stones
quite in twice vvorking, which they do not so easily to the Copper: yet in
time they do consume also, so that they must be renewed once in a quarter of a
year.

Centner of roast oar, and the oar will flow like water, and works it self
very fresh, and there is nothing else to be taken to it, but only the burnt Oar.

Now, when the Melter lifts off the uppermost slacks, iron Ladle he pours them
out, which will run like lead, so fresh as they are, and the slacks look like a
melted slack-stone. But the lead creeps through the light dust in the Oven, and
hides it self under it near 23 hours, and therefore the wild Sulphurish slacks
cannot reach it, nor the long during heat consume or devour it.

Opening the Oven.
When the Melter has observed his time, then he Funnel below, and takes out
the light dust together with the slacks which are settled in it, and whilst the
Melter is drawing the dust out of the Oven, a servant must gently pour water,
that the Melter may endure the heat, and when all the dust is drawn out, then
the Melter with his fork stirs the Lead in the Oven below, so that all the Lead
may come together, then he casts the Lead into the harth standing by the Oven,
and it must be kept warm continually.

Of the Cakes or Sows of Lead.
Out of this he draws it into Cakes or sows of Lead Fryberish Method, and
brings out of the 60 or 70 Centner of melted Oar (in such a time well melted)
near three centner of Lead, of which one centner contains 4 loths of Silver,
and the rest of the Lead and Silver will remain in the slacks; and though there
be
almost as much yet remaining, it is a Wonder that so much should be produced
out of a poor contenty stubborn Oar.

But if you would melt other Oars besides this (after Goslarish Method) you
must be careful the Oar may work it self fresh; for if it do not, then you
must help it, for the light dust cannot suffer the very soft slacks* also when
the light lead Oar contains pretty much Silver and little Lead, then at all
times, according to the condition of the Oars, there may be added hard Lead,
that the Silver may have a refuge into the lead.

I must signify, that in the melt Oven of the Goslarish Lead oars, they lay on
all four walls of the Oven a gray with a yellow mingled matter, every Row or
Lay as Galmay, or Lapis Calaminaris.
thick as a straw breadth) which they call Galmay, used in the brass-melting (and
adding as you have heard in the end of the Third Book:) and this matter must be
put out of the melt Oven after 8 or 9 Rows or Lays are made, else the Oven will
be too narrow, so that no more can be melted in it with profit.

Lead oar and Lead, that every Mine and Smelter, who will employ himself in it,
may know how every one may be help d; for it is a weak tender Metal, and may in
Smelting quickly be hurt: And, it is manifest, if this way of Smelting of poor
light oars of Goslar had not been invented The Goslar Mine 700 years
continuance.
(by which they make their Lead) neither the City, nor the Mine-work could have
been thus long useful, having continued these 700 years, and by the help of the
Lord may longer continue. The following Sculpture Deciphered.
1. The The Walls of the Furnace. 2. The Lines on them, shows the Gradations of
the Metal descending. 3. The man that manageth the metal in the furnace. 4. The
back of the Furnace with the coals and pieces of metal flaming. 5. The grand
Test. 6. The Oven for that Test. 7. The pieces from the Test. 8. The man that
beats the Oar. 9. The pieces of Oar and Cinders. 10. A heap of Charcoal. 11.
The water-troughs to wash the Oar in. 12. The Pipes by which the foul water is
cast out. 13. The Instruments for the Furnace and Tests.


Sculpture XXXVI.


CHAP. IX. Of melting Oars with Moll or Turf.
BECAUSE some years since the Miners and Smelters have pretended that all sorts
of Oars might be melted with Sods or Turff (as the Saxons call it) I could not
omit in this part, but give the Reader my Judgment. And because the Oars are
not all of one sort, but partly harsh and hardy, and partly mild saft and
flowing, and that the Turf yields very heavy and much Ashes, which in the Melt
The property of the Molls.
oven comes to be a slack (almost like a Glass) I judge it must not be used at
all to the weak oars, to which this separating Work is unprofitable, for
through their many heavy Ashes the weak flowing oars are hindered, and the Oven
thereby stopped, and though you use half coals with it, yet it would not turn
to profit. But what are harsh-hot-graty Oars (especially roasted lead oars by
help of Coals) may be melted, and it will be serviceable, for they will work
themselves more separable and deft: so that one need not much other addition
(as aforesaid.)

But if one would melt such harsh Oars with Turf only, I fear the Oven will be
stopped many times, by which the work will be much hindered; therefore I
conclude it better to melt with Coals, than with Moll, Sod or Turf.

CHAP. X. How to prove Spelter or Wizmet Oar, which some call Bizmuth.
SPELTER Oar is a white heavy Oar, and Oars the most flowing Metal, which needs
no singular Pains to melt it down: But there are two sorts Two sorts of spelter
Melting.
of melting it, in the Wind, and before the Bellows; as will follow: for, if you
will prove this Oar, how much Spelter it may contain, then grind it small, and
weigh a centner of it, and two centners of the fluss (before spoken of, made of
Argol and Saltpeter) mingle it, and put it in a Crucible, covered wit Salt, and
cover it, Lute it with Clay, and boil it up in a little Oven before the
bellows, like (to a flowing Lead proof) thus you will have the Spelter below in
the Crucible like a lead Regulus; draw it up after thy proof weight, and you
will find how much Spelter a centner of Oar yields: but, till of late, we had
not the way to melt so much out of the Oar, as has been found in the proof,
and the difference is alike, for we find almost the half part more in the
little proof, when the Spelter The Difference of the Content.
is melted out of it: But, as it has been mentioned in the Tin-slacks (which
by a strong fire will melt the remaining Tin) so it is possible to do with
the Spelter.

To melt on the wind.
But to melt the Spelter out of the Oars two methods wind, the other by
Bellows: the weakest sort of Spelter Oars are to be melted on the wind, which
is to be done thus; Take of the Oar, and beat it to little pieces, about the
bigness of Walnuts, and put it in little iron Pans (set in order) that they may
spread abroad, and set them in the field in the wind, and make a fire of dry
wood, so that the wind may bring the flame into the pans upon the Oar; thus the
Spelter will flow quickly out of the Oar into the pans, and when it is almost
flown out, stir the Oar about, that what the flame has not touched yet, may be
melted all out.

Spelter oar (and the right melting) because after this, can nothing more be
melted out of it; then lift the pans off the fire, and put out the oar, and
make the spelter clean, let it be cold, and put fresh oar into the pans, and
melt continually; this spelter so melted is the best and cleanest, and some
centners may be made at a melting, which melting is clearly to be seen in the
following Sculpture.

Oar To melt in the Oven.
clean and beat it small, and prepare a little Oven, a good span wide below, and
four spans high, and above two spans square, then place a weak Bellows (like a
little Smiths Bellows) behind, and in this melt the spelter Oars or slicks with
wood and soft Coals; and before it be all slacks, draw it out of the Oven into
a trough of wood, made on purpose, and in this stir the glowing Oar to and fro,
and so the spelter will flow together, then Zevar Color.
separate it and make it clean; what remains at last of the dross (by either way
of Melting) makes a blew color in great quantity, and may be used for glass to
give it a blew, it is here and there sold to the Glass-houses.

Sculpture XXXVII.
Deciphered.
1. The little Iron Pans for Spelter or Wismet Oar. 2. The fire of vvood for
them. 3. Melted Spelter that is to be made clean in the iron Pan, and the
workman that tends it. 4. He that draws the Oar out of the Mine.




CHAP. XI.
Tin-stone whereof Tin Tin-stone or Zwitter.
is made, is heavy Oar, yet the Metal which it produces is the lightest of all
other Metals; the Zwitter is to be known by its brown color, which inclines a
little to yellow, yet the rich Zwitters are black and of fine growth, and so
smooth as if they were polished, and very rich in Tin, yet sometimes the
Zwitters are found in another form like Iron stone, or a pointed woolferan Oar
(which the old Miners have not known) therefore it is needful to prove the
Zwitter with diligence whether it be Tin-stone or not, and whether it yields
much or little, that the Mine-workers may the better know what to do.

But the Tin-stone, as well in the little proof as in the great work, must not
only be burnt, but also purified clean before the melting, otherwise it yields
not so much Tin, as when cleanly prepared.

Yet, it is to be known that every Tin-Mine-work has a singular manner to
prepare the Zwitter or Tin-stone, which is to be admired.

CHAP. XII. How to prove Tin-stone for Tin.
The way of Proving it.
ALTHOUGH the proving of the Tin-stone how much properly does contain a centner,
be an uncertain proof, yet by it thus much may be learnt, that one may know
whether the Tin-stone be good or light, likewise what happily may be made of
Tin, and to know its true content, and the most common way to be used therein
is as hereafter follows.

First, when you have taken a common proof of the Zwitter, or well-beaten
Tin-stone, then grind it small, and weigh of it with thy proof-weight what
you think fit, and dravv that which is weighed off into the slick or dross,
and weigh that too; then set it in an Assay-oven upon a test, and roast it in a
pretty heat, and when it is cold again, grind it, wash that which is light in a
wooden trough, and weigh the clean slick again, and observe how much goes off
from the slick in the roasting and shifting, and do this two, three or four
times, till the stone is very clean, and that nothing more goes off from it;
thus it is prepared to the proving.

In the Coals.
Of this prepared Tin-stone weigh two Centners, and Pitch, and take a glowing
hazel or Lime tree coal, or any other that does not spring or break in the
fire, but remains whole, cool it in the sand, and cut in it a Channel, and at
the further end of the Chanel, make a little hole, into which put the mingled
Tin-stone above, upon the broad place of the Channels, and lay upon the same
Coals, other Coals, just as broad as the first, for which you must also have a
hole below and above, that the Bellows may blow between, and lute the Coals on
both sides, that they may remain together; and when it is thus prepared, lay it
together with a cool temperate fire, so that the Tin-stone may come above and
in the little hole (in which the Tin is to flow) lay glowing coals upon it, and
blow it with the Bellows, so that the blowing may just move upon the coals in
which the Tin-stone is, so the Tin will flow out of it with a fresh flame, then
lift the Coals out of it, and let it cool, and weigh how much Tin the two
Centners of the prepared Tin-stone has given, then you may make account how
many Centners of the common Zwitter yields a Centner of Tin, this I judge the
surest proof.

With the Fluss.
Then one may weigh off the prepared Tin-stone, and with the fluss (made of
Saltpeter and Argol mingled, and put into a Crucible and covered with Salt)
boil it in a little Oven (like to the Copper Oars) with the Bellows to give the
Proof a strong and sudden heat: for the Tin will burn easily in a strong fire,
and so you will find how much Tin the Tin-stone does contain.

Upon a sudden Heat.
But the Tin-Melters have a singular proof upon the bucking, and washed unburnt
Tin-stone, namely, to cause a shovel to be very glowing hot upon which they put
the Tin-stone that remains upon it, and springs not off, and does color it
self, this they account a good Tin-stone, but if there be much false Oar among
it, they may see it, and I judge it more needful to prove the Tin this way,
because you may know whether it be good or bad, and what may be made out of
it, but for those who have not long conversed with it, or well understand it,
it is better to use the first proof.

CHAP. XIII. How to try Tin-stone in the little Ovens.
WHEN the Tin-stone is cleansed and burnt, then weigh an half, or whole pound
or two of it: and set it through the little Ovens (as before is taught of the
Copper and Lead Proof) and melt it with the Bellows, without any other
Addition, whereby you may fully see how much Tin-stone it yields: but observe,
if you will set the Tin-stone in the little Oven, or will melt it, it is to be
put in wet, and no small or smooth Coals used to it, for the Tin cannot suffer
the heat, like Copper and other Metals.


CHAP. XIV. Of beating and preparing the Zwitter.
BECAUSE in preparing the Zwitter, Tin-stone cannot be made and washed from it,
as in the little proof, which I do impute to the useful and long observed
beating, because the Pestels fall not (as I have mentioned above in the
Lead-work) I judge the other beating (though not tried and prepared upon the
Zwitterwork) not to be unserviceable for the dressing it; but by it more
Tin-stone is obtained, and it stands with Reason, because thereby the Lead-oar
may be profitable to the Zwitter or Tin-oar which I leave to every ones
consideration and pleasure.

To melt old gathered Slacks.
There comes often many profitable works to light by trying, which otherwise
would have been lost; as lately the Melting the old Tin-slacks which have lain
long useless; also upon a new Method, that you need not melt them as before,
through the Zwitter Oven, but over a common Melt Oven, which is used to raw
Works, and may always add fresh, making it not only much but also good Tin.

But because commonly the Melters make not out of Tinstone, so much Tin as out
of the other* that is not as I judge in burning and preparing; but the fault is
in their way of Melting, else it were not possible to melt such Tin out of the
slacks, as now is proposed.

I must further instruct the Reader, That I am of this mind in preparing and
melting the Tin-stone, because it is Zwitter so much Tin The loss in Burning it.
cannot be made in the great proof, with the usual beating and melting, as is to
be found in the little proof, because in beating and melting, there may be
loss, (as above is mentioned) therefore it follows, That to this preparing and
melting some better ways may be invented, in my Judgment suitable to this way.

The way of burning it.
For the Tin in melting cannot suffer so much, and is more volatile in the fire
than Lead, and good clean Tin-stone goes off as well in beating, burning and
washing as the Lead oar: and I judge it more profitable and fit to be tried,
that the Tin-stone be left in grains, and then well burned, but not made half
so clean, as to the now usual melting; and when it is melted over the light
dust with Goslarish Melting.
strong blowing (after the Goslarish Method) under which the Tin may hide it
self, and remain sure, for the slacks and great heat: and I doubt not but by
this way, out of 60 Zwitters may be made more Tin than in the common way of
melting, considering the light Contents of the Goslarish Lead oars (are as is
above written) which does not separate in the water nor are made clean: but of
the Lead which is in it, (as it is said) one Centner commonly contains but five
pound of Lead, by reason of the light Content, and the many flints with the
Oar, which will not let it waste away, and in no other Melting can Lead be
melted out of it, as by the admirable way of Melting in this place is
discovered; whereby I judge this trying would not be fruitless, if it were
truly tried, yet I leave it to every ones consideration. But if the Goslarish
Method should not be used to this, then I know that through their Melt-ovens
it can no vvays be done*

CHAP. XV. An Instruction for Tin-stone Work.
THERE are many sorts of Tin-stone Stone, and in the washing there is much hurt
by the great waters which the Tin-workers use, by which so much of the
Tin-stone as is flowing and subtle runs away, so that for two, three or more
Miles the Tin-stone is found under the Water: which in my Judgment may be the
more profitable, because a full Mine-Tub of the Wash-work yields commonly one
Loath of clean Tin-stone, and may be set over the Seeve-work and washed, so as a
Wash-man may do as Seeve-Work.
much in one day, as two Boys can bring.

But such cleansing must be in a Tub of water with a hole in the bottom, that
the slicks may fall through upon a plain harth, and yet the Tub be always full
of water, and in this the Tin-stone is to be driven over the plain harth made
clean and preserved.

By this Work, if in one day 400 Mine-Tubs were filled and made clean (to which
there needs but four persons) there might in a Weeks time almost half a Centner
of Tin-stone be made clean and gathered, and this were to better profit than
the other usual way; but I leave it to every one's pleasure.

Tin Additions.
Tin, wherein is no Addition, cast it into a round Ball in a frame (made on
purpose) cut the Ingot clean off, and take the Tin you would prove against it,
and cast also of it a round Ball like the other, and cut the Ingot also clean
off, weigh the Balls against one another, as the pure Tin, and if they weigh
alike, then they are of one sort of Tin, but if one Ball be heavier than the
other, The light Tin the best.
there is Addition either in the Melting, or put to it afterward; but the
lighter the Tin is, it is the better: but to know justly the Addition, you must
have a particular weight made on purpose* and when the Addition is found, then
such proof must be weighed against the clean wrought Tin, and the Tin Vessels
made for the Tin, upon diverse Mine-works, will have a difference on the weight
(as is mentioned of the Coppers) and the Proofs will not agree.

CHAP. XVII. How to prove Antimony.
ANTIMONY is a fine heavy Oar bright like Lead, yet spizy, and in Germany and
Bohemia it is found in great quantity, yet some better than other: and now,
because it is used in some matters, I will show the best way how to prove it:
viz. Beat two or three pounds of the Oar small, put it in a pot with a hole at
bottom, cover it, and set it on another pot, Lute the joynings, and set them
between Tile-stones Oar will flow easily, and also the Antimony from it through
the hole, then cool it, and take out the Antimony, so you will see how much
Antimony those pounds of Oar will produce, and accordingly you may order your
self.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Quicksilver.
QUICKSILVER is a fine red and brown Oar, like Gold Oar, partly deft and partly
insperged in the Mine. To prove this Oar it cannot be done in an ordinary fire
(as the other Oars are, Quicksilver Oar*
nor melted out of it) but as a spirit must be driven off in a strong
distillation, for its Metal is in the fire volatile like a spirit.

CHAP. XIX. How to prove Quick-silver-Oar for Quicksilver.
FOR the accomplishing whereof, the best way is to take half a pound of it, or
somewhat less, beat it as small as half a Nut, and put it into a Retort or
other well luted Instrument, and drive the spirit into another Instrument laid
before it in water or other moistness, thus the vapors or spirit will
presently resolve it self in the coldness or wetness into Quick silver: But if
one has no Retorts, he may use a well luted glass Bottle, and set upon the
Bottle a Helmet (which hangs over) in which water is to be put, and the
joynings every where well luted, that no spirit may go out, then let the
Retorts on the Bottle in a little Oven, and make first a gentle fire with wood,
then stronger, thus the Quick silver will drive it self from the Oar in the
coldness or wetness, for the Quick silver loves coldness
and moistness, and avoideth the heat as its Enemy: Now when you have found
Quick silver in the proof, weigh it, and then you may see how much the Oar was
which was set in, whereby your reckoning may be made accordingly.

But concerning melting of Quick silver in the great Jugs.
Work, do thus, beat the Oar small as a little nut, put it into Juggs (made on
purpose) in each about four pound: then prepare a flat harth of moistened
Coal-Ashes, on which set round Tests, three square fingers deep after one
another, and turn upon it the Jugs filled with Oar, stop it well with the
moistened dust, about the Tests and Jugs: then make a wood fire upon it, and the
Quick silver will avoid the heat, and seek the cold which it finds in the Test
below.

This Labor in the great Work is to be seen in Germany, and in many places
upon the Mine-works.

CHAP. XX. Iron and Steel-stone, how to know and prove them.
IRON-STONE is brown, and its color is so that commonly it looks like roasted
Iron; but the best and richest Iron-stone its color is bluish, like to a dug
Iron, and some of these Iron-stones are Magnetish, and draw the Iron
apparently, which proceeds from their hidden heat, as shall hereafter be
discoursed of.

CHAP. XXI. How to prove whether the Iron-stone be rich in Iron.
Tried by the Loadstone.
SO this by the Loadstone; therefore if you will try the Iron-stone, roast it
(though some take it unroasted) grind it small, and take a good Loadstone, turn
or draw it about with it, and the good will hang all on the Magnet, stroke it
off with an Hare's foot, and lift the Iron-stone up again with the Magnet as
much as it can bear, and if at last any remains that will not be drawn up, that
stone is drossy and not good: Thus you may see whether a Mine has
Iron, or whether the Iron-stone in it be rich or poor in Iron, for the Magnet
(as is said) lifts up no other Metal but Iron and Steel.

The Steel-stone and Iron-stone are alike, though not in color, some look like
yellow sparr, this the Magnet will Iron stone at all; but if By the Steelstone.
you roast the Steel stone, it colors it self, and is like the
color of the rich Iron stone, and then the Magnet will lift it very easily,
and sooner than the Ironstone: and then the Iron may be made (with a long and
strong heat, and with hard Coals in a Secret glow) without damage to good
Steel, and the common Steel by Smith-working will turn into Iron again.

Magnet that the Ironstone is good and rich, then the Hammer-smiths (with their
Additions) use further to prove and try it, in the great fire.

Iron stone being of an hot Nature, will not flow To melt Iron. stone.
or melt with a small fire, as Gold and Silver will, but it must be a great and
strong fire, and when it is forced to flow out of the Iron-Ovens, many
Instruments may be cast, and its hot Sulphur will flow from it: also upon
melting of it, somewhat of its substance will come out, and though it be
refreshed in the fire with fresh Ironstone, yet so much of its substance will
go from it as it has lost in the first melting. But when the Iron stone is to
be melted in the high Ovens, or in the running work (with a true Addition as
every Ironstone requires) then let it force it self, yet the twice melted Iron
is best for use, and most deft for to work.

Thus much of the Ironstone, how to prove what it yields in the little work:
But how the Iron may be boiled into Crocum Martis, as also to get Vitriol out
of the roasted Iron (of which the Philosophers write much) and how the Iron is
to be wrought after several Manners and Methods, and hardened: But all this
belongs not to proving of Metals, and so it falls not under my Instructions,
but the Reader is left to find out other ways.

CHAP. XXII. Of Magnets.
LOADSTONES or Magnets being mentioned in BOOK II. CAP. II. and in this IV.
BOOK, I will discourse something of its Nature and wonderful Properties,
because there is none amongst all Jewels which does so naturally show its
Virtues as this Jewel or Magnet, and therefore I will let the Reader understand
what Serapion an old Philosopher writes of it in his Book De Simplicibus and
Mineralibus, where he says thus, Take the Magnet, lay it in an earthen
Vessel, and add much of Calx viva, lute the
Vessel well about with Plaster, and make a great fire under it, and let it
stand in the heat till the fire goes through the earthen Vessel that it may
well glow; then set the earthen Vessel with the matter to burn in a Potter's
Oven, till the overluting be consumed on the Test, then take the Loadstone out
of the Vessel, and mingle it again with Calx viva three or four times, and let
it burn as before, and when it is taken out of the Oven the fourth time, then
hold the Magnet in such a place that neither the Wind, Water nor Dew may come
to it, nor any other Moistness, till it be cool, then beat it small and add
yellow Sulphur, in like weight; Thus the Magnet is prepared, and if one do drop
Water only upon it, a great fire will spring out of the Magnet, which would
burn all that it touches.

This was Serapion's Opinion, against which I have nothing to say, whence the
Magnet does so vehemently love the Iron, and the Iron the Magnet, as though
they were both of one Nature, and created one for the other; the Magnet being
very desirous of Iron, and draws it to it self with its whole Power, and the
Iron presently shows it self by springing to it, and so remains hanging on it.

The Magnet is also called the Sail-stone, for the Sailors look upon it as
their Chief Instructor in their way upon the Water, far and near; namely, after
they have touched the little tongue or Needle in the Compass with the Loadstone.

Also the Magnet is used to the Compass Needle, in the Mine-work, and to direct
their Glass and Audits; and also in the famous and worthy Art of Mark Schiden.
Separation: and also with common Miners, the Sun-Compass is very useful; so
for Brevity sake, I will conclude this Fourth Book: and desire the Reader, for
this time, to be contented with the Instructions I have here given.

The END of the Fourth BOOK.
OF SALTPETER, VITRIOL, ALUM and Salt Springs. BOOK V.
CHAP. I. Of Saltpeter.
IN this BOOK Saltpeter Earth is described, The Purpose of this Book.
known, and how to make Lees of it, and of the Washings and Boilings of it, and
the Purifying of the Raw Parts of it, and how the Salt is separated from the
Earth, and cleansed with particular Instructions how the weak Saltpeter Lee is
to be made richer and boiled to greater profit.

Of Vitriol, Alum and salt springs.
Also how to prove the Flints for Vitriol, and Allum-Oar Alum, and of Wells or
Springs of Salt.

Now, because Saltpeter is much used for several uses (as may be seen in the
Four foregoing Books) especially for the distilling of Aqua Fort. I thought it
a necessary knowledge for every one who shall use the former works, that he may
himself purify the Saltpeter, and cleanse it from the Earth of common Salt.

How to boil salt Peter.
Therefore, I shall, in this Book, give a large and true Instruction to all
such (and others who are Lovers of the Products of Nature) and tell them of
what Species Saltpeter is, and of what it is made, also how to boil it, so that
every one for his own Use may prepare it himself.

Saltpeter is a Stone-Salt, which has in it self a sullen cold fire,
therefore for many things serviceable, especially for separations (of which I
have written in my Books before) and of great use for making Gun-Pouder from
which it cannot well be spared) but it is to be made out of many Sorts of Earth,
as hereafter follows.

CHAP. II. Of what Earth Saltpeter is best to be made.
Sheep stalls.
THE best Earth which is richest in Saltpeter, and has not much Salt, is the
Earth out of old long-lain Sheep-stalls, which are very dry and not wet:

The other Earth which yields good Saltpeter is the Calx or Clay of very old
Walls, in a Town or City: where the Earth it self Old walls.
is Salt-Petrish, having not stood too wet, nor always dry, but sometimes
moistened, and then again shined upon by the Sun:

Earth which comes of broken Old Cellers
Chalk-Walls in ruined Houses, built upon vaulted Cellars, and lain there some
years, because the Vapors out of
the Cellar through the Vault may draw it in, as also from the daily moistness
from above, and so the Saltpeter is generated: and this Earth may be dig'd to
a good depth, for it lies mixed from above down to the Vault, which (by the
beforementioned way) may be proved how deep the Earth shall be taken for the
use.

Also Earth which is old (and has lain long in unplastered Vaults) is good*
but if Vnplastered Houses, etc.
it lies not above a Span or half an Ell deep, it is not good to take up,
therefore it must be tried; only take Notice, that in those places where you
intend to boil Saltpeter, must be also of Saltpeter, or of a Saltish Nature,
that they may be workt together.


Now, those places in general which lay in good fat and claiey Countries, and
the Earth of unplastered Hors-stables, or old sheep-houses (where the Sun has
power over it) as also the Earth of Brewers and of Dyers-houses, and of all
Alumish places, and the Ashes of Sope-boylers and Tanners, and all other Ashes
(whereof Lee is made) are very useful, only this latter Earth, does yield much
Salt: which is some hinderance in boiling.

CHAP. III. How Saltpeter is to be proved.
SALTPETER and all other saltish Earth you must prove thus, Put it in a little
Tub with water upon it, which may cover it a square hand, let it stand two or
three hours, then let it run off, and retain the Lees.

Then take a little Balance made on purpose, pretty weight, then have two
Scales of Brass or Copper, set in each weigh scale one, and in one of them a
Centner of the Proof weight, and in the other Scale drop with the point of a
Knife or a Spoon one drop of this Lees and after that another, until you have
weighed a Centner of the Lees, then with Pincers take the Lees and the little
Scale, which must have room for a Centner of Lees in it) from the Balance, and
set it upon a foot made on purpose over a little warmth, or upon a piece of
Iron-plate or Lamin, and hold a large Candle under it, and the Lee will begin
to boil in the little Scale, and let it boil till all moisture is boiled in,
and the remains becomes yellow-white, and hardish, then lift it off, and put it
in the Balance again, lay as much of the proofweight against it as it weighs,
so you may see how much Saltpeter a Centner of this Lee will yield; only
observe, If you make your proof too hot, then the Saltpeter will be of a
black-brown, and so spoiled, then make it anew, that the Proof may be right.

But that you may know whether it be Saltpeter or Vitriol, take with a knife,
out of the little Scale, some of the rest of the matter, and lay it upon
glowing Coals, and when it melts and burns, and is sharp upon the tongue and
cold, then it is Saltpeter, but if it be Salt and no Saltpeter, then it
sparkles upon the Coals, and will flow, and is upon the Tongue like a common
sharp Salt.

saltish Earth is brought in or made to Lees, or boiled off (as I will show in
my following Instructions.)

After the Proof is made, observe diligently when the Saltpeter does burn,
whether it leaves behind much feces or dregs like Ashes, which will not burn,
and this is Salt. For, if it be found thus, though the Earth be pretty rich in
the Proof, yet it is not to be accounted so good, as if the proof were poorer,
and burned clear off upon the Coals, therefore the Salt by it is not so good,
but it must always be separated from the proof, for it weakens the strong
Lees, and hinders much in many things, as Experience shows.

But if you have not the Opportunity* with the Balance Weights, or understand
them not, then make a Another Proof.
little Scale of Brass of a hand-breadth, and put off the Lee which is made in
it, and set it upon a few hot Coals, let it boil in, as is above declared, so
you may see whether the Lee which is made of the Earth be rich of Saltpeter or
not, which is a nearer way also to have the Proof, yet he that knows it by
Balance and weight is surest of his Reckoning.

7.
How the Saltpeter Lee is to be proved, the Sculpture following shows.

Sculpture XXXVIII.
Deciphered.
1. The Tub in which the Lee is to be made, out of which Saltpeter is to be
extracted, and the Can or Vessel to put water into that Tub. 2. The lesser Tub
into which the Vessel does run. 3. 4. The Master with his Balance, by which he
proves the goodness of the Lee or Suds. 5. The Lamin* 6. The Candle. 7.
Pincers.




CHAP. IV. How the Lees or Suds shall be made out of the abovementioned Earths.
Lee Tubs.
IF you will make a Lee of Saltpeter Earth, then boil it* if* you have a great
quantity, and let it be cut open, as deep as it is found good after your Proof,
and put it among one another in a dry place, then cause Tubs to be made, of the
bigness that one may contain 10 Wheel-barrows of Earth, so that you may have
Lees enough, according to the bigness of the boyl-work, or greatness of the
Kettle; now know that there usually appertains to a common great boyl-work,
(when the Kettle weighs two Centners of Copper) eight Tubs, set them in such
order, that on every side 4. (and so the eight one over against the other) must
stand so far from one another, that one with a Wheel-barrow may run betwixt
them, and the Tubs must stand an half Ell high from the ground, and every one
shall have a Taphole below, and on the side, in which may be put a Tap of Wood,
to be pulled out, and there must lay below under the Tubbs a Channel in which
the Lee may run together into Tubs or Sinks, placed in the ground, so as the
ground may be higher than the tops of the Tubs.

Of the reeds or sticks, to be used.
When the Tubbs are set, then lay in every one a bottom of Wood, full of holes*
which does not lie up from the bottom above two fingers high, and upon the same
lay a bottom made to it on purpose of Sticks or Reeds (which grows by Rivers or
Ditches (bound together a quarter of an Ell thick) but if such stuff cannot be
had, then put upon the bottom full of holes, some chopped Straw* a span long, and
upon the same Straw, lay small little Boards, that it may remain together, thus
the Tubs are prepared, then run the Earth with a Wheel-Barrow into it, and when
you can have old long-layen Tanners or Soap-boylers Ashes, from old holes* put
two or three Wheel-barrows full of them below in the bottom, then put the other
Earth (which you have proved and brought in also upon it) and so do until the
Tub be full to a span breadth, then lay it upon an hurdle or frame of Reeds,
and tie it fast, and let water be poured upon it (so much that it may remain
standing a good square hand above the Earth) but if one could have a
convenience of letting the Water upon it with a Channel, it were better) and do
this so long, until the Water may* remain a good square hand above the Earth,
and that it may be poured upon the Reeds or Hurdle, that no hole may be caused
in the Earth, but remain even; then let the Water stand upon the Earth near 8
hours, then let the Lee run gently off below through the Tap-hole, till it does
run muddy, then pour the first Lee again upon the Earth, and so do till it runs
clear, then run the Lees quite off and retain it, and this Lees is called the
Weak-Lees.

Of weak Lee.
Then pour upon the once extracted Earth, common Water again, and let it draw
out the other Water, which the first Water has left in the Earth, and this
that then comes the second time, is the after*Water* and is called watering
out, and such Water one may use instead of fresh Water, upon new Earth, and
that which runs from it is called raw Lees (which is strong enough to boil) and
a Centner made of this common Earth, does usually contain 3 to 4 pound of
Saltpeter, or above, then put the extracted Earth out of the Tubs and renew it
again constantly, that one may have Lees enough to boil day and night, and need
not delay boiling for want of Lees.

Kettle, a Tub, out of which may run so much Lees into the Kettle, as is
boiled, that the Kettle may remain continually boiling, and always full; then
boil this one day and night, until a Centner of Lee may be taken out of the
Kettle, and may contain in the like Proof a quarter of a Centner, or 25 pounds
of Saltpeter, which may be done in two days, and one night.

Tubs more, prepared with bottoms full of holes (and the sticks or red bottoms
as aforesaid) only above the stuff must be laid again a bottom full of holes,
and put straw upon it, and then Ashes of good Wood (of the best Elm) mingle it
together, and moisten it with good warm Lees, before it be put into the Tubs,
then being prepared, put it into the Tubs, an Ell high above the straw, but if
you can have the Ashes for a small price, 'twere better to put them together in
it, and then pour upon them the boiled Lees (containing 25 pound) boiling hot
water, let it run gently off, and it will first come muddy, therefore put in
more till it run clear.

Strong Lees
When all the Lees is gone through both Ashes, which is done that the Ashes may
take the fatness of the Lees and become fit for washing, and so retain of that
which runs first off a part, and put upon the extracted Ashes, common hot raw
Lees, and let the Ashes be watered out with the same Lees which goes the second
time through the Ashes, and is called strong Lees, then water it out the third
time with hot Lees (and this is called weak Lees) after this the Ashesmay be
watered out with common Lees, until the strength comes out of it.

By the following Sculpture you are taught how the Tubs are to be set, and the
Lees made and boyld from it.

Sculpture XXXIX.
Deciphered.
1. The eight Tubs into which the Petre-Earth is to be put. 2. The Pipe with a
Brass Cock, by which the Water is let into the eight Tubs. 3. The Channel by
which the Lees falls from each Tub, and so into the Receiver. 4. The Sink or
great Receiver of the Lees. 5. The ninth Tub, from which the Lees runs into the
Kettle. 6. The Oven wherein the Kettle stands. 7. The Kettle on the top of the
Oven. 8. The Iron Door by which the Wood is to be put into the Oven under the
Kettle. 9. The Wind-hole in the bottom of the Oven. 10. The Hole where the Oven
may be seen into. 11. The Iron Grate on which the Wood does lay. 12. The form
of the Door by which the Oven may be looked into (being more largely Described
than in Fig. 10.)




CHAP. V. How to Boil Lees or Suds.
TAKE the weak Lees, and put it in the Kettle, and boil it, and then let the
strong be gently put into the Kettle, and so boil the first strong Lee (which
did run off) with it, till all comes in the Kettle, and the Lees be strong
enough, and you must sometimes, with a great Copper-Spoon full of holes, stir
the Lees about in the bottom of the Kettle, (for when the Lee yields Salt it
will fall on the bottom of the Kettle) then lift it out with the great Ladle,
and always take the scum from it, then prove the strong Lee by droping one, two
or three drops upon a cold Iron, and when the drops stand upon it like Butter
(that is, when they flow not off, when you turn the Iron) then the Lees is
strong enough, or set the Lees in a little Copper Vessel, upon cold water, till
it becomes cold, then the raw Saltpeter will show it self, whereby you may see
always whether the Lee be strong enough, which may be seen also upon the great
Spoon, wherewith you scum it, for if the Lees draw it self into a Body like an
Oil, the proofs are right, now when the Lee is thus prepared, then a hundred
pound of it will contain in the proof, very near seventy pound of Saltpeter.

CHAP. VI. How to prepare Lees for the crude and raw Saltpeter.
WHEN the Lee is prepared (as above) Kettle, into a very strong Tub, of good
Wood, let it stand in it till it cool a little and the dirt settles, then the
Salt will fasten it self in great Grains on the Wood, and when the Lees is
cool, so that you may hold your finger in it, then draw it off through a Tap,
which is to stand a span high from the bottom, and put it into great deep
Wooden Troughs, or into Copper Kettles, which must stand in the ground, (the
colder they stand the better) till the Saltpeter grows, and in this the raw
Saltpeter will grow almost two fingers thick, partly white, partly yellow, and
partly very black-brown.

When the Lee has stood in the growth two days and two nights, draw off the
Lee from the Saltpeter, and put it the second time over Ashes again with other
strong Lee, else it will be too fat and will not grow, but when the Ashes are
not good, (so that the Lee cannot grow) then put strong Lee with other Lee,
over new good Ashes, and boil it again to grow (as above:) likewise when the
strong Lee in the making is very muddy in the Kettle, and the Salt cannot fall
because of the muddyness, if this happen, then only take out the Lee to the
growth, and let the remaining Lee, purify through the Ashes.

Now how the Salt is to be taken out, and how the strong Lee stands growing,
this following Sculpture will show.

Sculpture XL.
Deciphered.
1. The long narrow Tubs wherein to cool the Lees. 2. The Oven wherein the
Kettle is placed. 3. The Master that makes and takes out the Petre, and puts it
into separating Baskets. 3. The separating Baskets. 4. The Tub out of which the
strong Lee runs into the Kettle. 5. The Melters in which the Salt* Petre
Improves. 6. The four Kettles standing in the Ground wherein the Saltpeter
also improves it self. 7. A strong Tub into which the Saltpeter is to be cast
as it improves.




CHAP. VII. How to purify and cleanse the raw Saltpeter.
WHEN the Saltpeter is thus made, and Lees drawn off, lift up Raw Saltpeter.
the Kettles or Trays, and turn them to one end, that the remaining Lee may run
clear off; then take a great Iron Spoon such as Bricklayers use, and lift out
the Saltpeter with it, out of the Kettles or Trays, put it into a Tub, with a
hole below, that the Lees may run clean off.

Saltpeter Boylers, (who sell the raw unpurified Earth-Petre) they pour clean
Well-Water upon it, that it may be well washed from the most part of its
redness, and become white, what is run off they put again to other strong Lee,
and boil it the next boiling.

But if you will purify the raw Saltpeter right and well Salt and uncleanness,
to become fair and white, do To purify it
it thus; When the raw Saltpeter is a Centner or four, cause the purifying
Kettle to be cleansed and dried, pour in it so much Well-Water, that the
Saltpeter may be dissolved in it, then make a fire under it, let the water be
boiling hot, and then put the Saltpeter gently and easily in it, and turn it
about with the scumming Spoon, that the Saltpeter may be the sooner and easier
dissolved.

But while you are pouring it into the Kettle, let there Salt Petre is almost
all put into the water and melted, and the cleansing begin to boil, then with
the scumming-Spoon, put some upon the ground, and when the Saltpeter has set
great Grains of Salt, then lift it out, which is better for it.

To make proofs.
When this is done, and the cleansing begins to boil, then it brings up a black
scum, take that off, and take a Copper Vessel which holds near 8 Loths of
strong Lees, and make it half full of the cleansing; put it in cold water to
cool it suddenly, so the Saltpeter will begin to shoot (and this is called a
Proof made) then you will see whether the cleansing be yet too strong, if it
be, there will come a skin over the Proof in the Vessel, and if so, then fill
more warm water into the Kettle, and keep it in such a strength, that the
cleansing in the Kettle may bubble, then make a Proof out of the Vessel, and
when the cleansing shoots in it, and in the midst do remain open (so that it
does not close together) then the Proof is right, but if it grows together,
then fill more water, till the Proof remain open, and pour near a pint of
Vinegar in the cleansing into the Kettle, which will bring up a black scum, for
the cleansing will purify it self of it, and when the scum is thick, take it
off, and when the cleansing has bubled a while longer, pour in it so much good
Vinegar as may keep it in continual bubling, and then take the To purify it
again.
black off, as at first, this you may do the third time, and pour on Vinegar,
till the cleansing be very clean, and do cast up no more black scum; Then take
3 or 4 loths of burnt-Allum, beaten small, and put it in the cleansed water,
stir it about, and of this the Saltpeter uses to yield fine long slacks, and
it hurts not the Saltpeter, then pour the cleansing in the before*mentioned
high slender Tub, and cover it, that it be not cold in the Tub; let it stand an
hour or two at most, thus the yellow dirt will settle it self in the bottom,
then let the cleansing run out while it is hot, and pour it into a great wooden
Tray, or great Copper Kettle, which for coolness had need stand in the ground,
and cover them warm that the Lees may begin to spring from below, else the
Saltpeter will grow first above and fall down, and so will not yield very long
slacks, let it stand three or four days until it grows no more, which you may
prove thus; set some of the Lees in the Copper-proof Vessels* if it grow no
more in it, then take away the rest of the Lees, and let it clean go off, and
then put the Saltpeter with the Iron Spoon, clean out of it, into a Vessel
with a hole below, that the rest of the Lees may run off, and thus you have
purified Salt Petre.

The Lees which is drawn off (while it is yet salty) Lee (in making of the Salt
or Lee) and from this the raw Saltpeter will grow very well. But some use at
the cleansing in the Kettle, Calx viva, by which it becoms as white as Milk,
and they let it settle in the Tub, which makes the Saltpeter very fine, but it
settles not so soon or so well in the Tub, and while the cleansing stands thus
strong in the Kettle, you must not make too great a fire, for if it boil too
high, you can hardly quiet it, or hinder it from running over, whereby comes
great loss, therefore it must be kept bubling with a little flame, and when the
Kettle is washed, such water is to be boiled again with the strong Suds or
Lees, but the scum which is to be taken off from the cleansing must be put upon
the Ashes, where more Lee is to be put over Ashes, that that which is yet in it
may come to profit, and when you boil much in the Kettle, then lay upon it a
hard gray stone, like the color of Tartar, under which the Kittle uses to
burn, and this is sometimes to be cleansed and separated off, with a flaming
fire made under it, to make it fly off, and when the Kettle is empty and clean,
then you may boil it again.

The Earth and Ashes which have been extracted raw weak Lee,) are to be put in
into vaults or Houses, and in four years it will be sit to use, only when you
use it to make Lees, then you must (many weeks before) dig open such Vaults,
that the moistness may go off, and the Sun may shine in, and of this good Lees
may be made.

Masters do suppose, that if one could How Saltpeter is generated and spoiled.
run off the Petre in the Houses under Tylings, it would be sooner good, which
is likely, for, because of too much moistness or daily rain upon it, the
Saltpeter is much spoiled, and will have only a little moistness, of which it
is to be generated.

To mingle splinters of Wood with it.
Also some of the old Masters do use among the Earth in the Lees-Tub, to mingle
bits of Firr Wood, a finger long, and these they put among the Earth, with the
Lees that has been made, and set it in the vaults or Houses, and such fatness
which is used in the mingling the Saltpeter
does also generate and multiply, and they say when it lays in a dry place, it
may be used again within a year; likewise they pour upon the light poor Earth
in Houses, the old decayed colors of Cloth-Makers or Dyers, or any sharp
decayed colors of Waters made with Alum, yet not so often, but that such
Earth may have a better beginning to a good effect. Next, they bring also Soot
out of the Stoves, Furnaces and Chimnies, and mixed with the Earth, likewise the
Ashes of such Lees as is made in Houses, and in the Nosel or Mouths of Ovens,
where much Straw is burnt, which Ingredients do much help to a melioration,
that it may sooner be used.

brown thick Lees, which of it self is too fat to make Saltpeter of, amongst
which you must mingle another Earth more brittle and lean, and with it put some
made Lee over it, or else you will bring no Saltpeter off from it fit to be
washed.

How the Salt Peter is cleansed, and what Instruments pertain to it, they are
almost alike to the XXXIX. and XL. Sculptures next before, and out of the same
to be seen.

CHAP. VIII. How to cleanse the great Graind and black Saltpeter Salt.
black or gray Saltpeter Salt, which is found (in boiling Saltpeter) below in
The uses of it.
the Kettle and slender-Tub, this may be good Salt for dressing Victuals,
without any danger, only it must first be cleansed and purified thus: Wash well
the Kettle, put in clean Well-Water, make under it a fire, and when it begins
to boil, take the said Salt, put it gently in, and let it dissolve, stir it
continually, and when it is all dissolved, then pour the Lees into a Tub, let it
settle that the Lees may be clear, then wash the Kettle clean again, put the
clear Lees or Suds in it, and boil it till the Salt fall in it, and then lift
it out with the great Spoon, put it in a Basket above the Kettle, that the
remaining Lees may run again into the Kettle, and lift up such Salt, until no
more will fall, then dry it, and so it is prepared: But some before they use
it, let the Salt glow out, by which it becomes stronger, and what remains of
the Lees in the Kettle, boil it like the other Suds to a Lees, and put it out,
and let the Saltpeter grow out of it, for this Salt coming out of Saltpeter,
cannot be quite without Saltpeter, but there will be still some among it,
which is to be cleansed off thus.

Take Notice if the Salt have too much Saltpeter, or black and unclean, the
Salt will not become very To make it white.
white at once, for when the Lees begins to be strong, then ascends not white,
therefore such unclean Salt must be dissolved in the Kettle once more, purified
and cleansed, and then it will become very white.

To purify the Salt through Ashes.
There is another way of cleansing such black and unclean Salt, viz. one may put
the dissolved Salt out of the Kettle thus warm, through the Ashes, over which
already Lees has been put, of which the salt Lees, will almost purify and
cleanse it self, yet it becomes not all white Salt, but the last remains
commonly yellow, therefore it must be cleansed once more; likewise take notice,
that when the Salt is to be put over the Ashes, that it must be well watered
out, that the red bottom may not be very salty, else it will come in the next
strong Lees, and makes it very salt.

And thus you have a true large Instruction of the Saltpeter boiling, how it
is to be usually observed; but it is a tedious and not profitable boiling for
this reason, because there is in a Centner of Lees but three or four pounds of
Salt Petre, therefore the Water remaining must all be boiled off, which takes
much time and expenses, and cannot be avoided, but how it may be helped (as I
my self have found out and used) I will Demonstrate in the next Chapters.

CHAP. IX. How to make the raw Lees richer before the boiling*
The manner of doing it.
AFTER this way many Salt Peter boylers have searched, but the true Method
(because they have not been guided by the little Proof) they could not find;
but thus it is to be done. Take a Tub full of the Lees (of which a Centner
contains four pound of Saltpeter) pour it upon new Earth, let it stand upon it
near 12 hours, that it may run off and as much as remains behind of the Lees,
so much Water pour upon the Earth, and let it run through to the other, and
thus you will receive so much again, as you had of Lees before; now when this
is done, then prove the Lees, through the little Proof, so you will find
(because of the other pouring over) it will contain 6 pounds, this 6 pounds of
Lees, prove again upon fresh Earth, and let it stand 6 hours, and then run it
off, and follow it with so much Water as remains behind upon the Earth; also
that the first measure of Lees may come only again and not more, then the Lee
will contain nine pounds, this you may once more pour over fresh Earth, and
enrich it; but always observe, that the Lees may be neither more or less then
it was at the first; and to follow this with Water in this manner, I only
mention for the proof sake, that one may be sure of the enriching, for the Lees
by this means will contain more Saltpeter, and yet the Lees will not increase;
then to supply the first measure of Lees, pour in some of the weak Lees, so it
will be the sooner and more enriched, and of such you may then soon come to a
Suds.

And though there is much labor and diligence thus The profit.
make in one Week two or three times more Saltpeter* and it spends no more
Wood, only it requires more Vessels to keep the Lees severally for their
enriching.

I will also show how the Saltpeter boiling may be Earth to a great
Boyl-work, and good Earth is not always to be had, but sometimes, if one
cannot prove the Earth, very poor Earth is mingled amongst it, that the
expenses are spent upon the poor as the good, and thereby no gain to be
expected, therefore I judge it more profitable to make the Boyl-work with
three or four Tubs, that one may take the best Earth which is to be had out of
old Cities, Houses and Stables, yet not too deep, by which means such Lees as
are of 8 pounds content, may easily be enriched (as above) to 18 or 20 pounds,
and not done with so much boiling, this they may consider of, especially
where Wood is dear.

To water out the Earth.
When the Lees is thus enriched, there will remain more Saltpeter in the Earth
(for the good Lees cannot take it all out) then upon this Earth pour common
water, let it stand some hours and then run it off, so you will receive weak
Lees, prove it, and make the enriching thus, as has been showed, and so you
may be continually at your work.

To enrich Lees of Alum.
Now because the Saltpeter Lees may be enriched out of poor Earth (much more
the Alum Lees out of the same Oar and Earth) and may be boiled to better
profit, will by dilligent searching, be found how it may be performed.

Salts of Oars.
After this manner I judge one may make Lees on all roasted Oars, and try what
Salt they may yield, for I do believe that the roasted Lead Oars are not
without such a salty matter, which I leave to farther Experience; But how a
Saltpeter Halls, Houses or Sheds, are seen to be on the outsides, you will
see in the following Sculpture, thus

Deciphered.
1. The forepart of the Saltpeter House, wherein the Lee Tubs do stand. 2.
The back part wherein the Kettle and the Oven do stand, wherein the Saltpeter
is to be boiled. 3. The Old Pieces of dig'd Earth, out of which Saltpeter is
to be taken. 4. The Wood used for boiling it. 5. The Servant that shaves and
fits the pieces of Earth, for boiling, 5. 5. 5.


Sculpture XLI.


It is also to be observed, That the Saltpeter Sheds must be built very low,
as possible, and covered with Straw, whereby the warmth from the Kettle may go
over the Tubs, especially in Winter, (if Earth is to be had for boiling) so
that the weak Lees may not freeze.

CHAP. X. How Flints are to be proved for Vitriol, and Allum-Oar for Alum.
Flints To make Lees of it.
are Coppery or Vitriolish, and some more rich than others, the proof is thus;
Roast the Flint very well, cool it, beat it small and make Lees of it, then
weigh a Centner of it, and prove it, (as is said of the Saltpeter Lees) and
what remains in the little scale, weigh against the weight, then you may find
how rich the Flint is: But that you may be sure it is Vitriol is good, but when
the proof does not so, then make more Lees, and try it in a little pan of Lead,
that you may know what kind of species it does yield.

Vitriol-Lees out of Roast-Oars and Copper-Stone, therefore we may out of
Copper and Silver, etc. which is with good profit to be melted out of them, yet
it is found, that out of the same Flint, and Copper-stone, made into Lees, there
has been made much less Copper than when it had been melted
before the making them into Lees, by reason the Vitriol Lees which is made of
it, has drawn out the most part of the Copper, and somewhat of the Silver,
therefore it is not to be trusted to, nor any account to be made of it.

Allum-Earth or Shiffer, if you prove it for Proof upon Alum.
Alum, it matters not that it be roasted, neither can it be done raw with it,
as it comes out of the Vein, but it must lay a while upon a heap together, to
be weathered and warmed in it self, that it may fall asunder and break out, and
then you may make Lees of it, and you will find by the proof of the Alum upon
the Tongue, that it draws it together very Vitriolish.

Vitriolish Water in the Mines.
Further, we may observe, that in the Vitriol-Mines Goslar upon Cuttemburg, and
other places) that the Waters which by Art are drawn out of the deepest Mines
are for the most part vitriolish, yet some more than others, and if such Water
might be directed in wooden Pipes into the Boyling-Work, and boiled for
Vitriol, it would yield good profit; yet when this is done, you must take heed
that no sweet-Water (which by Arts is brought into the Mines or other Tiling
Water,) may come among it, but such Waters (as above) you may prove, and
further after your pleasure make profit by them. Also on this wise you may
prove all Wells or Springs of Salt (after the beforementioned little proof) and
search and know properly how rich they be.

And I was willing to mention these Instructions, for salty-Proofs, that those
who are now concerned, may know how the better to manage them.

Thus much, loving Reader, I have writ of proving all Oars and Metals, and
other necessary things fit to be known, for proving and meltiug them, to the
good and profit of all Mine-workers and young Assayers, and for such as are
ignorant of these Arts: and this I have done in five Books, most faithfully and
dilligently, and also given very large Instructions, by writing and Sculpturing
the same; and I desire for this time that every one who loves or inclines to
these Sciences, will be content with it, and accept of my good Intentions, for
these are not designed for Magisterial Artists.

Now in these Books I have not undertaken to treat of all Oars singly, upon
preparing and melting them in the great Works, because I could not well
discharge my self therein, in respect that it would be a greater Task than my
present Services can admit of, yet I will reserve it to a farther Opportunity,
and I will also respite my Labor to discover how the Gold and Silver upon the
Coined Works are to be ordered, upon diverse certain Contents, and so made to
profit, which would require a particular and more large Volumn, considering
that it is a great Work and for many years (with other things pertaining to the
Coyn'd-Works) have been as Secrets, and therefore I

And although Goldsmiths, common Assayers and Merchants, do suppose when they
can reckon some dressings of the Crucible, they have the perfect Art, yet they
want the most needful and best parts; namely, they have not been with the
Coiners, neither have they any true understanding or exercise of it, and
therefore in these matters nothing could be done with fruit or profit.

Generation of Oars and Metals, of which the Philosophers and Naturalists have
wrote and disputed very much, I leave all of them to others with their Rules
and Opinions of the Mine-Workers, by reason that their thoughts and
presumptions, are not only uncertain, but oft-times wide and agree not
together; yet I really believe, That God the Almighty Creator has reserved
these Mysteries to his Almightyness, and that Gold, Silver and all Metals
through his Everlasting Word, the Son of God (from whom Heaven and Earth, and
all things which are in them have their Creation and Being) are to this day
preserved and multiplied, and that the knowledge of them are come to clear
light, and published for his Glory and the good of Mankind; for which glorious
Gifts, every one ought with pure Zeal to praise and thank God from his Heart,
and employ all his diligence and reason, so that what he may have out of the
Mine-Works may be used to the praise of God, and to the profit, help and
advantage of his Neighbors, whereby God the Almighty will not only bless it,
but also richly Multiply the Possessors of it, and cause them to enjoy it to
the Salvation of their Souls.

Now, may the Lord God, Creator and Preserver of all Creatures, be graciously
pleased to open the hidden Treasures of the rich Gold Soap, also of Gold,
Silver and all Metallic Veins, for upholding the Posterity of the Poor Sons of
Adam, and by blessings and long continuance, preserve them for his beloved Son,
our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and that we may use them with thanks and praise.

Amen.
FINIS.
Fleta Minor, Spagyrick LAWS, The Second Part.

CONTAINING ESSAYS ON Metallic WORDS: Alphabetically composed, as a DICTIONARY
TO Lazarus Erckern.

Illustrated with two Sculptures.

By Sir John Pettus, of Suffolk, Knight.

Scire tuum nihil est*
Nisi te scire, hoc sciet alter.
LONDON, Printed, for the Author, by Thomas Dawks, his Majesty's British
Printer, at the West End of Thames Street. 1683.

Kind Reader,
YOU are desired to take notice, That all the following words are only
transciently used in the Essays, and therefore referred to the Capitals of the
Dictionary, and the Capitals of the Dictionary are referred to some parts of
the five Books of Erckern.

Adam vide Gold. Aegipt v. Gold. Aegiptians v. Quicksilver. Aethiopia v. Gold.
Aes v. Brass. Aetna v. Bitumen. Africa, v. Gold. Alabaster, v. Marble,
Plaster. All v. Chimistry. Allays v. Money. Alum v. Minerals. Almonds v.
Blanch. Alpha v. Regulus. Amethist v. Metals. Antimony v. Metals, Minerals.
Antartick v. Gold, Loadstone. Antidotes v. Dung. Architecture v. Calcine.
Armoniack v. Minerals. Aarons Bells v. Bell. Arsenick v. Mineral. Artick v.
Gold, Loadstone. Ashes v. Gold, Pulveration. Asses v. Bone. Asia v. Gold.
Atlantic v. Gold. Auricalcum v. Wire. Barley corn v. Measures, Money. Barme v.
Yeast. Bees v. Putrefaction, Regulus. Beergood v. Yest. Beer v. Blink. Black
Lead v. Lead. Blood v. Gold. Boodstone v. Polish. Boards v. Planks. Boar v.
Bacon. Borneo flu. v. Gold. Botanist v. Color. Bread v. Feces. Brimstone v.
Minerals. Bullock v Ox. Buxtons Wells v. Mines. Calcanthum v. Sublimatum.
Calaminaris v. Brass, Mineral. Camelion v. Eggs. Camel v. Armoniack. Capa longa
fish v. Conglutinate. Cedar v. Gold. Ceruse v. Lead. Chaldeans v. Quicksilver.
Chalck-stone, v. Lead, Lime. China earth, v. Earth. Chiromancy v. Measures.
Cinders v. Coal. Cinnabar v. Minerals, Quicksilver. Clay v. Loadstone. Cloth
v. Filtration. Coaches v. Yellow. Coin v. Mint, Money. Consonants v. Regulus.
Constellations v. Loadstone. Copper v. Metal. Corrosion v. Calcine.
Counterfeits v. Money. Christ v. Gold. Crocus v. Verdigrease. Cubit v. Measures.
Cup v. Pipkin. Damp v. Evaporation, Mines. David v. Gold. Dew v. Feces.
Diamonds v. Metal, pulveration. Discourses v. Regulus. Devils arse v. Mines.
Dodmans v. conglutinate. Dogs v. Dung. Dovegang v. Mines. Dram v. Measures.
Ducks v. Dung. Dung v. Eggs, Gold. Durdans v. Petrefaction. Dust v.
Pulveration. Earthquake v. Boiling. Ebb v. Loadstone. Eden v. Gold. Eels v.
Putrefaction. Eldon hole v* Mines. Electrum v. Metals. Elbow v. Measures. Ell
v. Measures. Elephant v. Armoniack and Dragons Blood. England v. Lodestone,
Waterstones, etc. English Mines, v. Mines. Equinoctial v. Gold. Erckern,
Etimology v. Alchimist. Essays v. Assay. Europe v. Gold. Eye v. Needle. Fathom
v. Measures. Fermentation v. Yest. Finger v. Gold. Fish v. Eggs. Flax v. Flux.
Flesh v. Gold. Flowing v. Loadstone. Flower v. Fermentation, Yest. Flies v.
Putrefaction. Fort v. Measures. Foam v. Yest. Frankincense v. Xiphion. Froth v.
Litarge, Yest. Fullers earth, v. Earth Fusile, v. Fusion. Gallenist, v. Quick
silver Ganges, v. Gold Geese, v. Dung. Gems, v. Colors, Metals German Mines,
v. Mines God, v. Gold, Regulus Goldsmiths, v. Gold. Gold, v. Metals God's-good,
v. Yest. Gums, v. Yellow Gunpowder v. Boiling, Pulveration. Guts v. Bells
Guenea v. Gold Hards v. Flocks Havilah v. Gold Heaven v. Quicksilver Hebrews v.
Quicksilver Hell v. Quicksilver Herrings, v. Ashes Hens v. Eggs. Hides v.
Bellows Hisperides, v. Gold Holy Ghost v. Regulus Honeycomb v. Putrefaction
Horse v. Dung. Hungary v. Mines Iclingham v. Earth Idols v. Dung Jesus v. Gold
Inch v. Meeasures India v. Gold. Industry v. Alchimist Ink, v. Copperas Iron v.
Metals, Oars. Ising-glass fish v. Conglutinate Isop, v. Gold Ivory, v. Black.
King v. Regulus. Lapis celestis v. Vitriol. Lead v. Metals. Oars. Leather v.
Expression. Lees, v. Pulveration. Leimster v. Flocks Lethargy v. Littarg
Letters 24 v. Regulus Leven v. Firmentation. Limbus patrum v. Quicksilver.
Limbus Infantium v. Quicksilver. Limpet fish v. Conglutinate Linen v.
Expression Linsy woolsy v. Timode Linseed-Oyl v. Oils Liquid v. Regulus
Litturgy v. Littarge Loadstone v. Gold Lombardy v. Gold Luna v. Quicksilver
Magnas v. Loadstone Magnes v. Loadstone Magnus v. Loadstone Magnetism v.
Loadstone Mediterranean v. Gold. Mendip v. Mines Menstruum v. Extraction Mice
v. Putrefaction Mercury v. Quicksilver Miles v. Measure: Quicksilver
Millstones v. Quarry Mines Royal v. Copper. Mine-Counties, and no
Mine-Counties v. Mines Miniature v. Colors. Minium v. Quicksilver. Moon v.
Quicksilver. Money v. Coin Mortar v. Earth. Moses v. Gold. Music Instruments
v. Bells. Mutes v. Regulus. Nails v. Loadstone. Navigation v. Loadstone. Needle
v. Loadstone. Nigro Fl. v. Gold. Nilus v. Gold. Nitre v. Minerals. Norwich v.
Boiling. North v. Petrefaction. Oakers v. Arsnick. Earth. Obedience see
Regulus. Officers v. Alchimist. Mint. Oky hole see Petrifaction. Onion see
Loadstone. Os Oris, Os Ossis see Bone* Orpiment see Minerals. Ox see Dragons
blood. Oysters see conglutinate. Palm see Measures. Palmistry see Measures.
Paper see Filtration. Paradise see Gold. Peat see Turfe. Peacock see Dung.
Pencils see Coal. Pint see Measures Pison see Gold. Planks see Planks. Planets
see Colors. Plant see Loadstone. Plate see Silver. Pliers see Pincers. Plawing
see Boiling. Plymouth see Calcine. Poland see Mines. Policy see Polish. Pools
Hole see Putrefaction. Powder see Weight. Powder of Projection see Alchimist,
dulcification, Flowers, pulveration. Prayer see Gold. Priest see Gold. Pugil
see Measures. Purification see Gold. Put see Polish. Quenching see Steel.
Quicksilver see Gold, Metals, Pulveration. Ratsbane see Arsenick. Reason see
Ground. Rebeckah see Gold. Red Lead see Lead. Religion see Gold. Resurrection
see Calcine, Gold, Pulveration, Dust, Ashes, Quicksilver. Riddle see Rattar,
Rising see Yest, Runt see Ox, Sables see Sands. Sand see Earth, Russet. Sapphire
see Metals. Sandiver see Minerals. Scarlet see Gold. Scurf see Scales. Scruple
see Measures. Screen see Rattar. Seeve see Rattar. Sentences see Regulus.
Separation see Cement. Shafts see Mines. Sheppy Island see Copper as. Sillables
see Regulus. Silver see Metals. Sinoper see Armoniack. Skin see Gold.
Smerna-soap see Bacon. Snails see conglutinate, Putrefaction. Sodom see
Bitumen. Sods see Turf. Snakes see Egg. Solomon see Gold. Soul see Loadstone.
Span see Measures. Speckled see Missy. Spittle see Phlegm. Spring see Salt.
Stanneries see Tin. Sterling money see Money. Steer see Ox. Stibium see
Minerals. Stills little see Limbeck. Stones see Petrefaction. Sublimation see
Fixation. Sugar see Dulcification Sulphur see Phlegm, Minerals. Tobacco pipe see
Coal. Talck see Minerals, Plaster. Teasle tree see Petrefaction. Terrella see
Loadstone. Terra Sigillata, Lemnia, Arminia see Earth. Testis v. Test. Thane
see Athanor. Thumb see Measures. Thummim see Alchimist. Tide-Well see Boiling.
Tin see Metals. Tongs see Pincers. Touchstone see Marble, Needle. Traveling
see Money. Tree of Life, of good and ill see Alchimist, Gamahez. Truth see
Balance. Variation see Lodestone. Venice see Mines. Venus see Quicksilver.
Vermilion see Quicksilver. Virgula Divina see Xanthus. Vitriol see Phlegm.
Visuvius see Bitumen. Vitriol see Minerals. Union see Cement. Vowel see
Regulus. Vows see Regulus. Urine see Alchimist. Wales see Mines. Water see
Gold. Wax see Plaster. Weapon salve see Bacon. Weather see Lodestone. Wells,
v. Boiling, Mines, Wheel* Wheat see Measures. White lead see Lead. Wisset see
Blanch. Withy Tree see Coal. Wool see Flocks. Wood see Gold, Petrefaction.
Work see Needle. Words see Regulus. World see Vein. Yard see Measures. Yest see
Fermentation. Zambre see Gold. Zaclar see Gold.
THE Reader is desired to amend or connive at the Omissions of the folio's of
the first 80 pages, and to alter these words, p. 8. l. 24. r. Tentare. p. 16.
l. 15. r. Ceneres. p. 20, l. 25. r. or woolen. p. 29. l. 15. r. koinos. p. 41.
l. 13. r. Warner. p. 42. l. 11. r. Moving. p. 60. l. 15. r. Lamins. p. 64. l.
31. r. Maritime. p. 74. l. 27. r. Thumb. p. 92. l, 20. dele And r. It. p. 97.
l. 4. r. draining. p. 110. l. 7. r. Herbert. p. 120. l. 11. dele un. r. Dressed.
p. 121. l. 10. r. Coasts. p. 128. l. 11. r. Emerald l. 21. r. Lazuli: Some
other there are by want of points, or vowels or Consonants, or misplacing of
Capital Words, wherein I hope the Reader will pardon the Printer, confidering
my Circumstances.

ESSAYS EXPLAINING Metallic WORDS: Alphabetically disposed, as a DICTIONARY or
INDEX to the whole. Note, T. signifies the Teutonical or Upper German Language.
L. The Latin. A. The Anglican or English: The rest are written at large, being
but seldom used.
AL A AL
ALCHIMIE. T. Alkumy, L. Alchimia, but by Plautus is writ Orchimia, which may
well have relation to our word Ore or Oar. The Lord Verulam tells us, It Is an
ART of Distilling or Drawing Quintessences out of Metals by Fire, separating
the pure from the impure, setting at liberty such Bodies of Metals as are bound
and imprisoned, and bringing to perfection such as are unripe, and this is the
chief subject of this Book; now in his Lordships mentioning Fire, in this
Definition, it seems only to relate to Culinary Fires: But I apprehend this ART
looks higher, even to the use of Celestial Fires; from the Sun and Stars, and
their influential Heats, gained by Contractions, Reflections, etc. which are or
may be used in this Art, as will be shown.

ALCHIMIST, T. Alchumist* L. Alchimista (from the Greek Alkamos, or Hebrew
Alkum) is one that is used or skilled in the Art of Alchimy or Chimistry, and
therefore in A. he is commonly called Alchimist or Chimist, Melter, Prover,
Assayer or Extracter of Quintessences; and such an one was our Author. But
before we fix our Title or Epithet to the Master of this Science, it is fit to
show the Progresses of it; at the first step to it, he is called, a Miner, or
he that finds out and digs (or causes to be dig'd) the Metallic Oar out of
such Mines. The second is the Washer, or he that washes the Oars from their
useless Excrements or adherences. The third is the Stamper, that knows how to
beat or stamp them by mills or otherwise into such Particles as that they may
be fitted for smelting Ovens (which are the great melting Works, but called
Smelting for distinction from the lesser.) The fourth, is the Smelter of the
great Quantities in those great Ovens or Furnaces. The Fifth, is the Finer that
smelts them over again, and separates the metals in the great Works. The sixth
is the Refiner, that melts them again so often as he thinks fit, till he has
brought the separated Metals to their several perfections and intireness. The
seventh, is the Prover or Assayer, who by Tests, Crucibles, Weights and other
Experiments is able to judge of all Oars, either as they come from their Veins,
or made into melted, fined or refined Metals; and such an Assayer was our
Author in all these seven Gradations, and therefore entitled the far renowned
Laxarus Erckern, Berkmeister, or Chief Prover, (which we call, Assayer) of the
Mines of the Emperor of Germany, and the depending Principalities of that
Empire.

In what Emperors time he lived, I cannot learn, but his five Books were
printed and published at Antwerp, Anno. 1629. from which many of the younger
Chimists of this Age have derived their skill, by Copies surreptitiously gained
from my first Translation, about 14 years since, which occasions my printing of
it now, being made more perfect.

His Name, Lazarus, is in Imitation of the old Romans, Germans and Belgicks,
who assumed Names suting to their temper, or some observable Actions: the word
Lazarus signifies in Sacred Writ one that was beloved of our Savior, also one
that was raised from the Earth; and, in the Parable, signifies a good poor man
in Abraham's Bosom, and accordingly in the conclusion of his fifth Book, he
shows his Zeal for God's Glory, and his true Belief in Jesus Christ, assisting
him in his deep Knowledge of Metallic Science, and he might well expect, by his
Humility of mind to be lodged in Abraham's Bosom (who we find was well verst in
Metals:) and the Rosy Crucius (of whom Majerus and Spagnetus do give a full
account, being a sort of Metaphisical Chimists, who do make it a chief
Principle of that Science, to be strict in their Devotion toward God, and just
toward men, without which they believe they cannot attain to any Perfection in
this Science: also Paracelsus (that great Chimist) goes so far as to make the
two Trees of Life, and of Good and Evil, and the Vrim and Thummin, (and many
other things written by Moses) to be only mystically related to this Science;
but to pass by this.

His other Name is Erckern (Erskerus being but a mistake in the first
Translator, for in the Original it is Erckern) now Erk in T. is Oar, and Kern
in T. is granum, or grain; so that to kern is to granulate (which is to reduce
Metals into certain proportions of the purest part which they call grains:)
also kern signifies to pulverize any thing* and so may be applied to Metals,
whereby it may intend also that magisterial powder of Projection (of which I
shall speak more:) or else it may very well come from the Latin word Cernere,
which we English to discern, the Latin often using c for k; and so we do in
our Language, so kern or cern, may justly signify to see, know or judge.

Now joining all together, I may represent him as an humble minded industrious
man, that knows how to judge of all Oars, and how to manage the Products of
them, for the Glory of God, and good of mankind.

By which we may see how Goodness and Industry do improve the Fortunes and
Esteems of such men, and that the exact Knowledge of this Noble Science, and
Art of Proving or Assaying Metals, do raise them to be owned, and dignified,
even by Emperors, Kings, Princes and States; and their very Names renouned to
Posterity, as may be seen in Histories.

Now, I have shown the seven Gradations to a Chimist, so I must tell you that
he looks on himself in an higher degree and justly defined, according to the
Lord Virulam, for he, not only knows all these seven Gradations, but also knows
how to Extract Quintessences or several marvelous Works out of all, and if he
would stop there (as Erckern does) it were well for him, but it seems he cannot
be content, unless he attains to the high Elixir or Powder of Projection or
Philosophers-Stone, which is believed by some of them to have a power of
Transmuting or turning all other Metals into Gold; but by woeful Experience of
some men's credulity, instead of turning every thing into Gold, they have turned
all their Gold into nothing (Verulam.) But our Author (though it may well be
supposed, that he knew much more than he writ) goes no farther in his Books,
than what is safe and fit to be known and published; i. e. only concerning
Fining and Refining of Metals, neither stooping too low to the meaner
Gradations, nor ascending too high to the Metaphisical Speculations, but leaves
those subjects to other Writers.

Now, as for the word Alchimist, it is the same thing with Chimist, but usually
taken in an imperfect or ill Sense (like Ben. Johnson's Alchimist) that is, one
that can or pretends to counterfeit Metals: so that to sum up the chief Terms;
an Assayer judges of the purity of Metals, and the Chimist improves this
purity to Spirits, Quintessences, Virtues, etc. But the Alchimist, Counterfeits
and Adulterates them, by making them appear to be pure, which realy are not
pure, but mixed with other sophistications, (Verulam.) Of this latter our Author
is not Guilty; so as he stands for a renowned Assay-Master, a good Chimist, and
one that understood, but was not a Sophisticating Alchimist, nor a Lapidarian
Philosopher, or Metaphisical Projector. See Assaying.

Alkali or Alcali, reckoned by Doctor Wilkins amongst Stones, but here and in
other parts of the V. Books, called Sal Alkali, which is a Salt made of the
Herb Kali or Salicornia; vulgarly called Glasswort: The herb is hot and dry,
and therefore such Salts of that Quality are called alcalous, and this Salt is
often used by our Author, as having a nature to discoagulate Metals, by opening
their Bodies. (l. 1. c. 32. s. 4.)

ALIMBECK, See Limbeck.

ALLAY, T. Linderen. L. Mitigare. A. to lessen or allay* See Money and Coin.

ALUM, T. Alaum. L. Alumen, from Lumen, in respect of its transparency and
nearness to Crystal, and is accounted among the brighter stones; of this
Mineral there are several sorts from several Mines, and Alum works erected in
England, and they are also in many parts of Europe, some more acid and sharp in
taste than others, by which their goodness is chiefly distinguished: and this
Mineral is of great use to Chimists, Dyers and others Artists. l. 2. c. 4. s. 5.

AMEL, or to Enamel, T. Eyn-brennen, and is called the metallic Calx or Lime,
compounded of two parts, viz. one of Lead and one of Tin, and being well
calcined in an Oven of Reverberation makes the Amel, and in the making it is so
delicatly tinged with variety of colors, (the Art being grown to so much
perfection in this age) that all sorts of Features, Images, Landskips, etc. are
so lively represented to the eye in a condensed work of the same, that they are
as delightful and more durable than those which are done with oil or gums, l.
2. c. 4. s. 1. see Nealing.

AMONIACK, see Armoniak.

ANTIMONY, T. Speiz and Speiz-glass (which is properly Glass made of Antimony)
L. Stibium, and it is also called by some Mineralists Red Lion, Wolf and
Proteus (in respect of its various qualities). It is a heavy, bright Oar, like
Lead, but more speizy and porous, and less ponderous, and some give it the name
of white stone or imperfect Metal (because they say, it is the beginner or
producer of Silver or Lead) and the extracts made out of it, are of singular
Virtues of, which his late Highness Prince Ruperts red drops were chimically
made, and given with good success for most Diseases, l. 4. c. 17.

AQUA FORTIS, (which for brevity is printed Fort.) T. Scheid-wasser, called by
Lat. Chimists Aqua separatoria, and is a composition of Nitre and Vitriol, etc.
and this liquor is used for dissolving and separating Gold and Silver, and has
many other excellent properties, as may be collected from the 5 Books. l. 2. c.
16. to c. 34.

AQUA regis, is a water made of Aqua fort. and other compositions, and is of a
more strong and corrosive nature than aqua fort, and it is observable the aqua
fort. is a specific for silver, and this aqua regis for gold, for it will
touch only gold and not silver. l. 2. c. 28.

Aqua argentea, see Quick silver, and metals.

Aqua Vitrioli, see Vitriol, and minerals.

Aqua dulcis, see common water.

Aqua fontis, see Spring water.

ARGOL, T. Weinstein, L. Tartarum, and in English Tartar or the Lees of Wine,
which sticks to the sides of wineVessels, hard and dry like a crust, and
therefore sometimes called Argol-stone from its compacted hardness, and this is
of great use in metallic Operations, l. 1. c. 10. s. 17. and other places. l.
1. See Feces.

ARITHMATICK, T. Rechenkunst, L. Arithmatica, the Art of Numbering, or
Reckoning, according to the T. and this Art of all others is the most assisting
to the Metallic Science, in judging of the goodness of Metals, after Fining
and Refining them. l. 1. c. 1.

ARMENICK* See Armoniack.

ARMONIACK, T. gives it the Latin Name, Bolus Armeni, and we Bole Armoniack,
and I find these words of kin, both in their Orthography and Pronuntiation,
viz. Amoniack Armenick and Armoniack. The first Pliny tell us, l. 24. is a Gum
which he calls Gumma Amoniaci, of a glutinous nature (like other Gums) and so
may be used for Metallic Vessels. The second viz. Armenick; I find the word
Sal always joined with it, and so called Sal Armenicus, and this Salt was
anciently accounted a natural Salt, but that being now unknown to us, we use
the Armenicus, which is made of the Urine of Elephants or Camels (as it is said)
boiled to a Lixivium or Salt, and called Sal Armenius or Armeniacus, and this
is of great use for purifying and refining of Metals. To the third Armoniacus
the word Bole is added, I suppose for distinction sake: Pliny, c. 35. mentions
a Stone, which he calls Lapis Armeni, of which he counts several sorts, but the
best of those he says, are of a blew color, and calls it verd de Azure (being
of great price and esteem with Painters, but the common Armoniack he calls
Synoper (and we Synople) from a City of that name, where it was plentiful, and
it is probable this is the same which we call Bole Armoniack, being of a reddish
color, and this is often used by our Author, and for distinction the word Gum is
put to the first, Salt to the other, and Bolus to this: which I write to
prevent Errors in Medicines or Metallic Experiments. l. 2. c. 20.

ARSNICK, T. Arsenick, L. Auripigmentum, We, Orpine or Orpiment, and commonly
Rats-Bain (being used to kill Rats) of Arsnick there are two sorts, yellow and
red, (which some, by mistake, esteem to be red Oker) Pliny, l. 34. says, it is
of the same substance with Sandarack, and inclines to that Color, the best of
which, says he, resembles Gold, and therefore I suppose called yellow
orpiment.

There is also a white or Christalline Arsnick, which is compounded of Salt and
the yellow Orpiment, so becomes transparent like Crystal, and from thence is
made the white Rats-bane, and it may be observed this white, consists of two
parts, viz. a crusty or external part, and a Christaline or internal part, and
this makes metal brickle, the other solid, and of the Regulus of this mineral a
good metal may be made, l. 1. c. 14. s. 1. See Sulphur.

ASHES, T. Ashen, L. Ciner, A. Ashes, and these are made so by the power of
Fire, from metals, minerals, stones, bones, earth and wood; which puts me in
mind of those trees which plentifully grows in England, called Ashes, T.
Esschen or Asschen-Baum, quod optimos cerneres efficiant (Minslaw) but the L.
calls it Fraxinus, and of this Ashen-wood I have seen the great effects of it
at Yarmouth and Laistoff in Suffolk, for with this wood and no other they dry
their Herrings, (which is a profitable commodity to them) and it seems that the
Salt and drying Vapors of that Wood, do cure (for so is their term) their
Herrings of all malignities: and doubtless that wood is most proper where it is
to be used for dissolving metals, and the ashes of it rather than any other for
metallic uses (except Bone-ashes) and especially for Saltpeter which is the
Subject of the 5th Book. l. 2. c. 20. s. 5. See Dust, Bone-Ashes, Pulveration,
etc.

ASSAYER, T. Probirer, L. Probator. A. Assayer or Tryer.

To ASSAY, T. Probiren. L. Probare. Which we call also to Assay, Prove or Try
Metals, all intending the same thing, though different in Dialect; but there is
another Word of the like signification, which is written with an E. as Essayer
and to Essay, etc. both are rendered, by Dictionarys to Try, L. Tentare, Probare

Now I think, some have committed an Error herein, and ought to have made a
more clear distinction, for I take Assaying to have relation only to things of
Weight, as Metals, etc. from the word As or Assis, (which signifies a pound
Weight, or 12 Ounces, or the whole of any substance which may be divided into
parts) and especially applicable to the greatest or smallest Coins that are
made of any Metal, which many times were, and still are of Copper or Brass,
which the L. call Aes, and thereupon I suppose it is sometimes writ Essaying
(without a diphthong) and so confounded these two words in their applications,
and to confirm my just distinction of them. We read in the Stat. of H. 6. c.
12. that the Kings Officer of the Mint, who, (as the Statute says) is
indifferently appointed between the Master of the Mint and the Merchant (which
brings Silver thither to be minted) is called the King's Assayer, and not
Essayer, and in the Records Assaisiator not Essaisiator, (See Goldman 's Dict.)
And some latin Records render it metallorum prebendorum Praefectus, and the
Italians, Assaggiatore, and the Belgic calls Assay, Examen Probitatis monetae,
applying the word wholly to Metals, but Essay they define it specimen artis, or
Exemplum quaesitae artis. (See Binworts Biglotton.) it is true the French make
the two words indifferent: yet further to support this distinction in our
English Language, the ever to be admired Lord Virulam calls his excellent
Observations on Men and things, Essays and not Assayes, and so Dr. Don (a
Critic in our Language, and in general Learning) calls his quaint Discourses
on some Pieces of Divinity Essays and not Assayes, and therefore to prevent
the misapplication of those two Words (with submission to those of this present
age, who write themselves Essayers and not Assayers of Metals) I take leave in
these Discourses to apply the word Assayer and Assaying to Metals, and
metallic substances, and the word Essayer and Essaying to Accidences, and
other ingenuous Undertakings, and not to metallic substances, having such
Authorities, as I have cited to countenance me, l. 2: c. 2.

ATHANOR, T. Heinzen thurne* L. Fornax, which we also call Kiln or Oven, and
indeed is only a Furnace of several shapes, so this is called Athanor from its
distinct shape from others Furnaces or Ovens being like a Thurn, which in Teut
is a Tower; but from whence the word Athanor to which the name of this kind of
Furnace is given, I cannot find, unless it be from the Greek word Athanatos
which signifies immortal) and so the spirits of the Metals which are drawn from
thence into lesser Ovens, and so into Recipients, do thereby perfect
Quicksilver which may be said to be of an immortal nature.

Or else from the Saxon word Thane, which signifies Noble, as also a Servant:
and thence called Athaner or Athanor, because it has those two properties, as
being the most noble of all Furnaces for Metals: and also the most serviceable
in the operations of refining Metals, l. 2. c. 7. s. 2. See Ovens.

BA B BA
BACON (signifying here the Fat of Hogs or Swine) the Original of which word I
cannot trace, with any satisfaction to my self, either from the T. Speck or L.
Lardum, nor from a Boar, T. Eber, which is pretty near L. Aper) nor from Sow,
T. Saw, L. Sus and Scrofa, nor from Swine, T. Schwene, L. Porcus, but refer you
to Skinner's Dictionary. And though this is often mentioned by Erckern for
greazing of Instruments, yet in respect of the Salt in it, I conceive it were
better to use the fat of a Boar (especially when any Metal is concerned)
because I know it is as effectual in curing of wounds at distance, as the so
admired unguentum Armarium, commonly called the Weapon-salve; and since it has
such a kindness to Metals, I know not how it may not be better used than
Venetian or Smerna Soap, for improving Gold, Silver, Tin, etc. and so in stead
of Gold-soap called Golden Bacon. l. 2. c. 4. l. 4. c. 15. l. 5. c. 10.

BALANCE, or a pair of Scales, T. en wagmit Zwyen Schustun: but the L. call it
Bilanx, habens duas lances, or two little Vessels to contain the things to be
tried, and also statera, because it demonstrates the state of the thing in
question, and the tongue of this Balance is in the T. Wigzunglain, L. Lingua,
and Examen, because by standing in an equipoisure or not, it does as it were
speak or tell you the difference or certainty of the Weights, in question, and
the Latin has another word for it, viz. Trutina, from the Greek Trutane,
which not only signifies a Balance, but a dilligent examining, or good advice
and judgment, and from this Trutina we borrow the word Truth, and as the
natural tongue of men speaks the truth of the Heart, so this artificial tongue
speaks the truth of the Balance and Weights, and this Balance is very
necessary to the performance of this metallic science. l. 1. c. 35, 36, 37.

BEAM, the word is applied to the beam of an House, and the beam in the eye,
the beam of a plough, a Weaver's beam, but though we use the same word for many
things in English, yet they all differ in other Languages by distinct words:
but this is called T. schnalwag, and in Latin the same with Balance. See
Balance.

BELL, T. Schelle, i. e. sonitus, that which yields a sound, and it either
comes from Belle an adverb signifying that which is pleasing to the ear, or
from tunable Instruments that were used in Tempore Belli, and though by the
Italians they are called Campane, upon pretense of their original, from
Campania a noble region in Italy, yet we find in Exodus 28. that there were
golden Bells upon Aarons Vest, which all the Versions into Latin call
Tintinnabulum auri (of which* the Interpreters give little account) and
certainly they had little or no sound; but the metal of our bells have no gold
in them, but what is casually mixed with other metals, for they are compounded
of Copper, Tin and Brass, and a little Silver: sometimes the Artists or maker
of these are called Bell-founders T. Glockengiesser from Gloken which we call
Clock, by changing G to C) and the art of mixing, making and casting them (in
respect of their diversity of sounds) is of as transcending a nature as any one
art or science, for the proportions of Ingredients are according to the great
skill and Judgment of the Founders adequated to their various uses.

Anciently, and still, solemn Prayers are used at the casting them, and
formerly they were with great Ceremony baptized, presuming that many spirits
did attend them: and I remember an old sexton did affirm, That by the sound of
a Passing Bell, for one dying and dead, he could tell how many hours or days
after, some other of his Parish should die: But whether this prognosticating
quality be in them, I shall not dispute, but we are certain, that the Harmony
of a Consort of them, are very pleasing to musical ears; and it is observable,
that this Art is only from Metals. l. 1. c. 18. And not only this of Bells, but
most of the choice Instruments of Music were and still are either in the whole
or in parts composed of Metals; Such as are wholly of Metals, are Trumpets,
Sag-bots, Cimballs (soft and triumphal) Organ Pipes, etc. such as are in part,
viz. the strings of the Harp (which we now call the Irish Harp (being strung
with wire) in distinction of the Welsh Harp strung with Gutsstrings) also the
strings of the Harpsicon, and Poliphant (which I have often heard with great
pleasure, but now out of use) also the Tabaret, and the Cittern, though now of
small esteem, yet was devised by Amphion, Pliny l. 7. p. 187. and many others,
amongst which I must not forget the Monochord or Tuba marina, whose Entrals are
curiously composed of Metals, although the string, which stirs up the
reverberating Spirits of the Metal, is composed of Guts. Now as Petrus Bongus
has writ a Book de sacris numeris, and Jonston de sacris Arboribus (with
Sculptures) I wish some would write De sacris Instrumentis Musicae, with their
Sculptures, especially of those wherein metals are employed, for doubtless the
subject would afford excellent variety.

But besides this musical part of Metals, the word Bell is also applied to a
Glass with a round bottom and long neck, which the Chimists call a mattress
glass, or long Bell, Sculpture I.

BELLOWS, T. Blaszbalgh, and to blow Geblasz. L. Follis and follescere: of
these there are three sorts mentioned in Erckern, 1. the Philosophical Bellows,
2 The great Bellows (which requires eight Ox-hides) and 3. the common Bellows,
which Smiths also use, and others for common fires, as you often find in the
Sculptures, and all these in imitation of the nature of a Cow Beast, which in
drawing in and forcing out her breath, is said to Bellow.

BLANCH, T. Blanck, Weiss and Bluk, all signifying white, or a white Silver or
Tin, when it is melted, for the mere Oar of Tin is of a ruddy color, and white
when melted; and this by the Translator of Weckerus, is called Blenck; which
word I like, (though I find it not in any Dictionary) for I had a Manor in
Suffolk, called by the name of Blenches, and it appeared so in my Ancient Court
Rolls, for that the Soil of the Manor, consisted of a white Clay and Chalky
temper, and the next Village is Wisset, which consisted also of the like Soil:
Blench and Wiess both signifying white, so that Blench and Blanch have the same
signification of white, and so the word is used for the whitening, blenching or
blanching of Silver; the word is also used to Almonds, viz. when the
superficies or dull part is taken from them by boiling Water, they are then
called blencht or blancht Almonds. See Bone Ashes.

BISMUTH, is a Crude Oar or kind of Silver Marchasite, and of a white, hard and
brittle Body, and I conceive is the same which Erckern calls also Wismut, or
Wismuth Oar and Spelter, l. 4. c. 10. and sometimes called Tin Glass. See their
Alphabets.

BITUMEN, is accounted both among Gums and Pixes, and also among Sulphurs, but
that which Erckern speaks of, intends Brimstone, which the T. calls Schwebel,
L. Sulphur, and this is either Natural, from the Lake called Asphaltis, (where
once Sodom and Gomorrah stood, also from the vomiting of the Hill Aetna and
Visuvius) or Artificial made by Fire. See Minerals.

BLACK, See Colors.

BLEND, or Blent, T. Ablinderne, L. Miscere, A. to Mingle, that is, when Metals
are blended or mingled in lumps. l. 4. c. 2. etc. And this word is much used in
the North parts of England, for mixed or mingled matter, which some call
Hots-Potch.

BLEW, See Colors.

BLINK, T. Blinkin or Blicken, L. Micare and Nictare, A. to Shine, it is
commonly used to those that are blear Eyed, or often twinkle with their Eyes:
it is also applied to dead and sharp Beer, and to the brouss or loppage of
Trees, given to Deer (see Skinner) but in our Author only applied to bright
Oars, or melted Metals, l. 1. c, 23. etc. and l. 2. c. 24. viz. blink Gold and
blink Silver, that is bright or clear Gold or Silver.

BLOOD, T. Blut, L. Sanguis, applied to the Blood of Oxen, etc. and is often
mentioned as a good mixture, for Instruments and Cements for Metalick uses. See
l. 2. c. 20. and Ox.

BOILING, T. Seiden and Kochen. L. Coquens, l. 5. c. 7. s. 1. we have many
words for this, tending to the same sense, and yet with some Gradations, as
when any liquid matter begins to stir with the heat of the Fire, we call it
simporing, it may be from simpo, a Pot wherein the old Roman and Gretian
Priests were wont to drink their cheering Liquor, and therefore the word
simporing is used for smiling, and when it stirs more, it is called seething
(which differs little from the T. Seiden) when it stirs to bubble, it is called
Boiling, from bulla and bullire; but anciently Boiling was called Plawing, from
L. Plaudere, to rejoice, because the fire had the full effect of the heated
liquor, and therefore the Psalmist says, Plaudent Flumina vola, let the Floods
clap their Hands: i. e. let them plaw or rejoice in their plawing or boiling
waves, but I do not find my sense of the word plawing confirmed in any
Dictionary, as I can now peruse; but this I shall affirm for the Sense and
Antiquity of the Word, That there is a Marsh in South-Walsham in Norfolk,
belonging to the now Duke of that County, which with other Marshes were gained
from the Sea, in the time of the old Romans (as it is generally said) to which
my Grandfather and my self were Tenants for near an 100 years, and in these
Marshes there was one parcel called by the name of Plawing-Well Marsh, within 3
miles of Yarmouth, and about a mile from the Sea, and the Marsh is so called,
and styled in Writings, from a Well or place in it of about two yards broad,
and about 18 Inches deep, only in the middle of it is a little hole, the bottom
of which I could not then fathom by any Pole or Instrument that I could get,
and from that hole the water constantly bubbles, boils up and plays, which was
the word used in the Lease, and in other Records sufficient to justify the
Antiquity of the word.

Now having spoken what I can of the word, give me leave to speak of the water,
which keeps at one scantling, neither swelling higher nor decreasing; but if it
decrease at any time, it foretells a dearth) so that the motions of it cannot be
attributed to the neighboring Motions of the Sea (which are regular, lunary or
ventilary) nor any other cause that I could find; unless it be from a constant
motion of Cattle (grazing in these and the neighboring marshes* which being
only thin and grassy coverings of the waters, those beasts by quassation and
constant compressure of such flexible grounds, may easily cause this Ebolition
or plawing) I confess, I am the more content with this reason, because we daily
see, that a little Compressure in a large vessel of liquids will make it rise
and run over, and we often find in solid Bodies, Compressure will have great
effects at distance, as in the year 1648. when the Committeehouse at Norwich
was blown up, by the firing of 40 barrels of Powder, it caused by compressure
such a motion in the Earth, that at Thorp Market (15 miles from Norwich (near
Cromer) Mr. Allen who dwelt there in good repute) told me, that as he was
sitting in his Parlor there, he was very sensible of the quaking of the Earth,
which upon Information of what had past the day before at Norwich, and
comparing the punctual time, he found the shaking was caused by that
Gun-pouder, and I, being then in the Country, soon after went into the City,
where I observed, that all the lower windows of the City-houses were shattered
by the Air and Earth, but the upper windows (that had only the more tender
motion of the Air to offend them) had little hurt, and this was general, except
in Churches whose Windows were all shattered, having no floors to defend them
against the motion of Earth and Air.

I was pleased with these outward accidental causes, but soon after I saw a
Spring on one side of the highest Hills in Darbyshire within the Peak-Forest,
and 30 miles from the Sea) that eb'd and flowed four times in the space of an
hour, called Tides Well, and for this I will not pretend to give a Reason,
being so far from the Sea, or any probable outward cause.

BOLUS, see Armoniack. It signifies a certain proportion; from whence we might
have the word Boul or Bole, which is used by Miners to measure out their dig'd
Oars, both for the King, Proprietor or themselves, or for other uses.

BONE (Ashes) T. Bein (Ashen) Lat. Os and Ciner. A. Ashes, and from ciners,
cinders: so as the Latins have no proper word for it, but Ciner the Cinders,
or ashes of Ossium, or bones in the plural. Now the Latins have the like word
Os signifying a mouth, distinguished in their Genitive cases, one making Os,
ossis, the other Os oris, one signifying spiration, from the Greek, the other
duration, and they may well be coupled, for the nourishment which goes into the
mouth gives nutriture to the Bones, and is the Original of its duration (of
which I have writ more fully in my Fodinae Regales) and our Author gives
several Directions what Bones are fittest to be used (to the making of Tests
and Crucibles for dissolving Metals) either of Beasts or Fishes, of which you
may see his Opinion in several places, l. 1. c. 5, 6, 7, etc. See Ashes,
Incineration, Pulverisation.

Now Pliny N. H. l. 11. c. 37. tells us that the bones of Asses have a more
musical nature in them (being made into Pipes) than any other bones, so that it
may be worth the Trial for Bell-Founders, who make their Furnaces and Tests of
Bone-Ashes) to try if tests made of bones of those dull Asses, in stead of
other bones, can make their Bells of a more active sound.

The ordinary Bone-Ashes made of Beasts is a considerable Trade about London,
not only for Goldsmiths, etc. but for our Mines in England, for whilst the
Leasees of our Society did work the Mines of Consumlock and Talibont in
Cardigan shire in Wales (two old Roman Mines, as I have shown else where) every
year there were at least 800 Tun sent from hence thither by Sea; by which may
be guessed what is, or might be, spent in the other 28 Mine Counties in England
and Wales, if our Mines were duly set on work, but they being neglected, we
send great quantities to other Nations, for the same use; for which the
Merchants pay outward 6 s, 8 d, for every thousand Bones, and we pay for their
bringing them into us 1 l. 5 s. for every Barrel of their Ashes, which we might
burn and employ for ours.

BORAX, T. Borras. L. Borax, and Christocolla, which Pliny calls the Ordure or
Dung of Gold, yet Goldsmiths and Silver-Smiths use it for their chiefest
sodering of Gold or Silver, and joining one metal with the other, and indeed
bringing all metals to perfection, besides it has medicinal properties, l. 2.
c. 4. s. 2. and in many other places.

Pliny reckons it among Minerals, and describes it to be a green Earth, but of
four sorts, the best from Copper Mines, the second from Silver, the third from
Gold, and the fourth and worst from Lead, he tells us also of an Artificial
Borax which he says comes from a putrified Vein of metals: there is also
another kind made by Art of Roch Alum and Bole Armoniack, and other
Ingredients, which is used also by Goldsmiths: But the right Borax has another
quality, for it being mixed with Arsnick, it takes off the poisonous quality of
the Arsnick, whereby it may be safely put to metals as a dissolvent.

BOTTELLS, T. Krugs. See Instruments and their Cruises, Jugs, Pots, etc.

BOTTOM, T. Boden, l. 1. c. 33. L. Fundus. A. Foundation, or the lowermost part
of any thing: the word is also used for a bottom of thread, T. Vin-Gleuen or a
clew of thread. L. Glomus, which is only the Foundation on which the thread is
wound, and so called the bottom.

BRAN, T. Kleyen and Gruesck. L. Aplauda and Furfur, because it makes a double
theft, by taking away it self, and also much of the good flower with it:
however this Bran is very useful, by its mixtion with such stuff as is used for
glasing and strengthening the outward and inward parts of such earthen Pots or
Vessels as are made for Metals, by making the matter stick the more close and
firm, and is it self destroyed like many innocent men, to make way for others.
l. 2. c. 20. s. 6.

BRASS, T. Ertz. L. Aes: and it is a great Error that most Writers run into, by
promiscuously giving the title Aes for both Brass and Copper, as if they were
the same Metals; whereas Aes or Brass is not a proper Metal, but compounded of
a Metal, viz. Cuprum or Copper, and Lapis Calaminaris, or Cadmiae, which is a
mineral, and from the mixture of these two, Brass is made, as may be seen in
Erckern, lib. 3. c. 28. which in T. is called Galmay. Now there is of this
Calamin two sorts, Natural, as in the third Book; and Artificial, l. 4. c. 8.
s. 7. made of the dregs of Metals, but the natural, he says, comes from
Britain, and indeed we have mountains of it, especially in Gloucestershire,
Sommerset-shire, and Notinghamshire: but we let the Calaminaris go for Ballast
into foreign parts, in very great quantities, before it be wrought, so as the
best Brass beyond Sea is made of our stone rather than their own, which
deserves a further consideration: and I remember about 30 years since, one
Demetrius a German, did set up a Brass-work in Surry, and with the Expense of
6000 pound (as he told me) made it complete and to good profit: but the foreign
Merchants joining with some of ours, found ways to bring him into Suits; and
meeting with no encouragement, he was at last necessitated to submit the work,
to his own ruin, and unspeakable prejudice to the Kingdom, in loosing so
beneficial an Art, having here both the best Copper and Calamine of any part of
Europe. See Stones and Copper.

Now whereas Pliny, Cap. 33. speaks of about 18 several Mines of Brass, we must
not understand it as a specific Metal: though the word Aes is vulgarly applied
to both, but those Mines were either Copper mines, capable of being made Brass;
or so many several sorts of Lapis Cadmiae or Calamin, from the composition of
all which with Copper, Brass was made more or less both in Quantity and
Quality: and this Art of composing it, is said, by him, to be first invented by
Cadmus a Grecian, contemporary with Joshua, in whose time the word Brass is
first mentioned in the Sacred Story, Exodus 25. 3. And it is observable, That
though in the composition of Brass, there is more of the stone than of Copper,
and that Copper is a Metal, and that other a Stone, yet it takes a new name of
Brass, and not its own, or of the Metal, Copper: and being thus made Brass, it
is an Imitator of Gold, both in Color and in many Virtues, and in such esteem,
that the Roman Treasurers were called Tribuni Aerarij, rather than Aurarii: and
Camerarius says, that the Egyptians (long before the Romans) had so great
Veneration of Brass that they made Images of it, and laid them in the graves of
their Kings, to preserve their Bodies from Putrefaction, and to men of lesser
quality they nailed their dead bodies with many brass nails.

Also Virgil, Horace and Homer are all full of their Encomiums on Brass, and
therefore it may well have the honor of a seventh Metal, though compounded of
a Mineral. Now as the common Brass is of a Goldish color, so Pliny, l. 34. c.
11. tells us, of a white brass, (which is no other (as I conceive) than Brass
Tind-over, and called Laten, or Auricalcum. See Latten.

BRICK, A. Brick. T. Gabachen-stein or (a stone made by Art) L. Later, a side,
because it is used both to outside and inside of Buildings; as ancient as the
Aegytians who forced the Israelites to make it: the Makers of it is called, T.
Bachen-strein-lin. L. Laterculus. l. 5. c. 7. s. 1.

BRICKLE, T. Zee bruch-lech, L. Fragilis, and this we vulgarly call brittle,
but doubtless it come from Brick, the nature of which is fragile or more easy
to be broken in pieces, and so made into Powder, which both whole and in Powder
(as those from Tile) are used by Assayers. l. 1. c. 32. s. 3. l. 2. c. 44. s.
2. etc.

BRIMSTONE, see Bitumen, Sulphur. l. 1. c. 16. s. 1. thence Bitumenous,
Sulphurous.

BRITAIN, See Mines and Mineral Countries. l. 3. c. 28. s. 5.

BROOM, T. Bassem, L. Scopa, A. Besom and Broom; but I conceive this word is
from the Plant, which we call Broom, (T. Ginster, L. Genista) of a flexible
nature, and so used to sweep Rooms.

BROWN, T. Braun, L. Fuscus. See Colors.

BRUSH, T. Buerst (and yet to brush, they say Kethern) L. Scopula and
verricula, vestes purgare scopulis, Sculpture 7.

BUBLING, Ein Wasser blason, from T. Blass a Bladder, being but a more durable
bubble, L. bulla. l. 2. c. 35. s. 7.

BUCK, Bucking, and up- Bucking, and to Buck, used often in the 2, 3, 4 and 5
Books, in the T. is Lawgen, L. Lixivare from Lixivium or Lee, (see Lee of
Ashes) but the Italians call it Bucato or Washing, from whence our word Buck,
or properly Buc (to distinguish it from the Male of a Do) is called also Buck,
which may have its name too from Bucceto, from his frequent mingency, pissing
or making Water oftener than Females, and this word Bucking is applied often to
those that are Washers of the filth out of Linen or Clothes, which the common
people use to do with a piece of broad and thick Wood, which they call a
Clapper or Bat-staff; but for more Expedition, the Fullers have invented Mills,
with several Stamps for their Cloths, which by the force of water do raise and
let fall their Stamps, by which the Fullers-Earth with the Water do make our
Clothes fit for use; but whether the Metallists did teach them that Art, I
shall not enquire, only the Metalists which we converse with here, have two
ways of Bucking or Washing their Oars, from the dirt or Earth about them; one
by a Mill, which they call a Smelting-mill, by which with the force of Water,
certain Stamps or Hammers do beat and wash the Oars, and those Workers are
called Smelters at the Mill, and after that, there are other lesser Buckings in
Mortars and Tubs, to prepare the Metal (more free from Rubbish) for the
Melters; See Smelting Melting, and Menstruum.

BURNING of Metals, i. e. reducing them to Ashes or Powder for use. l. 2. c. 2.
See Ashes, Calcination, Roasting, etc.

CA C CA
CADMIA, See Calaminaris.

CAKES, T. Schiben, or pieces of Metal, melted into the form of Cakes. l. 3. c.
26. By this word Cake, we must not understand such Cakes as in Latin are
called Placenta, from placere, to please the Pallat, by their several pleasant
Ingredients; but here it relates only to the form of it, sometimes round and
Unequal, but mostly Flat, like pieces of Plate, and therefore the Refiners (for
distinction) do call Lead, cast into a solid body, Sows and Pigs; Tin, Blocks;
and Iron, Bars; but Silver, Gold and Copper so cast, they call Cakes; and
Copper sometimes Rose-Cakes, or Cupri Rosa; and though they be not Edibles (or
bear the name of Placenta) yet without Money, which is derived from those
metal'd Cakes, we could not have such things as are placentious or pleasing to
us.

To CALCINE, Calcinate, Calcinize and Calcination, T. Calcineren, L. Calcinare,
both Languages making it a compound of two Words, Calx for Lime, and Ciner,
Ashes, which in a metallic sense, is to reduce Metals, by Fire to a friable or
brickle temper, like Lime; therefore Lime is called only in Latin, Calx, and
we from the word call our Limestone, Chalk, which being burnt, we call Lime,
and this burning we call slacking (according to the Teut.) and before it is
burnt, Vnslackt, unburnt, or uncalcin'd Lime; and being burnt or slack't,
called also Calx viva (which is often mentioned by our Author) and A. Quicklime,
or that which has by Fire, as it were) an additional Life, for metals seem to
be dead in their Oars, but by this Calcination revived, to hint to us the
advantages of our Resurrection, by the general Conflagration. It Is true, there
are other ways of Calcination, especially of Metals; viz. by Corrosion,
Immersion, Amalgamation, Cementations, Fumigations and Illinations. (See
Salmon.) yet none of these can be performed without Fire: but to return to the
common Lime, as it is fitted for the use of Architecture, it is mingled with
Water and Sand, and then called Mortar, and according as the Lime and Sand are
in goodness, so the Structures by it are made more durable, and therefore it is
thought, That we had all our Sand for our Mortar (with which our ancient
Churches were built) out of Italy; and the Fort of Plymouth (built by his
present Majesty) recompensed my Journey thither, the Graff of which is hewn out
of Marble, and the Mortar also made of (alcined Marble, and their Sand, which
makes that Mortar as compact as the Marble it self, but what kind of Sand or
what Proportions, I did not then enquire. Now there are two words in L. which
pass under the same Orthography, viz. Calx for Lime, and Calx for the Heel of a
man, (or end of a thing) so as I may conceive that our Metallic and Artificial
word Calx for Lime, is borrowed of the Natural word Calx for Heel, because the
Calcining of Metals, do as it were determine its Life for a better, because
those Metals which lay dully in the Earth, before their Calcination are by
Calcining and Refining made more active and passable throughout the World.

CALAMINARIS, See Brass, and Sculpt. 35.

CALIFY, T. Warm, Werme, L. Calefaccre, A. to make warm.

CALX, See Calcine.

CAPUT MORTIS, (for brevity Mort.) is the matter or sediment of Metals (or of
other things used in Chimical Dissolutions) which remain at the bottom of a
Furnace or Stillatory, thick and dry, chiefly from Metals and Minerals; viz.
when all their Spirituous parts are drawn off, the remainder is called Caput
Mort. or Feces. See Feces.

CARRAT (signifying a weight) is a French and Italian Word, much used by our
Author in his second Book; and it seems to come from the Arabian, Kirat: (see
Holioak.) but Cotgrave says, That Goldsmiths and Minters esteem it at a third
part of an Ounce, and among Jewellers and precious Stone-cutters, but the 19
part of an Ounce; so as eight of them are but one Sterling, and a Sterling is
the 24 th. part of an Ounce, and 3 Grains of Assize, or 4 Grains of Diamond
weight make a Carrat.

Torriano's Addition to Florio, calls it Carrato, signifying, says he, a
weight or degree in Metals, Diamonds, Rubies, etc. and does not determine it:
but Mr. Howel in his ingenious Tetraglotton (sect. 40.) proportions it to the
24 part of an ounce, and Mr. Webster in his History of Metals speaks more
clearly, and says, the Carrat or Charrat is a term given (by the Officers of
the Mint, and Wardens of Goldsmiths) to a certain composition of Weights, that
are only used for Assaying, and computing the standard of Gold, and are of two
Contents, namely, either the 24 part of an ounce, Troyweight, and is compounded
thus; of the pound carrats 2 d. weight, and 12 grains, Troy, make a Carrat
grain, and 4 such carrat grains make one carat, which is half an ounce, or 10
d. weight Troy, and 24 of such carats make a pound or 12 ounces Troy, the other
way of Computation is of an ounce carat, five Troy grains make one carat grain,
and four of such grains make one carat, and 24 such carats make one ounce Troy,
and for assaying he recommends the ounce carat, as more easy for Calculation,
than the pound carot, which is made more perspicuous by our Author. l. 2. c.
15. See Money, Gold-weights.

CASE, T. Gehauesz, or a little house, L. Capsula. A. Case, it is of various
signification, as, a Gramatical, Legal, Formal, and sometimes put for an ill
chance or hard case. See Sculpture 1, 5, 12, 13.

CATSILVER, T. Kat-zon Silver, because it has a gray sparkling color like a
Cats-eye.

CEMENT, cementing and Cementation. T. Cementerne. L. Coementum, not from
Caedo, to beat (as Minshaw would have it) but Caementum, is quasi men's coeli,
i. e. the mind of Heaven, to unite things separated, especially, when they
consist of one species, and it may well be observed in the vicissicute of the
things in the World, that the whole Labor of Man and Nature, seems to be
almost nothing else, but to separate what is united, and to unite things that
are separated, and this not only seen in our operations upon Metals, but in the
actions of bumane Affairs: yet, to pass them by, this Cementation of Metals is
properly a gradual imbodying or uniting of Metals first separated, and this by
a gentle fire, as in Lib. 1, 2, and 3 Books, wherein there are several
magisterial Directions: and in other Cases it is properly called a
Conglutination, or glewing together. See Conglutinate.

CENTNER, T. Center and Centner. L. centum. At the Mines it signifies an
hundred and ten pounds weight, but at the Mint, just an hundred pound: Whereby
the Miner may get 10 l. toward his charges: See lib. 1 cap. 9. but in lib. 1.
cap. 37. and in many parts of the five Books, it is considered only as a small
Assay-weight for trying how much a little Part of an hundred weight do hold of
Gold, Silver, etc. whereby (as ex ungue Leonis, the whole Proportion of the
Lion may be known from its claw: so by the small Assay-weight, the goodness of
the whole piece may also be estimated, be it a centner or half a centner, etc.
and this shows the skill of an Asay er in the skilful use of Arithmetic.

CERUSE. T. Bleywiesse, L. Cerussa. A. White Lead, the best is made of Lead,
calcined with the vapors of Vinegar; but the common way is by Urine.

CRYSTAL, T. Keistal, L. Christalus and Christalum, there is Natural and
Artificial, the Natural is Aqua quae frigore in glaciem concressit; that is,
congealed or petrefied Ice. Diodorus Sic. and Boethius are of a contrary
Opinion, and say, It is the purest Earth, dissolved by Water, and for want of
Water, congealed to the Christal-Stone: it is found about the Alps and in many
parts of Germany, Hungary, France, etc. And Captain Ant. Langston, my good
Friend, who had traveled about 300 Miles into the Continent of Virginia, did
assure me, that he saw there several Mountains of clear and shining Crystal;
he died about a year since, and was a very Credible person whilst he lived. Now
the Artificial Christals, are made by Chimistry, and is a peculiar part of that
Science, called Christalization; that is, making things like Christals: viz.
Crystal of Silver, Tin, Antimony, etc. See Petrefaction and Stone.

CHIMISTRY, see Alchimy and Alchimist: But I have something more to say to
them, for I find that the Chimist has another Name, and is called Spagirus;
and Chemistry, Ars Spagerica; signifying, to fine and refine Metals, and
therefore I have thought fit to put the words Spagericae Leges, as the Title to
this whole Treatise, instead of Leges Chymicae, this latter being more commonly
used than the other: nor do I wave the word Alchimy or Alchimist, because it is
sometimes taken in an ill Sense, for in the best and truest Sense, by the
addition of ALL (which word in all Languages signifies Omnia) so as by addition
of All, we are to understand, That Chemistry does comprehend All Sciences and
Mechanic Arts and Trades, even from the Cobblers Awl (T. Aal, and Belgic
Elsen) to the Astronomers Astralobe, for nothing can be performed without some
Metalick Instrument.

CINABAR, T. Zenober, or (l. 1. c. 2. s. 5.) Bergennouer, L. Cinnabaris, which
in English we call natural Vermillion, for of this Cinnabar, there are two
sorts: Natural, which is an hard, red and heavy Stone, found in Mines: or
Artificial, which is better colored (made of calcined Sulphur and
Quicksilver, which we now use with Metals) but it is vulgarly called Ruddle or
marken Stone, and Sinople or Red Lead; the first also of these two is natural,
and the other artificial, but I conceive our Author intends none of these
latter, but the former, or one of them: Pliny, N. H. l. 33. has a large
Discourse of this Cinabar, and makes it the same with Minium, of a rich and
fresh Scarlet Color, and says, there are whole Mines of it in some parts of
Spain; and concludes with his Opinion, That it is the Rust of Silver and Lead,
but it has not the less Esteem with the best Painters or Limners, no more then
has Verdigrise, though it be the Rust of Copper: there is great quantity of
this Cinabar in the Mines of America, and some few Veins of it, in the English
Copper-Mines. See Gold and Quicksilver.

CLAR, so the T. word is writ (l. 1. c. 5. s. 1. and c. 7. s. 1. and c. 21.)
the French call it Clair, and A. Clear; Now though this word bears the same
sense in all, yet because, by a certain composition, it does clear the Metals
and Instruments to which it is applied (for distinction sake) I think fit,
according to the T. to call it Clar, as a substantive, rather then Clear, which
for the most part is used as an adjective* viz. clear Drink, etc.

CLAY, T. Laim and Thon. l. 2. c. 20. s. 1. etc. But the L. calls Clay (which
is of a flat and clammy Earth) Argilla and Terra Figulina, because Potters (by
whom it is used) do reduce it to certain Figures; in A. it is commonly called
Potters-Earth, or Clay for making of Potts, Dishes, etc. and although Erckern
applies the word chiefly to Potters-Earth, Clay or Loam, yet there are many
other Clays or Earths which have particular Names, according to their natures
and colors; as Fullers-Earth, or Clay of a Russet color, also Blew, Green and
reddish Clay, but that which is for common use is solid and firm, and for the
most part of a russet or bluish Hue or color: and though it be said by
Minshaw, That Potters Clay is called Argilla, from Argos a City in Greece,
where Potters (as he says) did first exercise that Art (which Pliny ascribes
to Coraebus an Athenian, one in the Province of Argolis, and the other in
Africa, but both in Greece:) so it seems the Art was there, before it was in
Egypt in Africa: however, according to the Sacred Story, the Art of making
Pots of Clay was ancient, as we may read in Exodus 16. 13. and of Bricks. Exodus
5. 8. and in Job 4. 19. the Houses in his time were called Houses of Clay, and
Clay was of such Esteem with Jesus Christ, That he made it an Instrumental cure
in the Blind Man. Jo. 9. 6.

Now to pass these, In Devonshire, and other places, I have seen good cottages
made only with clay, without any wood, except little Window-cases, doors and
roofs; and in Suffolk and Norfolk the outside of most cottages and outhouses
(to great edifices) are of clay daubed on Splenters, and the insides also
plastered with clay, and a little Lime, yet are very durable.

At Woodford, near London (about 20 years since) I saw a fair House of Brick,
built on the top of that hill, and had no lime or other mortar within or
without it, but sound clay mixed with sand, which continues strong to this day,
as I am informed: and in 1674. (my House in Suffolk (standing on an Hill, upon
a clay Soil) I dug about 30 foot in length, and 10 foot deep, under part of
it, with intent to make a cellar, designing to pin or support the sides with
Brick: But finding the clay to be very firm (being mattocked and not spaded)
and never before dug (as might be judged, because under the clay was found
good gravel, and beds of flat Oystershells) I saved the charge by continuing
the clay in stead of the brick, and I hear it does hold firm to this day, as if
it had been done with Brick: and doubtless, according as the clay is in
goodness, so Furnaces, Ovens, Tests, Crucibles, etc. will the better endure the
heat of Fire and Metals* care being taken that they be well dried, after they
are made, and before they be exposed to the fire, and then by degrees, and not
suddenly burnt. See Brick, Earth, Loadstone.

COAGULATE, T. Rensel, L. Coagulatio, See conglutinate.

COAL, T. Koll stein, L. Carbo, of these we have Varieties, viz. Wood-coal (of
several sorts mentioned by our Author) used chiefly for Metals, Sea Coal (dig'd
out of Coal-Mines, near the Sea at Tinmouth, by Newcastle, and Pit-Coal (in
Mines remote from the Sea) near Coventry in Warwickshire, and in Staffordshire
and Shropshire, etc. but these are not useful to Metals: it is true, many have
attempted to Chark or make Cinders of them to be used for Metals, when Wood is
scarce, but I have not yet heard of any certain success therein (though I wish
it:) there is another Coal which is artificial, which we call Charcoal, and I
conceive the proper Latin word for it is Anthrax, and the burner of it
Anthratius, but most Dictionaries do use carbo and carbones for all sorts of
Coals, by adding Adjectives, as Carbones Fossiles, etc. but Charcoal being a
new Invention (comparative to the other) it is fit to have a newer word then
Carbo, and these Charcoals of Wood, are most useful for Metals: Now in making
those of Wood, the Art is so much improved, that I have seen an Arrow with its
Feathers exactly burnt into a Charcoal, without diminution of the shape or the
Feather, only the Feather made black for white, and some of this Wood Charcoal,
I have seen at the Iron-Mills in Worcestershire, so uncombustible, that they
have come running out of the Furnace, and floated on the top of the Metal,
whole and entire, and this (as they told me) was the Charcoal of the
Withy-Tree, being a more light and soft Wood than any that grows in those
parts: I carried away some of them, and cut them into fine Pencils, and used
them for Drawing, on blew Paper (especially being first boiled in Butter) and
the white Pencils proper to them, I made of Tabacco-Pipe Earth, in Rouls dried
by the Sun, and not at the Fire, and sometimes I heightened the lights with
Ceruse (composed of Lead, see eruse.)

COBOLT, T. Cobolt. Sometimes accounted for the Copper-stone, and reckoned by
Dr. Salmon, among the natural Recrements of metals; and I do not find it by
any other name, then as it is so described by Erckern. l. 1. c. 2. s. 11. and
l. 3. c. 21. etc.

COIN, T. Gemuntsz, the Latin has several Words for it, viz. Moneta, Nummus,
Pecunia, etc. and Aurum, Argentum, Cuprum, Aes; and anciently Coriata (when
Leather Coin was current and in esteem) but the proper word for it, (and so
Minshaw) is Cusus, thence Cudere to Coin: Now Moneta is a relative Word to
Monere, advising to take heed how to use Money, only to honest ends, after it is
once Coined: Nummus to Numeratus or Quantity: Pecumia to Pecus or Sheep, which
were and still are commutative as Money it self, but it may be properly from
the Greek Word Kainos, Comunis, because when it once had its Stamp or Cude upon
it, then it was passable, current and Common, and some would have it from the
form of the Coin, consisting of Angles (as much of the French and Spanish Money
do) and some say, That from Angular Coins, the Corners or Angles of Structures
are called Coins, because with such Money the Architects were paid their Wages.
Now, I conceive that I may add my Supposition also, That the Word Coin, may be
the abstract of Coynobeline or Cunobeline, one of the Kings of the old Britans,
and who is said to be the first that did Coin Money, at Malden in Essex
(Cambden) where it is probable that their Mines (in our Records) since decayed
or neglected, did supply him with Metal, for that purpose; however, in our
later Ages, the Word Coin is still applied to Metals, formed into Current Money
made of Metals.

CONDENSE, T. Dick-Maken, A. making Thick. L. Condensatio.

CONGEAL, ver Breizon, L. Coagulatio. See Conglutinate.

CONGLUTINATE. T. Lime, (from whence we have the word lime, for a Dog and Bitch
in copulation) L. conglutinare. A. to glue and join together: now these words
cement, coagulate, condense, congeal and conglutinate are often, but
improperly, applied to one sense, especially about metals; for cementing is, as
I have shown in Cement; coagulation, from coagulo, to curdle, i.e. where metals
are joined or curdled together by fire; condensation, when metals are made more
hard, or thickened; congelation, when they are by Fire turned into a
Christaline, Glittering and Icy form, from gelare, to turn into Ice; which kind
of Crystal is often seen in refining of metals; and Conglutination from
Glutinare, when they are joined by a glewish temper, and is more properly
applicable to vessels made of Glutinous matter, for the better holding of
Metals in the Fire, yet all these Words still signify the making of things
thicker or harder, than they were before: Now as to Conglutination, I cannot
here but call to mind what I saw at Exmouth in Devonshire, where upon little
Rocks appearing somewhat above the Sands (at a low Water) there were Oysters
sticking fast to them (which at an high Water were all covered by the Sea) so
as we were forced to beat them off with a Chizel and Hammer, and these they
called Rock Oysters, the Shells being almost as firm as the Rock it self; I
confess I looked upon it as a wonderful Secret in Nature, That the Oyster could
fix it self so firmly, having no outward parts to do it, and this in 12 hours
time; for at the next Low Water those very Rocks (where at the former Ebb we
had left no Oysters on them) they were filled again with other Oysters, and
therefore it must be some glutinous matter, which they cast forth upon the
Rocks, and so brood upon it to a condensation; and I the rather believe this,
because Shell-Snails, which we call Dodmans, have an excellent white Cement,
always lying in the little end of the Cone of their Shells, with which they
often glue themselves so fast to Walls, that they cannot get loose, but dye in
their Shells: and so does the Limpet (another Shellfish on the same Coast)
cleave it self so hard to the Rocks, that nothing but a Chizel can divide them
from the Rocks; now certainly, if that part of the Oyster-shell which is so
glewed, were mixed with so much of the Rock, on which it is fixed, there might be
made a very binding Glue or Cement, for Metallic Vessels; but there is another
sort of Shellfish, upon that Coast also, which I cannot but mention, because I
do not find it amongst those that write of Shell-Fishes, and it is called in
that County, the Long-Fish, or Capa Longa, the longest are not above 12 Inches
and about an Inch in breadth, opening at each end, and contains in it a
white-Worm (for I cannot call it otherwise) which is a very nourishing Food,
and being pickled up, are sent as acceptable Presents, to those that make their
Gusts their delights; these are caught in this manner: at a Low Water, that is,
when the Sands are clear of Water, those Fishes do show themselves above the
Sands, about 3 Inches, so as 8 or 9 Inches remain in the sands, and then those
who make it their Trade to get them, presently go against the wind very softly
(as in catching of Moles) and with an Iron Engine (somewhat like a Spade)
strike under them, and so are caught; but if they go with the wind, the Fish
presently retires into the Sand, without possibility of being caught for that
Tide, and though after their Escapes, I have seen them dug for, yet they
vanish beyond the strength or agillity of labor to catch them.

Now, these having no outward thing discernable to assist them in so quick a
Motion, I conceive it must be by some glutinous matter, (such as we see do
attend snails in their motion, but the snails cannot contract it again, because
it usually lies on some dry substance) but the glutinous matter of these Capa
longa's, being fixed in their Repositories (much under the superficies of the
sand, and so extended by them like a spiders thread) may with much more agility
than a spider rise or fall as they please in a moment, there being a liquidity
from their Repositories to make their motions of ascension or descention more
agile and passable: Now from Creatures of this constitutions, certainly many
excellent Cements may be made, as may be judged by the Fish, which Pliny lib.
32. cap. 7. calls Itchthiocalla, and we Ising-glass Fish, which besides other
virtues, the skin and other parts of it (as he tells us, and now we know by
Experience) do make an excellent Cement (especially if it be mingled with aqua
vita) either for earthen Ware or Metals: enduring both fire and water.

COLOR, T. Farb. L. Color. A. Color. (signifying Beauty or Pulchritude) of
which there are two sorts: natural and artificial; wherewith the Limners and
Painters, in Imitation of the Beauty of Nature, shows us the Beauty of their
Art; yet they cannot perform their Works without the help and mixture of other
Substances; as Oils, Gums, etc. but their best and most proper Colors are from
Metals; Whereof seven are accounted the chief, produced from the seven chief
Metals which are influenced from the seven Planets, and these 7 Colors are
used in painting, by two sorts of eminent Artists in that Science, viz. those
who use them with Gum (called the Art of Miniature or drawing in little) and
those which use them with Oil (called Limners or Painters, or drawing in great
and little) for I meddle not with those who work with Pastils or in Frisco, or
Dyers, or Tincturists, so the first of these in an Alphabetical Order is Black;
otherwise White and Black are accounted the Principes Colorum, and Mensura
Reliquorum (Alsted.) And all of them produced from Metals and Minerals: the
Seven are these;

I. BLACK, T. Schwartz (l. 1. p. 6.) from whence we have our word swarth or
swarthy, inclining to black) L. Niger. Plutarch calls it color umbrosus. A.
Black, and these Blacks are natural in Stones, Coals, etc. but the best
Artificial ones are made by the retortions of Lamps, placed under Plates of
Gold, Silver, Copper, Lead, Tin or Iron, and are easily distinguished, in their
nigerities or blackness; and this shows, that black has some superiority over
white, because when white things, as Ivory, etc. are burnt, they turn to a
black: but as to our purpose: it is Observable, That all these Blacks are still
heightened and improved for use, by the three eminent Minerals, viz. Vitriol,
Alum and Copperas.

II. BLEW, T. Blau and Himmel Blau (in English heavenly Blew) the Latins
renders it to us mostly by Participles or Adjectives, as Lividus, Adluens,
Caeruleus, Cyanaeus, Cumatilis, Coelestis Color; that is, a Color having those
properties or resemblances: the French calls it Bleu and Azur, and we Blew and
Azure, we from them, or they from us; which latter is the more likely, because
we have more Mines of Copper, from whence it is produced, than they: now
besides this Azure Blew, there is Blew Bise, Vltramarine, Smalt, Flory,
Inde-Bandias, Litmus, Orchal, Blew Vitriol, Verdigrease, produced from Mines
and Minerals.

III. BROWN (or Russet) T. Braun, the Latins, which would bring this into the
septinary of colors, call it color nativus and Pulligo (Holioke) otherwise the
common name is Fuscus, from the darkness of its color, being (as it were) an
attendent on Black, and of this brown color (which is the proper color of Tin
and Copper Oar) there is Vmber, Spanish-Brown, Terrra d'colonia, Turnsil, Bole
Armoniack, and other products of Metals and Minerals, which Painters and other
do use for it.

IV. GREEN, T. Gruen, L. Veridis Recens, and many other words relating to the
diversity of Greens, but those which are used for Painting (from Metals and
Minerals) are Green Bise, Virditer, Verdigrease (which though it be used for
Blew) yet being steept in Vinegar (as I have often tried) it does produce a
delightful transparent Green: also Copperas, Vitriol and Alum do much improve
this color.

V. RED, T. Rot, L. Ruber, Rufus, etc. to supply which for Painting (there is
Lake, which is another delicate transparent red purple color) also red Lead,
Vermillion, Cinnabar, Minium (of different Names, yet little differing in
color) also Cinople, Rosset, and several other Reds from Metals and Minerals.

VI. WHITE, T. Weitz and Blanch, L. Albus and Candidus, to represent this, the
Painters use Littarge of Silver, Ceruse, white Lead, Spanish White, etc. raised
from the Calcination of Metals.

VII. YELLOW, T. Gelb, L. Gilvus, Flavus, Fulvus, Luteus, Croceus; to represent
this, they use Littarge of Gold (and a liquid matter which counterfeits Gold,
such as is used about Coaches, etc.) they have also yellow Orpiment, Sandarach,
Masticot, yellow Oker, etc.

Now of these colors, those which are produced from Metals and Minerals (as I
have shown) are too piercing for Paintings with Gum, and therefore not lasting,
but with Oil they are safe and very durable, even to a thousand years or more,
especially in the curious Art of Anealing.

Now concerning colors in general, here is the difference between the Botanick
Science and the Metallic, because in one the color of Plants are seen in
their admirable varietys, without the use of Art; but the colors of Metals are
not seen, but by the help of Art; only it may be supposed, that every Vein of
Metal has some precious Stones to attend it, whereby we may be informed of
what color that Metal is most apt to yield by Art: as Saphires, white and
yellow, Diamonds, Rubyes, Emeralds, Amathists, etc. which are daily found
(especially in hotter Climates:) there are also other colors, mentioned by
Erckern, as Gray, Lazure, red Sulphur, Purple, Orange, etc. but whoever will
make a more exact review, will find, that the most pleasing, useful and durable
Colors, are from the Metals themselves, or their Extracts and Flowers, seen in
their Original representatives, viz. Gems and precious Stones.

COOPERATE. T. mit eyn ander werk. L. Cooperate, to work together, that is,
when Metals do work together before separation, and is also generally applied
to any joint action.

COPELLS. See Utensils.

COPPER, T. Cupser, L. Cuprum (l. 3.) A. Copper, and is accounted the third
Metal in esteem next Gold; and, as is pretended comes from the Isle of Cyprus,
from whence it had its Name Cuprum; we need not go so far for it, having many
Mines of that Metal, both in England and Wales, especially those at Keswick in
Cumberland,, which occasioned a great Suit betw^en Queen Elisabeth and the Earl
of Northumberland, concerning her Right to them, upon the account of Royal
Mines: which Case is reported by Plouden, with the Opinion of the Judges on the
Queens side, whereby the Society for the Mines Royal, have had and still have
the care over them, but for want of Fuel and skilful Miners, they are of no use
at present: This Metal is of three sorts, the Red or Reddish, is the proper
Natural Copper: Yellow Copper, which, for distinction, is properly called
Brass, is an Imitator of Gold: the White is when Copper is tinged with Silver,
so as it imitates Silver. See Brass.

COPPERAS, T. Vitriol, L. Vitriolum, this is a kind of Stone which is cast up
very plentifully between Rochester and the Isle of Shepy (which being not far)
I went purposely to the Copperas-Works, farmed of Mr. Haward (Lord of the Soil)
by one Mr. Johnson a Londoner, who in few years got above 20000 l. by it, as
appeared by what he left to his two Daughters, when he died: I went also to
other places, but did not find that the Stones are so plentiful and good in any
other place of England: it is of a dark Seagreen, but being melted its color
is heightened, and glitters like to Crystal, and serves for many uses about
Metals, and almost in all Trades where colors are concerned; and is one of the
chief Ingredients for good Ink, as I found it in an old Abbot's Book:

Vitrioli quarta, mediata fit uncia gummi;
Vncia fit Galli, his jungas octo Falerni; (which I take to be Sherry)
His been contritis, comixtis omnibus illis,
Facit bonum Atramentum.
And therefore this Copperas or one sort of Vitriol (in distinction of the
white (called Dans Vitriol, because from Danemark) and the perfect blew Vitriol
(called Roman, coming out of Italy) is called Atramentum Sutorium, because
Shomakers-black is made with it. See Colors, Black and Vitriol.

COPPER-stone, T. Ruffer stein (lib. 3.) is no other than solid Oar of Copper,
as it is in the mine, and not touched by other Imbracers, or, as it is made at
the first smelting into Cakes or stones, and so the word Stone is commonly
applied to it by Erckern. See Oars and Stones.

CRISTAL, See Crystal.

CROCUS, is the T. and L. for Saffron (lib. 2. and 4.) but in Metallicks, it is
meant a powder made of Iron or Antimony, of a Saffron color, and when it is
made of Iron it is called Crocus Martis, or of Copper, Crocus Veneris, because
it is the powder of those Metals of Iron and Copper, which are Dedicated to the
Planets Mars and Venus, and sometimes is made of mixed Metals, and then called
Crocus Metallorum, and are often mentioned by our Author.

CREIZER (l. 2. c. 2.) T. Kreutzer from Kreutx, or a little Cross stamped upon
it, and is so small a piece, that it is accounted but the 92 part of an
Hungarian Gilder, which is about 30 pence of our Silver: but H. Vaughan in his
Book of Coinage, makes six sorts besides the Hungarian. See Weight.

CRUCIBLE, T. Tiegel, I find no proper Latin Word for it, but it may go under
the word Phiala for a Cruise or a Pot, and this Crucible is a diminutive of
Cruise, or Pot less than a Cruise, but of different shapes: and this is used
for dissolving of small pieces of Metal for Assaying, as others are for other
uses called Cruises. See Pots.

CULB, T. Krug, which is a common name for all Cubical Pots, but we call it
Culb, from the particular form of it, I suppose, because it inclines to a
Cubical shape. See Sculpture.

DE D DI
DEAD, T. Todt, Todter (from whence we have our word Tclod or Clod) and
Gesterbeu, L. Mortuus, Defunctus. See Dissolution.

DECLINATION, T. Nidersichbiegn, L. Deorsum se flectere, and is almost the same
with Precipitation; for which Gramarians use the Word Declination, Declension,
or going from one Case to another, and in the Vulgar sense, a man is said to
decline in his Fortune, when he falls from Prosperity to Adversity: but in the
Metalick sense, it it to fall from the top to the bottom, by which means the
Metal is better than when it was at the top; and it is often seen that adversity
makes Men better and of more use (as Metals are) by being Cast down; a Phraise
often used in this Book. See Precipitation.

DEFT, (l. 1. etc.) an English Saxon Word, therefore I retain it; signifying
fair, clean, neat (quasi sine defectu) or without defect, on the contrary
undeft is unclean, etc. (Skinner.)

DELINEATE (l. 2.) or to Describe a thing by certain Lines or Figures.

DIAMETER (l. 1.) is a certain straight Line, drawn through the Center of a
Figure, and of both sides bounded in the compass of it, cutting or dividing the
Figure into two equal parts.

DISHES (l. 1. etc.) T. Schueffels, L. Discus, A. Dishes, and these are of
various sorts and shapes, but the most useful about Metals are made of Pewter,
Iron or Clay, for I do not here write of Epicurean Dishes, but of Dishes or
Bowls that are certain measures in Mines, which are filled with Oar, by the
Labor of the Miners, whereof a certain number are paid as a duty to the King,
others as a duty to the Church, and the rest to the Proprietors, and according
to the number of Dishes delivered, so the Miners are paid; and then they may
eat the Fruit of their Labor in other Dishes. See Utensils and Wardens.

DISSOLVING (l. 2. etc.) that is, a metal easy to be loosed from such other
metals as are fixed or intermixed; and thence Death is called a Dissolution, when
the Soul is loosened from its Terrestral part, and becomes a Celestial Metal,
and from hence the word Dead is often used in Erckern.

DISTILLATION (l. 2. etc.) is a drawing of a Liquor made thin with heat, into a
Receiver, by Alembicks, Retorts, etc. and is mentioned by our Author, though of
little use to Refiners, who deal with hotter fires and harder substances.

DRAGGONS-BLOOD, L. Sanguis Draconis (l. 2. c. 13.) our Author uses it for
Lutings. Dr. Salmon says, It is the product of a Tree, red like Blood, or the
color of a Dragon, and comes to us from America, and by boiling condensated:
but Pliny (l. 36. c. 7.) says, That the Indians make it of the substance of a
Dragon, crush't and squiez'd with the weight of an Elephant, falling upon a
Dragon, that has sucked him to Death, whereby the Dragons and Elephants Blood
are mingled together; and of this the Indians make a Color like Cinnabar, so
as though they bear one name, they are of different Natures, and which it is
that Erckern means, I leave it to others; for the Blood of the Ox, etc. we see
in other of his Experiments is used in Luting and Cements: there is also an
Herb growing plentifully in England, called Dragons Blood, which is much used
to tinge Colors, and has a Restringent quality, and so may be used with Clay
in Lutings.

DRAM (l. 1. etc.) T. Quintlein, L. Dram. See Weight.

DREGS, T. Trussen vapfen, L. Faex, from whence we use the Word Feces.

DRIVE or Driving, T. Abtreiben, L. Abigere, Depellere. l. 3. c. 25.)
signifies the forcing of metal to cast its dross upwards, as the feces
downwards, l. 3. c. 25. and 26. and in many other places used.

DROSS. T. Treusen. L. Faex. A. the scum of metals: see Dreggs, Feces, Scorias,
Lees, Slacks, etc. so it seems Dregs is the purge or settlement at the bottom
of melted Metals, and Dross the vomiting the crude matter upwards.

DRY, T. Abdoerren and Treigen maken, L. Siccare (l. 3. c. 26.) See Ovens.

DUCCATES. See Money.

DUKE-GOLD. See Money.

DULCIFICATION, T. Susz, L. Dulcis, or reducing the ill Tastes or Scents of
Metal to sweet and pleasing; and thence the Pouders often are called both
Sugars and Salts, as they are different by Extraction, and the perfuming of
them called Hedichra, and these are dispersed in our Author, and are called
Saccharia Auri, or the Sugar of Gold.

DUNG, T. Tingen, L. Sturcus, and of these Horse-Dung and Ox-Dung, and some
other Dungs are a chief Ingredient to Lutings (used by our Author l. 2. c. 20.
etc.) and the Dung of Creatures are not only used in this Art, but in almost
all other Arts and Sciences; by Chimists called Ignis Sapientum, or the
Wise-man's Fire (Howel) and though it be in contempt amongst Ladies (and the
less Learned Inquirers into Nature) yet certainly the Heathens had them in such
Veneration, that they Sacrificed to most of their Idol Gods, upon the account
of Stercorary Virtues in them: and therefore the Translators of our Bible into
Latin, instead of Idols calls them Dij Stercorarij (Junius and Trem.) of which
I apprehend this reason: viz. that the several uses which they made of Dung,
either for Medicine or Manuring their grounds, might be propitious to them: and
I have read it from some Traveller of note, That among the Indians it was
usual, that when they intended Homage to their Superiors, or welcome to their
Friends, they did evacuate their Dung into their Hand, and so daub it on the
Face of whom they intended to honor or pleasure, and was ever accepted by
them, as the first and best of their Welcoming Ceremonies: for Agricola tells
us of Mans-Dung made as sweet as Civit. But to return nearer home, when I
remained in London, during the great Plague in 1666. Dr. Glisson (famous in his
time) being my old Friend and Acquaintance, persuaded me to take a piece of his
constant Antidote, which was only the Dung of one that had dyed of the Plague,
dried, and so kept in a foraminous Box, for the best Antidotical Perfume; but I
thank God I escaped without it: and let us but consider of the great Virtue of
the Dung of Geese, Ducks, Peacocks, Dogs (generally known and used) it were
worth the while to make a Collection of them, from Johnson's Natural History of
Quadrupedes, etc. and it may very well complete a large Book of those useful
Experiments; especially if a little variety from Pliny be admitted: so I will
conclude with this Direction, That Stone-Horse-Dung is of certain and known
Virtues in curing scaldings, scorchings or burnings by hot Metals, if quickly
applied to the part grieved.

DUCCATE, T. Duckat. L. ducalis aureus. A certain Gold Coin which was first
coined in Rome, Anno 547. and afterward it began to be used in other Places,
and so called because it had the Image of a Duke (that is, some eminent Leader
of an Army, a ducendo) and worth about 6 s. 8 d. English, now 9 s. (Holiock)
This Coin was held formerly the best Gold, but now it is much adulterated, so
as Goldsmiths are very careful in receiving them.

DUST. T. Staub. L. Pulvis. See Powder, Ashes, Pulverising.

EA E EA
EARTH, T. Erd, L. Terra. A. Earth, from the Saxon: Now, in every Territory
there are differences of Earth, so there are accounted sixty eight sorts: but
of those which are esteemed the best in England (which other Nations make use
of more than our selves.) some of them are rather lapidious than fragile, as
yellow Oker (of which I have seen a Pit or Quarry in Mr. Whorewood's grounds at
Halton in Oxfordshire:) also red Oker (which some call Markingstone) in many
places, and both of these are improved by artificial Okers: and of Fullers
Earth there is store, and very good, in a Lordship of the Earl of Bedford's,
near Oburn-Abby; also in Sir John Warren's ground in Suffolk, and in many other
parts of England; (of which the Dutch make good use, though there is a Law to
the contrary.) As for Chalk which is burnt into Lime, and White Earth for
Dishes, there is very good in a Manor of the Lord Abergaveny's, near Norwich,
in Norfolk, and Potters-Clay for Pots, and Marl in most Counties, with which
they manure and much improve their Grounds; also earth for making Brick and
Tile for Houses, etc. of which there is plenty in most Counties, and commonly
they burn to a red Color: but there is a sort of Brick-Earth in many parts of
Suffolk and Norfolk, and in other Counties, which burn white, and are more
lasting and durable than the red, and these, other Countries borrows from us;
and we borrow from them the Terra Sigillata, Terra Lemnia and Terra Armenia,
and many more of great use and Virtue: but that which is common to us all, is
Sand, and this is particularly used for those Ovens which are called
Sand-Ovens, Sculpture II. and XXIV. for separating Metals: Now these have their
several Names and Natures, as Pit-Sand, drift-Sand, Sea-Sand, etc. which may be
experimented in Chimical Operations, viz. what kind of Sand is most proper for
Metals, and what for Mortar, etc. But before I pass this Discourse, I cannot
but speak of the Sands at Icklingham in Suffolk (yet spreading into Norfolk)
having their rise from an Hole in that Village, therefore they are called
Icklingham-Sands, or rather Mowing's Sands, but their Motion is different from
all others, for these do not move but by a Western Wind, and then they go East,
and lie still and compact in any other Wind, and yet it has walked from thence
above Eight Miles to Brandon and Downham, two Towns East of it, covering the
ground at least a foot deep for more than a Mile in breadth; and whilst the
ground is so covered it produces not the least sprig of any green thing: Now
Brandon and Downham are two Towns situate on Suffolk-side, by the edge of the
river Ouse, which runs from Thetford to Lyn-Regis: and the Inhabitants did make
very high Banks to defend their Meadows, and to prevent the stopping up of the
River, so that you might see good Meadow-ground on the East Side of the Bank,
worth 20 s. an Acre; and on the West Side, sandy ground, the Inheritance not
worth two pence an Acre to be sold. But the Inhabitants being not able to
defend their River or Meadows any longer, left the Sands to act their pleasure:
and then they fairly marched over the River, and are gone about three miles
into Norfolk, still keeping the same point of motion. Now, whether this
proceeds from any extraordinary attraction of the Sun, or inclination of the
Sands to the Sea-shoar, by way of sympathy, being about twenty miles Eastward,
I shall leave it to further Consideration: and my reason of writing this was,
that in sand Ovens for Metals the different sorts might be tried, some being of
a very fresh, and some of a very salt, and others of a very dry Nature.

And I cannot but further observe, that the Western parts do as much admire at
the Eastern sandy Grounds producing pregnant Crops, as we at their mountainous
Crops, both having their Fertility from the artificial and laborious Mixtures
of other Earths, with their stones and sands: see Sculpture XLI. Clay, Sand,
etc.

EGG, T. Eye. L. Ovum: l. 1. p. 20. this word has as much difference in our
Neighboring Languages as any I meet with, and therefore I shall set them down;
the Greeks call it Ooen: the Saxons, Eghe: the Belgic, Eye; like the Teut, the
French, Oeuf: the Italian, Novo: the Spanish, Huevo, etc.

In the Egg there are three parts, the white, the yolk and the tredle: the
white of an Egg is called in L. Albumen, T. Eyeclar, and by Pliny, Ovi Albus
Liquor, and this is called Eye clar, from the bright spots in it, by whose
delatation the Coliquamentum, which is made from it, is styled (by that Learned
Dr. Harvy,) the Oculus or Eye of the Egg, agreeable to the German word Eye; the
Yolk is called in T. Totter, L. Vitellus, from Vita; the Treddle is called
Chalazae.

There is little use in Metallic matters of the Yolk or Chalaze, but our
Author often mentions the use of the white of Eggs, as a chief Ingredient for
Lutings.

But upon this occasion of writing of Eggs, I am put in mind of a Camelion,
which was bestowed on me by Mr. Fasset (an Eminent and Honest Chyrurgion) which
was sent him out of the East Indies, and with it the very Stalk and Cluster of
small Eggs, as they were in the Body, and one Egg in its full proportion, as
white as Pullets Eggs, and as big, considering the proportion: this Egg from
the Camelion was a perfect round shell, whereas Hens are Oval, so as I find
this difference, that the Camelions Eggs are Oval within, and are cast out of
the Mouth round, but Hens are round within and are cast out of the Fundament
Oval; and the reason may be, that the Camelions Eggs comes out of its Throat
(the extention of which is of one constant Globular form;) and so Snakes and
Fish (whose Eggs are round) do send them out of their Mouths, and then take
them in again, as they perceive any danger to their Spawn or Eggs; but Hens
Eggs come out of an Orifice, which opens by degrees, which makes the first part
of the Egg narrow (for the little end comes ever first) and so the passage
extending gently, the pliable Egg increases in bigness, and at the exclusion
does narrow it again, but not so much as at the first egress.

Now it is to be observed, That when the Egg is unloosned from the Knot or
Cluster of the little round Eggs, it soon receives extention into an Oval form,
even whilst it remains in the Body, in compliance to its passage through the
Fundament; and whilst it is in the Body, it is prepared also with a white Film
over the whole Egg, resembling, but is not a shell, because it must endure
compressure, and being now ripe to be expulsed, then by a certain spirituous
liquid Cementation, or glutinous varnish from its Dung (which passes out with
it) and by the ambient Air (at its coming out) it is crushed in an Instant into
a solid shell, which will not endure compression: And this I mention the
rather, because I find that the Learned Dr. Harvy attributes the hardness of
the shell to the approaching Air, and not to the Cementing Dung, and does not
in the least Discourse of the causes of oval and round forms of Eggs.

ELECTUARY, of which there are near an hundred mentioned in the New London
Dispensatory, whereof the chief are from Metals or Minerals.

ELIXAR is exalted Quintessences, made by infusion and Digestion of Metals,
etc. whereof there are also 25 sorts in the aforesaid New London Dispensatory.
the chief of them also are from Metals. See Quintessence.

ELL, T. Elen and Eblen, L. Vlna, Cubitus, A. Ell. Now it is here to be noted,
that the English Ell is as long as two German Else: and so it is to be applied
proportionably to the making of Furnaces, etc. See Finger, Hand, Measure.

ENAMEL, See Amel.

EQUILIBRIO, See Weights.

ESSENCES, (Doct. Salmon.) are the Balsamic parts of Metals, or of any other
thing clearly separated from their gross parts, whereof 16 are numbered in his
London Dispensatory, and the chief of those from Metals or Minerals* See
Quintessence and Elixir.

ESUSTUM, T. or Copper calcined and then called Calx Veneris. See Products of
Metals.

EVAPORATION, and to evaporate, T. Dampffein, or to take away the Dampness or
exhaling of the humidous parts of Metals, by a gentle fire, or heat. (D.
Salmon) L. Evaporare, or to take away vapors. See Fumigation.

EXPRESSION, T. Ansz Trucken, L. Expremere, i. e. a straining or drawing forth
Metals or Liquids by pressing, and this done either with Linen or Leather. See
Filtration, and Quicksilver, the word is also applied to the speaking fluently.

EXTERN. T. Avez wendig, L. Externus, or the outward part of Metals, or things.

EXTRACTION, T. Ausz Zichen, L. Extractio and extrahere, that is, the drawing
the Essence, life or virtue out of any Metal, by a fit Menstruum or Liquor from
Oil, Tartar, Calx viva, Vinegar, etc. whereof above 60 are in Dr. Salmon's New
London Dispensatory, and have peculiar names, viz. the Extraction from Iron is
called Crocus Martis, and so of the rest.

FEFFI
FECES, T. Trusen, L. Feculae, or certain setlings which remain at the bottom
of melted Metals, which may be reduced to a profitable Powder; and we also call
faeces from facere, or that which is made to flow or float on the top, or sink
to the bottom of metals; and the word Dross, seems to come from Ros, or thick
dew, which arises from Metals, and condensed bodies: also the word slacks T.
is Slacken, L. Scorias, which signifies also Dregs; and these are so called
before the Metal it self is by Praecipitation cleared from them; and it may be
observed, that Argol (the Dregs of Wine) which is faeces of another Nature, for
it has this Property, that as the scum, dregs or faeces of Metals fly to the
top or bottom, this betakes it self to the sides of Vessels, as if it scorned
to be called either Scum or Dreg.

FERMENTATION, T. Saurmachen, L. Ferment or to leaven, raise or improve; but as
to Metals, it is used for rarification, ripening or flowring them by addition
of Ingredients, as our Bread is ripened by Leaven, and Beer is flowred by
Yeast, and in many parts of our Author it is used: See Dregs, Dross, Scoria's,
Yest, etc.

FILE, T. Feile, L. Lima, A. File or Rasp, to file metals to a Powder, and the
filings are called Limations, but we use the word File in three other senses,
viz. File, from filum Thread; a File of Soldiers; which may also come from
filum, because they stand in a direct Line, like an extended piece of Thread.

FILTRATION, also from Filum a Thread, because Cloths woven of Thread, are used
for straining Quicksilver, etc. but that is more properly called Expression
(as before) for this Filtration is done two ways, either by brown Paper, or
Pendent Lists of Cloth, whereby the liquid Water may drop guttatim, from one
Vessel into another. See Expression.

FINGER, T. Finger. See Measure.

FINING, Refining and Clarifying, T. Saeuberung and Reinguns, L. Purgare,
Mundare, and are only the making the Metals more perfect in their Species or
Kinds, by often melting them from their Dross or Dregs, l. 1. p. 18.

FIRE T. Fewr, L. Ignis, is the chief Operator in the Dissolving of Metals,
still showing its power and activity on the sulphurous part of Metals, and
makes it fly away or submit.

FISH-BONE, T. Fisck bein, L. Os piscis. See Bone-Ashes.

FIST. T. Taust. L. Pugnus. See Measures.

FIXATION, to Fixed. T. Hesten. L. Figere, is the making of that which is
volatile in Metals to be Fixed and endure the fire, and not fly away; and this
is done by sublimation, still adding some fixed Metals; as Lead-Glass, Lead, etc
to the Volatile.

FLAME, T. Flam, L. Flamma, or the Oily part of Wood, or combustibles,
impregnated by fire, for the more easy passing it self into all the porous
parts of Metals.

FLEAKY, Flakes, flaky, T. Floken, L. Floccus, Fragmen and Strictura, A. Flaky.
See Shivery and Shivers.

PHLEGM, T. Rhoden, L. Flegma, Pituita, or the waterish, volatile and unfixt
part of Metals, and as in Man it is of a thicker substance than spittle, so in
Metals it is of a thinner than the Scoria's or Dross, and that which arises
from Sulphur or Vitriol, is commonly acid, sharp and salt.

FLINTS, T. Fewerstein, and sometimes in the T. they are called Hornestein,
from the color: L. Silix, there are such store of these in Norfolk that it
makes a City in Spain accounted one of the wonders of the World, being
encompassed with fire, that is Flints, to be no wonder: but the Metalick Flints
are such as accompany the Veins of Metal, and from whence Metal is made; but
whether the Norfolk Flints, though full of Ignitous matter, will afford the
like, may be tried, by such as do not value the charge of Experiments; and then
the great Labor and Expense of digging in Mines might be saved. l. 1. p. 7.
etc. See Stones.

FLOCKS (of Wool) L. Floccus, the same with Flakes, Flocks of Wool, T. Ein
Loken Wull (l. 2. c. 20.) and A. called Locks of Wool, by lasily using l for
f, for it has its name from a number of Sheep which bears the Wool, which
makes Flocks (being the remnants of the Wool after Combing and Dressing it)
for spinning; the like is made of the remnants of Flax after Dressing, called
Hards, and both of these are much used for Lutings, and it may be a Quaere,
whether the Flocks of Lemster Wool, which is the finest in all England, or
Norfolk Wool the worst, be the best for use? but I prefer Leimster Flocks,
because its Wool is called Leimster Oar, oftener than Leimster Wool, because
the feed of the Sheep consists of those Herbs and Plants which have their
Virtue from the metalick Oars under them; so as I know, that the Sheep of
Leimster, being removed to places where there are not such subterranean Oars,
their Wool in one year will be adulterated by their Feed, the word Flocks is
also metaphorically used for Societys of Men, and Beasts or Birds, etc. l. 1.
p. 9. etc.

FLOWERS. L. Flores. T. Blum, from whence we have our Word Blossom; this word
in natural Plants signifies such parts, as are extracted by the Sun into
delicate shapes and colors, and as they are the last Works of Nature upon
Plants, so that which Chemists calls, Floss Auri (or of any other Metal) is, as
it were, the last sublimation or extraction by fire from any Metal; and as the
Flowers of Plants have their virtues superior to all the other parts, as
leaves, stalks, etc. so the Flowers of Metals, which some also call Pouders,
are superior to the Gold, Silver, or any Metal in their substantial Bulks, or
multifarious ways of Extracts or Magisteries.

FLUS, T. Fluez, I retain the Word Flus, because it comes from the L. fluere to
flow, as that which is fluid or flowable, and and sometimes (as it is a
Composition of the Glass of Lead) it is called Lead-Glass, which being put into
dissolvible metal, it gives expedition to their Dissolutions (l. 1. c. 8. c.
26. so l. 2. c. 5. etc.) and from hence may come the Word flushing or flowing
of the Blood to the Face, from other parts, etc.

FORCEPS. T. Tangs. L. Forceps. A. Tongs. See Utensils.

FORGE. T. Einschuide. L. Fabrica. See Utensils.

FOREIGN. See Outlandish.

FORMS Chimical. See Salt.

FRESH, T. Frisch, L. Recens. See Oars.

FUMIGATION, from L. Fumus, A. Smoke, T. Rauch, but as to Metals it is used
when they send up sharp and stifling Spirits: see Evaporation, but note that
Fumigation is applied to dry bodies; Evaporation to liquid, to show the
difference between Fumes and Smoaks.

FUNNEL. See Utensils.

FURNACE* See Utensils and Ovens.

FUSION, T. Geissig; the Word is often used by our Author, and by Metallists, but
more by Distillers; sometimes signifying putting in; from infundere and
fundere, and sometimes in metals called fusile or fusible, being so meltable as
it may be poured in or out.

GA G GA
GAMAHEZ, is an Arabic Word, signifying the Figures of things (as of Birds,
Beasts, Snakes, Trees, etc.) naturally represented in or upon Stones, which
usually attend Mines, as other transparent precious STONES do, as I have shown
under the words COLORS and YELLOW; for I intend not here to speak of
Talismanical Figures from Constellations, for which I refer you to Gafferel, G.
Agricola, etc. But first of the outward Figures of Gamahezies, of which sort I
have seen many taken up about Aderly and Pomfret in Yorkshire, and in other
parts of England, which do perfectly represent Snakes, as they usually lay
rolled up in the Earth, when alive, so as these seem to be Snakes petrefied,
only their Heads are wanting in all, and they are seldom above two or three
Inches Diameter, and of a blackish color, yet I have heard of, but not seen,
some inclining to a Goldish Color: But it was my chance in the Year 1668. to
find (on the side of a Stone-Cawsy, between Burport and Axminster in
Dorsetshire) one of the largest Snake-stones that ever I heard or read of,
being above six Inches Diameter, and of a Freestone color, and one might
judge that there had been an Head on it but broken off, and as a Rarity I
bestowed it on Dr. Warner one of his Majesty's Physicians, which was very
acceptable to him.

Now as to the inward Gamahez, I had some years since a whitish Flint,
inclining to a light Blew, which being casually broke in two, upon the inside
of the two broken parts, there were the perfect Figures of a Tree, with black
Lines and dilicate shadows, such as I have seen in Paintings, representing
Trees in the midst of Snow, and so seemed the black Figures on the white Stone:
I then thought my self well skilled in that Art, so I could not but give my
Verdict on Natures side, beyond any Arboreal Figure that ever I saw done by Art.

GALLON, T. Kandel, L. Brocus, and from T. Kandel, the word Can or Vessel (to
drink with) is derived; the proportion of which differs in England, as it does
in Germany, being in some parts four, in others two quarts, which is a Gallon.

GUARDIAN, T. Gaerdigein, L. Gardianus. See Warden.

GUILDERS, a German Coin (see Money) also such as use to lay Leaf Gold upon
Metal, or otherwise, to make it appear like Gold, are called Guilders, T.
Guilder, L. Aurare: see Money.

GLASS, T. Gleizen, L. Vitrum, is by fire produced from all Metals, but that
which is of most use for helping to dissolve Metals, is produced from the Dross
of Lead or Tin, and so called Speize Glass, and Tin Glass (l. 1. c. 8. and l.
2. c. 23. See Lead.)

There is also that which is called Glass-Gall, Glass-Cup or Hematithe, a Stone
of which Glass is made, and used also for Metals (l. 2. c. 3. and l. 3. c. 5.)

GLASS-CUP, T. Glass-Kup and Blutstein, L. Homathites, A. Boodstone (l. 1. c.
34. 59.)

GLASS-GALL (l. 3. c. 5. 52. See Glass.

GO, or to go, the word is commonly used as a motion to the dissolving of Oar
or Metal, and signifies much of the same with driving and flowing, being only
degrees and terms of Art toward dissolution.

GLIMMER, or Glumering, T. Glantz, L. Splendere, A shining Oar, which the
Latins call Rutilatio not properly so appliable to bright Oar, but
Resplendescentia may do well enough. (lib. 1. cap. 2. 5. 11. and lib. 2. and
lib. 3. 7. 4.) See Oars: and sometimes, it is taken for Tallow, lib. 2. cap. 28.

GOLD, lib. 2. etc. It was writ so by the old Saxons, and Britains, and still
so by the Danes, but the T. now Goldst and Belgic Gout, and if we observe what
little difference there is between Got, Gut and Good, used in these two
Languages for God; and Gout and Goldst for Gold: We may well think those
Ancients did make this Metal their GOD; and that we may not altogether blame
them, we may well bring-in the Spanish and Italians, who call this Metal, ORO,
signifying to pray, as if it were a Metal, to which their Forefathers did pay
their Devotions and Prayers: and all of us seem at this day to be guilty of
this Metallic Idolatry: but to prevent that Imputation, the Latins call it
Aurum, and We Gold, being of a different Dialect, from almost all the present
European Languages, except the old Saxons, as I said, and Danes.

Now, as Quicksilver is called Matter, so this is called Pater Metallorum, and
therefore there may be some Dispensation for a filial Love to the nobler Part
of our Mother Earth, especially if it be without idolatrous and covetous
Applications. We have little natural Gold in England from any of our Mines, yet
we are not altogether without it, for I am assured from a Cornish Gentleman,
that has a considerable Interest in the Stanneries of Cornwall, That in
digging for Tin, they often find little Grains of Gold, not in the Tin-metal,
but in the outward sandy circumjacent parts of their mines: and that the
biggest he ever saw, was not above the bigness of a small Pea, nor need we much
to search for it, or labor artificially to make it: for what we have from
other parts in Africa, Asia, and America do sufficiently supply us, especially
our late Trade with Guinea in Africa, from whence it is brought to us in little
Grits or Seeds; yet I was told by an eminent Goldsmith, That he had often
bought pieces of above an ounce in Weight, and that was so good, that though it
had not an high Color, yet the Color was recompensed by the little loss in
melting: Whereas the Seeds of other Gold are much adulterated with the filings
of Iron, which they draw off by the Loadstone: but when they bring their
Artificial Gold, made into Duccates, they are first to use their skill in
separating a considerable quantity of Silver from the Gold, which is commonly
made by Art, to contract the Gold, whereby it will endure the touch like Gold:
but their Scissers soon decide the Controversy, and cheat: so as Art discovers
the Artificial Gold from other mixed Metals. Our Author says, lib, 2. c. 1.
That the seed of Gold came out of India by Nilus, wherein he is mistaken (as
other former Ancients were) in taking Gehon, in India, to be in Asia; of which
Mistake, Sir Walter Rawligh has convincingly showed their Error (H. M. l. 1.
c. 6.) Yet very probably Nilus may afford Variety of Gold, in respect it has
its Heads, from the two great Lakes of Zambre and Zailar (and not Zambre alone,
as Dr. Heylen would have it) in the lower Aethiopia, and passes the upper
Aethiopia, or Habasines Empire) which is full of Gold, and then running above
2000 miles, and so may well bring it into Egypt, and from thence cast it into
the Mediterranean Sea, and by that Sea tossed into Asia and Europe: But, as I
said, We have a shorter and better way for it to Guinea, in Africa, from the
river Nigro, and the Coasts of it, and that we may the better credit a greater
Efflux of seeded Gold from thence, than from any other in Africa, it is found by
late Geographers, that this River does rake the very Bowels of the Earth for
it, for it seems (as they tell us) that it has its rise from a great Lake,
called the Black Lake, within two Degrees or 120 Miles of the Equinoctial (and
within four degrees Eastward of the River Nile) and so it runs Northward about
600 Miles) whereof under ground about 60 miles) and then rises again and falls
into the Lake Borneo, from whence it bends it course directly Westward
(differing from the course of Nile, which runs directly North) and so after it
has run above and under ground more than 3000 miles (through many Kingdoms and
Countries, rich in Gold) it unlades its Treasure into Guinea, by many lesser
streams, where the Natives are always dealing for Gold, and it self at last in
the Atlantic Sea, over against the Islands called Hesperides; so as we never
cross the Equinoctial to go thither; which is less trouble than unto the
farthest part of the Mediterranean Sea, where Nile vents it self: or to the
Mouth of the two Eminent Rivers of Ganges or Indies in the East-part of Asia
(and therefore called the East Indies:) Now where the land of Havilah which
Pison encompasseth (mistaken for Ganges) wherein there was Gold, and the Gold
was called good; as also where Paradise was, or is, whether beyond our known
World, or the Middle Region of the Air, or elevated near the Moon, or as far
South as the Line, or as far North as that Line; or whether near Havilah in
Africa, or Havilah in Asia; or whether a place called Eden or Paradise was
peculiarly created for the Reception of Adam after his Creation; and Christ
Jesus after his Resurrection; I shall leave to Sir Walter Rawleigh, and others
to determine, but we are assured from the sacred Story, that there was Gold
near that Place, and that then (in the Innocence of times) the Gold was good;
which must be known by Assaying, and doubtless that Knowledge was communicated
to Adam, yet we hear no more of Gold in that Holy Writ till 2800, after Adam
(though it was accounted the Golden Age) and then, (Genesis 24. 22.) Rebeccah was
presented with Gold-Earings, and shekles of Gold, so it seems they had the Art
of Melting and casting Gold into Assayings and Forms, as may be collected from
the several Distinctions in the Sacred History, concerning Beaten Gold, pure
fined and refined Gold, and crown Gold; And we are assured that in Moses's
time, they had the knowledge of all Metals, as may be read in Numb. 31. 21.
where Moses taught the Soldiers how the Spoils of their Heathen Enemies were to
be purified, commanding (as from GOD) That all their Gold, Silver, Brass,
Copper, Tin and Lead, and every thing that endures the fire, (in the furnace,
according to the Syriack) should be purified by fire, and then to be accounted
clean: yet, it is also said in that Text, That it shall be purified by the
Water of Separation, by which water certainly is meant Quick silver, because
this does purify, cleanse and devour Metals; and so Dr. Salmon calls it a
Volatile Juice or Liquor; for nothing but Fire or that Quick silver or Aqua
fortis can separate those Metals.

Now of that Text, the Commentators gives but little account, passing it in
general, only as a Water of Purification; whereas there were two sorts of Water
of Purification: viz. that which is mentioned for purifying Metals, and this
other for purifying Men and Women, which in Numb. 29. unto verse 11. is plainly
set down, how, in what manner, and with what Ingredients it was composed: viz.
that a young Red Heifer, without spot and without blemish, and which was never
put into a Yoke, was to be brought to the Priest, and one was to slay her
before his Face, and the Priest was to take some of her Blood with his finger,
and sprinkle it seven times before the Tabernacle of the Congregation; and then
the Heifer with her Skin, Flesh, Blood and her dung, was to be burnt in his
sight, and whilst it was burning, he was to cast into the midst of its fire,
Cedar-Wood, Hysop and Scarlet, and after that, both the Priest and he that
burnt the Heifer, washed their Clothes with Water, and bathed their flesh also
in Water, and yet they remained unclean until the Even: (by which time, it may
be supposed, that all was dried) in the mean time, one that was clean was to
gather up the Ashes of the Heifer, and lay them up clean without the Camp, and
he also, for this act, was to be accounted unclean until the Even; and these
Ashes were kept (as Lees) to put into Water, which was called the Water of
separation for the Congregation of the Children of Israel, as also for
Strangers so journing with them to be sprinkled with, and thereupon also called
the Water of Purification for Sin, ver. 9. so as we see clearly this Water of
Purification of Men, was a distinct Water from the water of Purification and
Separation of Metals; and the Ingredients of one is communicated to us, but the
Holy Spirit thought fit to conceal the other from us; However, this Science of
Purifying Metals, did daily improve, which Historians and Philosophers shows
us, before David and Solomon's time, which two Kings are plentiful in their
expressions of fining and refining Gold and Silver; and these Arts David most
Divinely applys to our Souls, which by often refining (like Metals) are brought
to Perfection: and this Science did so increase in Nehemiah's time (Chap. 3.)
that it grew to a Trade, and the Professors thereof called Goldsmiths, and so
GOLD and the Trade for it continues still in the World.

But I perceive since Christ said to the Thief, That he should be with him that
day in Paradise, there has been more search after the place of Paradise, than
before; not for the Pleasures in that place, but for its Neighborhood to
Havilah, wherein it is said, There was Gold which was good: And therefore in
this Discourse, having traced the four great Rivers of three parts of the World
for it, I may venture the fourth, viz. America, and ask whether Pison be not
the Ocean, or one of the four streams or Sea's which encompass Havilah, or a
Country abounding with good Gold, for seeing it is not agreed where Paradise
is, and what were the four Streams: I hope, I may not give Offense in rendering
this great Island or Continent of America, surrounded with a Pisonick Ocean, to
be the same, or some such like place as Havilah; and well may we trade thither
for gold, where Religion shows us the way; for Divine Herbert, in his Church
Militant, tells us, That Religion stands on Tip-toes (and from our Land)
Ready to pass to the American Strand.


Now if Religion goes thither, we may safely follow it, so as it be in pursuit
of Paradise or Havilah; and seeing it is not agreed that they are in Asia,
Africa or Europe, though Lombardy in Europe is called The Garden of the WORLD,
we may try whether there be any Havilah, or something equivalent to it in
America, and leave Paradise to the prognosticated Religion to find it out.

Now if we may Credit the Writers upon that great Continent or Island (Nicols)
it extends from the Artick to the Antartick Circle, and has its breadth in
some parts proportionable; and in this great spot of Earth, there is a greater
plenty of Gold and other Metals, than we can find from the other Havilahs; but
I shall conclude here, because I shall speak more on this Subject in the manner
and way of getting and washing the Seeds of Gold, and other Discourses of Gold.
See the Words Metals Mines, VVashings.

GRADUATION, T. Gradierung, L. Graduatio, from Gradus, A. Degrees; but in its
Metallic sense, it is applied to the melioration of Metals, by certain
degrees, either to that color or virtue which is most proper and natural to
them: (l. 2. c. 9. and c. 45. etc.) and the Word is also applied to Graduates
in the Universities, who by degrees are sensibly Refined by the Liberal Arts
and Sciences.

GRAINS, T. Koernleine, L. Granum, and both in the notion of Weights, have
reference to a grain of Corn, from which Weights have their original. See
Weights.

GRANULATION, T. Kuernen, from whence I suppose we have our word Cornel or
grain of Wheat, Barley, etc. and it comes from the former Latin Word granum: in
the Metallic sense, it is considered as a certain proportion of melted Metals,
made by Art, into the smallness of such grains, so as they may be the better
weighed, and is a peculiar Art in performing them (l. 1. c. 19. etc.) See
Weights.

GRAY, T. Graw, L. Glaucus, Cinereus, etc. See Colors.

GREEN, T. Greisen, L. Viridis, but it has its particular names, according to
its Resemblances, viz. grass Green, Herbeus, Leek-green, Prosinus, and so of
the rest. See Colors.

GROUND; this Word has many senses in our English, viz. Ground or Earth,
Foundation or Principle, or Reason; but here it does signify such Metals as one
does grind small. T. Malen and Gerienen, L. Molare, that is, being ground, it
is a Foundation to other proceedings.

HA H HA
HAND. See Measures.

HEARTHS. See Ovens.

HELLER. See Weights.

HELM, Helmet. T. Helm, L. Tegumentum, made of Clay or Iron, used in the
Metallic Art, for covering of Ovens, etc. as in Sculpture XVII. etc. the Word
is also used for an Headpiece in time of War, and for the chief Rudder that
guids a Ship, all signifying something of a Defensative or Preservative Nature.

HEMATHITE, which is no other than the Boodstone, of a dark-red color, L.
Hematites, T. Blutstein. Pliny says, It is of Kin to a Lodestone, of which
there are ten sorts, but that which is called Hematites Fossilis (dug out of
Iron Mines) is of a Purple Color, which we do not find in England, and but
some few of the other* See Glass-Cup.

HERMETICK-SEAL, that is, to join the Mouth of a Glass, first heat in the fire,
and then nipt together by Pincers; so called from Hermes the first Inventor.
Pliny. See Cement.

HORNY. See Horny Oars.

IN I IR
INCH. See Measures.

INCINERATION and Reverberation, are two sorts of Methods in Calcining Metals.
See Calcine and Ashes.

INCORPORATE or Incorporation; that is, when Metals are mixed, they are called
Incorporated, or their Bodies joined together: and from hence Bodies Politic,
or a number of Men joined in a Fraternity, are called Incorporations, because
they consist of all sorts of Tempers and Metals. l. 2. c. 1. s. 2.

INFUNDING, Infusing and Infusion (lib. 1.) that is, a pouring or putting: in
but the Infusion of Metals and of Plants have two ways of proceedures. See
Fusions.

INGOT, called by that name in the Teutonick and English, and is a little long
Vessel wherein Gold is cast, which Vessel is called an Ingot, and the piece of
Gold taken out of it has the same Name. l. 2. c. 47. and Sculp. XXVIII. Fig. 5.

INSPERG is often used in Erkern, from Inspergo, when one Metal has certain
parcels or sprinklings of other Metals, whereby their goodness is seen before
proving. l. 4. c. 1.

INSPISSATION, is the method of Fixation of Metals.

INSTRICK, is a Term of Art, used to signify the first work in separation of
Metals, l. 3. c. 22.

IRON and Steel: see Metal: T. Eysen, Iron-man, L. Ferrum and Chalybs: l. 2. c.
20. s. 2. See Oars,

JUG, T. Krug, Heb. Chug, A. Jug or Pot: so it seems we do retain the Word,
which is of little difference from the Hebrew.

KE K KE
KETTLE, T. Kessel, L. Cacubus. See Utensils.

KELL or Kiln, or Kill for metallic Matters, T. Kalck-Ofen, L. Fornax and
Calcaria, A. Kill, they are also used by that name, for drying Malt, etc. See
Furnaces and Ovens.

KEINSTOCKS, I retain the word as very proper, and is fully explained. l. 3. c.
22. See Thornels.

LA L LA
LADDER. See Utensils.

LEACH (l. 3. c. 26.) this word I retain signifying hard work (often mentioned
by Erkern) and the Etimology may be, because such hard Work, do occasion Le
Ach, on the Ach in the Joints of the Operators.

LAMINS. T. Bleck. L. Lamina, A. the Plates of Metals. l. 4. c. 4.

LAPIS LAZULI, l. 1. of which Blew Vitriol is made.

LAPIS CALAMINARIS, L. Cadmia: see Cadmia, Calaminaris and Stones.

LAPIS TUTIJ, a Compound made of Calaminaris, good for sore Eyes. See
Calaminaris and Stones.

LATTEN, T. Latton, Auri Chalcum and Orichalcum, also Coronarius, and is a
Compound of Copper and Lapis Calaminaris, and so cast into Forms and not
wrought with Hammers, in respect of its friableness or brittleness, that which
is also made of thin Plates of Iron and so Tin'd over, is vulgarly called
Latton. See Plates, Iron, Tin.

LEAD. T. Bley, L. Plumbus; it is called also (Howel) Aurum Philosophorum,
because it does as it were govern Gold and other Metals in their
Precipitations, and from thence we use this word to lead or conduct, because
this Metal does as it were, lead and conduct us to the knowledge of all other
Metals (l. 4.) and several other parts: see Metals; and certainly no Metal has
more excellent effects in Chyrurgery, than the Artificial Leads made of it,
under the names of white and red Lead, and therefore it is put under the
highest Planet Saturn, slow in motion and sure in operation, and of this
virtual metal we have as good and as great quantities in England and Wales
proportionably, as in any parts of Europe; besides the great quantity of Silver
contained in it: But before I close this Discourse (because it was omitted in
the word Ceruse) I must inform you, that for this common Lead (which is a
natural Metal, and plentiful in all our Mine-Countries) there are Mills erected
(such as the Society for the Mines Royal have in Wales) where they make white
Lead (which is only a product of that Metal, Lead, corrupted with Vinegar or
Urine, and afterward being ground in the Mills, and formed into a white
color, is called white Lead, and after that Refined, and then has the name of
Ceruse, which yields the best and most perfect white, and at these Mills there
is made also red Lead, of the common Metal Lead, and is brought to that color,
only by the Art of using Fire to it; and both being thus made, as well the red
as the white, are of excellent use, not only for Painters, etc. but to all
Surgeons (as I have said:) There is also a mineral Lead, which we call Black
Lead, something like Antimony, but not so shining or sollid, of which sort I
know but of one Mine in England, and this yields plenty, both for our selves
and other Nations, and this Mine is in Cumberland, which they open but once in
seven years (I suppose the reason is, least they should dig more then they can
vend) this also is used by Painters and Chyrurgeons, etc. with good success,
especially being mixed with the products of Metals: and of late, it is curiously
formed into cases of Deal or Cedar, and so sold as dry Pencils, something more
useful than Pen and Ink.

There is also a white Mineral in England, called white Chalk, tending to a
transparency, but of a Leadish quality, and therefore I place it here, rather
than under Earths or Stones.

LEAD-GLASS. See Fluss.

LEATHER. See Utensils.

LIMBECK, T. Alimbick, L. Alimbicus, quia extrahendo materiam lambit (Minshaw)
and also called sublimatorium, quia materiam evehat in sublime, and he says,
it is an Arabian word; but in short, it is a kind of an Oven or Furnace made of
Metals, vulgarly called a Still, and used more for distilling Waters than
Metals, and is sometimes mentioned by Erckern, but chiefly as an Helmet to the
Athanor or great Furnace (l. 2. c. 32. s. 7.) Now of these Stills, I deny not
but those which we commonly use, are very fit for their purposes; but I have
contrived one (whereof I have made often Trials) which perform the like, with
much less fire, and less trouble, because the fire need not to be tended but
once in 10 or 12 hours, and the Waters (of several sorts) which I have
Distilled in it, are every way as effectual, but the manner and way of
Distilling therein, does every day improve in my Experiments, and when it is
fitted to effect all the intents and purposes of the common Stills (with some
additions, which they cannot perform) I shall divulge the Invention, without
Patent, or any expected Reward, but thanks. See Quicksilver.

LIMETS. See Files.

LIME-CALX, I have writ something of this, under the word Calcine; but now I
shall speak of Lime, or the Calx of Limestone or Chalk-stone, which Calx is
used both in Cementings, Lutings, and in melting of Metals, with other
Ingredients, but the great use of this Lime, is to make Mortar for Buildings,
and therefore I shall refer it to the word Mortar: only observe this, That when
Limestone or Chalk, whilst it is immediately from the Pit or Quarry (because
it is properly a Stone, though of a soft nature) is called unslack't or unburnt
Lime, but when it is burnt, called slack't, and so all Metals unburnt or burnt
may be also called, unslack't or slack't and the pieces slackes, which word is
often used.

LINEN. See Utensils.

LIQUATION, L. Liquatio, from Aqua and liquidus: A. liquor or moisture: and
liquation is a term in this Art of Chimistry for one of the Methods in
dissolving Metals, and the word liquifaction of the like sense, and from the
same Radix is also applied to Metals when they are melted by the heat of fire,
or Sun: See Conglutination.

LITTARGE, T. Blegg Leidt or Glet, L. Lithargicus, or the stone of Gold or
Silver, from the Greek Lethos; and sometimes called the spume or froth of Gold
and Silver, but generally the Excrements, Scoria's or Dross of Gold or Silver
caused by Lead, and if it be Gold-Litarge, it looks of a Yellow Color, and tho
it be dross; yet the Metallists give it this distinct name, because it has
more excellent Virtues than any other Excrement, Recrement or other Dross, and
that it may be cleared from other words of almost the same sound; I think it
fit to distinguish them here: This word is written Littarge, and by some
Lithargy, and that which signifies the public Office of Devotions, LITTURGY;
and the sleepy Disease, LETHARGY (with an E:) and I wish that the plenty of our
Littarge or Lithargy may raise up our Litturgical Devotions to be delivered in
all times of our Wealth, and from the Lethargical or sleepy hours of Death, as
well by our Devotions as by the excellent spirits, etc. made of our Littarge
peculiar to that Apoplectick Distemper. (See those words.)

LIXIVIUM, See Menstruum, Lee or Lees.

LIE, called also Ligh or Lees, to distinguish from a lie, or to lie, or to
speak untruth, or to lie or lay down to rest.) T. Langen, L Lixivium, from Lix
signifying Ashes, or as Minshaw calls it, Humor Cineri mistus, of which see
more in Buck and Menstruum. And here I may observe that as in Latin, Lix
signifies Ashes so lixa is Water; and those two mixed, makes the lees, with
which women wash and buck their cloths for so lixa also signifies.

LODESTONE or Magnet (lib. 4* cap. 21 and 22. s. 4.) T. Magnet-steine; but
when it has relation to Navigation, it is called Segel-steine, or sail-stone;
but the Latins Magnes and Magnifficus: and A. from the Saxon, Load or Leading
stone, or lapis cujus ductu Nautae instituant cursum; and Erckern for this and
many other qualities calls it a Jewel, and it is pretty to see how the Latins
quibble about this word Magnes, for they call a great Man Magnas (on the
account of Honor;) and Magnus great, on the account of bulk, etc. and this
stone Magnes, being of so great Virtue, that it is scarce comprehensible, and
it is probable, that the other two words do borrow their titles from it.

Pliny tells us, (lib. 7.) That this word Magnes was given from Magnes the Name
of a Shepherd who was the first finder of it, and makes five kinds of it (lib.
36. cap. 16.) Cardanus but three kinds, who observes, That Aristotle was
altogether ignorant of the maratine use of it, and that Galen and Al.
Aphrodosius (two great Inquirers into the secrets of Nature) have not so much
as once mentioned the wonderful Nature of this Stone: but now Authors do abound
in their discourses upon it, and make all things easy and plain in their
Naratives of its Virtues and Operations: only when their Discourses are applied
to its Variation by the Needle (touched with it for the use of Navigation)
there they disagree very much in their Opinions; and amongst the rest, Boethius
tells us, (cap. de Magnete) that there are two magnetic Mountains; and that
those magnets which are dug nearest to the Artick Pole, have most of the
Artick Virtue; and such as are dug nearest to the Antartick, have most of
the Virtue of the Antartick; which is the cause of their Variations, and many
other pretty and plausible notions are writ of them, but I shall only mention
some of my own Observations.

1. That this Stone is found in most Iron-mines in England, but are not so
effectual in their attractive power as those which we have from foreign Parts,
and therefore ours need to be nourished with filings of Iron) for stones have a
vegitable life to be preserved) and to be kept from the Juice of Onyons and
Garlic, and moist places, which do unglutinate, and so destroys or subdues
their Virtues: and therefore those Lapidists whose Art it is to fit Loadstones
for Navigation (or other uses) will not suffer those Plants to be near them:
and I have often tried, That when I have touched my knife with a Loadstone, and
thereby empowered it to take up Needles or small Weights (and so it holds its
Virtue many days) but the Knife once touched with an Onion does utterly loose
the Virtue which it borrowed; I confess I never tried Onions or other acid
things to the Poles of my Loadstone, because I chose rather to believe than
hurt the Stone: especially a Lapidist of my Acquaintance affirming the Truth of
it, who was so great an Artist that he told me, That with a Magnet of the
bigness of my head, he could drive the Soul of it, into as little a compass
thereof as a Nutmeg, but before I could see the effects of his Art, I was
diverted with other Occasions, and could never find him after. Yet it was my
good fortune to be acquainted with a worthy Gentleman Francis smith Esquire (of
Rushoke in Worcestershire, since deceased) who was Master of much sound
learning and very ingenuous in his Discourses, when he thought fit to expatiate
himself; or otherwise reserved: and we happened upon the Discourse which I had
with the Lapidist upon which he produced a Loadstone, fixed with its irons for
the North and South points, which I had the freedom to weigh in my Gold-Scales,
and the Iron pieces and points and Gold (for Ornament which embraced it)
weighed just eleven grains, and it attracted a piece of Iron of an ounce
weight. Now, there being according to the Venetian account 6912 Grains to a
pound, every ounce is 576 grains, which is 52 times 11 grains so that it took
up an Iron of above 52 grains more than its own weight (considering its
embracers) and by my description of the Lapidist, he believed, it was bought of
the same person and looking upon it as avery great Rarity, I took upon me the
Confidence to tell him, That it was pity so great a Jewel should lie concealed,
and added, that I believed it would be a very acceptable Present to his
Majesty: He approved of my Proposal, and accordingly did present it, and it was
so accepted, and got a good Office soon after, I cannot say for that, (though
it deserved it) but for his own Deserts, and I hope it is still preserved
amongst his Majesty's Rarities.

Another piece of Curiosity I saw in the Hands of Sir William Persal (since
Deceased also) viz. a Terrella or Lodestone, of little more than 6 Inches
Diameter, turned into a Globular Form, and all the Imaginary Lines of our
Terrestrial Globe, exactly drawn upon it: viz. the Artick and Antartick
Circles, the two Tropicks, the two Colures, the Zodiac and Meridian; and these
Lines, and the several Countries, artificially Painted on it, and all of them
with their true Distances, from the two Polar Points, and to find the truth of
those Points, he took two little pieces of a Needle, each of about half an Inch
in length, and those he laid on the Meridian line, and then with Brass
Compasses, moved one of them toward the Artick, which as it was moved, still
raised it self at one end higher and higher, keeping the other end fixed to the
Terrella; and when it had completed it Journey to the very Artick Points, it
stood upright upon that Point; then he moved the other piece of Needle to the
Antartick Point, which had its Elevations like the other, and when it came to
the Point, it fixed it self upon that Point, and stood upright, and then taking
the Terrella in my Hand, I could perfectly see that the two pieces of Needles
stood so exactly one against the other, as if it had been one entire long
Needle put through the Terrella, which made me give credit to those who held,
That there is an Astral Influence that darts it self through the Globe of Earth
from North to South (and is as the Axel-Tree to the Wheel, and so called the
Axis of the World) about which the Globe of the Earth is turned, by an Astral
Power, so as what I thought imaginary, by this Demonstration, I found real; and
am convinced by this, and other Experiments, That not only the whole Earth is
guided by this Astral Influence, (fixed in the Septentrional and Astral Points)
but every particular within the circumference of the Terrestrial Globe, has a
Magnetic tendency to the Septentrional Points, naturally fixed in them, as may
be Experienced in Plants, Stones and Metals (of which one might write a large
Volumn) and it is commonly known, that in Clay, which have not been formerly
dig'd (as I mentioned of that under my House (in Title Clay) being dig'd in
pieces of 6 Inches, more or less in length, make them into Rolls, pointed at
each end, and hang them with a thread in Equilibrio, and they will turn
themselves to the North, to show that there is an obedience in all Vegetables,
to the Septentrial Astral conduct, and so it may be evident on every other
Vegetable; and though the lesser sorts of them can scarcely be experimented, in
respect of their minuteness, yet in Plants of greater bulks, we may see the
predominancy of the North Point in their vegetation, which is the reason, why
Plants that are removed do not grow, or but very slowly, till they have
recovered their first position to the North, by a second compliance to the
Northern Magnetic Attraction.

And it is not only thus in Vegetables, but in sensitives and Rationals, which
I might enlarge: yet before I leave this Discourse, I cannot but say something
of the Constellation that attends this Artick Point, which is called Cynosura,
pretended in the stories of Constellations (see Dr. Hood) to be the Daughter of
Calisto, and so had the name of Vrsa minor (a Female) yet has the tail of a
Dog, and the end of that tail is called the Pole Star, and this polar Point is
called also Septentrio, from the seven Stars which hover about it, and those
seven Stars called Septentriones: Now the Scithians held the polar Point to be
an Iron Nail (which is our Axis) and this they adored as a God, and before the
Lodestone was known for Navigation, the 2 stars on the shoulder of this Bear
or ursa minor, were Directions to the Spaniards instead of a Compass, Card or
Needle: the like is said of the Constellation (called Helyce, Sister to
Cinosura) which is in the Southern Point, fixed in ursa major; and the seven
chief of this Constellation are called Charles's Wayne, and are in the hinder
part and tail of this great Bear; but I have said enough of this, especially
concerning the Scithians belief, that it was Iron (probably not then knowing
the Name of the Lodestone, and therefore called it Iron instead of
Lodestone:) but to pass these Metallic Parts of the Terrestrial Globe, and
celestial Influences attending them. I cannot but recommend the Experience I
have had (in lying in my bed with my Feet to the North and Head to the South)
in my rest, sleep and dreams, from other Positions, which I leave to the
Consideration of others; and return to the Magnetism of Metals; wherein all
Chimists agree, That Gold is the Magnet of Quick silver, Iron of Copper, Copper
of Silver, and Tin of Lead; and these Magnetisms are still guided by astral
Influences, not only of the Seven Peculiar Planets, to the Seven Metals, but to
the Septentrional Axis or North Point, which directs the Influences of the
Seven Stars upon the Seven Metals. And now I shall conclude, and refer you to
that admirable Experiment which our Author mentions of this Jewel, l. 4. c. 20.
(collected from Serapion (an old Philosopher) as also to Cardanus, (a known
Author) who tells us what he had experimented, viz. That if a Knife be touched
with a Lodestone, it will enter into any part of Man's Body without sense of
Pain, not only in thrusting it in, (which is common to all Weapons till the Air
enters the Wound) but also when it is drawn out.

Yet I cannot leave this pleasant Subject, till I have imparted my own
Experiments, in making this Jewel (for so Erckern deservedly calls it) useful
to inform us, as well of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, as of the
Alterations of the Weather, and to that End, I framed a Model or Case (as is
here represented, but covered with glass) with a pair of little wooden Scales
artificially hung by a thread to a thin piece of Wood, placed between the two
iron Points of the Loadstone, so as the two Scales may hang true under each
point, and at each end of the wooden Beam of those two Scales, I fixed two
little pieces of Iron, to answer the two points, whereby the attrative power of
the two Iron Points of the Loadstone might operate its attractive power on the
two lower pieces of Iron on the Beam, and then in one Scale I put in
Quicksilver, and in the other certain little weights proportionable to the
weight of the Quick silver; and on the Center of the top of the frame I placed
an Horizontal Dial, with a Compass-Needle in it (such are commonly sold) and on
each side of the frame (at equal Distances from the Center) I placed also upon
an extended piece of thin wooden board, two more such Horizontal Dials with
Needles, so as the Gnomon's of all three, might answer each other in a
diametrical Line. But having been hindered in perfecting my real Apprehension,
of obtaining thereby many pleasing and useful Experiments, I must refer the
further account of them, till another time.

Sculpture XLII.


LOAM, See Clay.

LOATH, See Money.

LUMP, l. 1. c. 4. Teut. Klumpen. L. Massa, or a piece of any thing composed of
hard, and moist, mixed, as Clay; etc. but in a mixture of Metals, it is called
Bolus, and in mixture of light Earths, Gleba: and we also call a fish (which is
common in our Markets) a Lump, in respect of its form, close, and compacted
without a regular shape, and the word may well come from Lumbus or Lumbricus,
by changing b into p, which two Letters differs not in their labial utterance,
but by the addition of some other Consonant or Vowel: also Lumbus is properly a
Storehouse (for refuse Metals or lumps of Metals) and for other Wares.

LUTE, Luting, The Teut. calls it Laum, the L. Lutum, and they have a word
called Testudo, which signifies not only the outward Case, or belly of a
musical Instrument called a Lute, but also Clay, and as Lute for Clay, and as
Lute for a musical Instrument, are synonimus, so they are in their operations,
for as the Belly of a Lute serves for reverberations of Sounds which makes them
musical, so these Lutes or lutings serves in a Chimical Notion to reverberate
or repercuss the spirits of Metals, to make them harmonious and useful to
Chimists, and consequently to others who partake of their Art: and therefore
the Chimists have a Past or Clay compounded with many Ingredients, whereof the
chief is that which they use about the necks of their Retorts, etc. which they
call Lutum Sapientiae, showing the Wisdom of the All-Disposer, that, that Earth
which preserved the Metal whilst quiet and undisturbed in its Bed or Mine; is
now made use of also, to keep its spirits from being useless.

MA M MA
MAN, See Vir.

MARCASITE, T. Marcasit, L. Pyrites, and we Marcasite, Erckern says, It is
rich in Gold, Dr. Salmon, calls it Bismuth, but I find it to be no where else,
and makes it to be one of the Recrements of Silver; he agrees with other
Lapidists, that there is both a Goldish and a Silverish Marcasite, the one
yielding Silver the other Gold, however, they are excellent Fire-stones which
we find in our Mines in England, but not so good for Firelocks, as those which
are brought from Germany, etc. And our Marcasites do neither afford Gold nor
Silver worth the charge. Diascorides says, That Brass may be made with
composition of this stone, but that will not quit cost, because the Marcasite
is not so soft as Calaminaris, but it may be tried whither by mixing it with
Calaminaris it will not give a nobler Tinge to Brass, and because it is not
generally comprehended in Metals, but of an Epicene or doubtful Gender, I shall
refer it to Stones.

MARBLE, T. Marmel steine. L. Marmor, and A. Marble, which is but a little
Variation from the general Name of Marmor, in Greek Marmoras, and we have
several sorts of them, which consist of various colors and uses, and of these
we have in Devenshire, and other Counties in England, good white and black,
brown, bluish, green, serpentine, yellow and gray, faintly intermixed, and
though, ours consists of various colors and degrees of hardness, yet they are
short of those which are brought us from beyond Sea, or at least we think so;
and as for the Porphory or red Marble, we have none of it that ever I saw: And
the Alabaster which is a kind of soft white Marble, we have but little good of
it, but of the Lapis Lidius or Touchstone, which indeed is a kind of black
Marble, by which (being polished) Goldsmiths try their Gold without
Touch-needles) and of these we have plenty, especially in Darby shire. (See
Touchstone.) but the Occasion of Erckerns mentioning Marble, is because the
stone is the hardest of any common stone, and so used by Painters to grind
their Colors on, and for reducing Metals into Dust, by Metallists. See Lime,
Mortar and Stone.

MARK, T. Merch, L. Marca, signifying eight ounces; the Word in English is
applied eight several ways: See Dictionarys.

MARK CUTTING, that is, cutting of pieces of Metal which are marked out to be
divided, so the Art is in dividing of the pieces to be cut, whereby they may
bear a just proportion of weight one with another, and this is performed only
with a cold Chizel (Dr. Revell.)

MARLE, T. Marghel, L. Marga. See Earth.

MATRAS, We retain the same Name. See Utensils.

MEASURE, T. Masz, L. Mensura which are considered either of Longitude,
Latitude, Altitude or Profundity: and these are sometimes used distinctly, or
jointly, and so reduced to Measures of Application, T. Zuphurgung, and to
Measures of Capacity, T. Emphaung, the first of the four (called Longitude, L.
Longitudo) is termed also in T. Masz, A. Longth, but the Latin has variety of
Words adequated to the extention of things to be measured, as the Measuring of
Lands, Geodesia, etc. 2. Latitude, T. Breit, A. Breadth, broad, and large, L.
Largus, and Latitudo: 3. Altitude, L. Altitudo, T. Die hahe. A. Hight. 4.
Profundity, T. Lage, L. Log, and Profunditas, A. Depth, deep, and many other
names, according to the proportion of natural or artificial Contentures, as
Cyathus and Coclearium, etc. about which Dictionaries may be consulted, for I
speak only of such as are mentioned by Erckern for metallic uses, of which
some are uncertain measures, (viz. a Fingers length and breadth, an hands
thickness, and breath, a span, a man's foot, a cubit, etc. and some certain,
viz. a yard, an ell, a fathom, etc. and of the mensurae Capacitatis, some are
also uncertain, as Crueibles, Tests, Cruises, Jugs, Pots, etc. and some
certain, as Pints, Quarts, Galons, etc. of which in order; And first of the
Finger, T. also Finger, L. Digitus, which signifies the length and breadth, but
we may read in Georgius Agricola (de mensuris and ponderibus, and other Books)
that they consist of several Proportions; and in Gallen (de usu partium) of
several uses: and of this word Digitus, Holiock makes no less than 24
Observations: but that which concerns this Subject, I have in part collected
from Cor. Agrippa, that the Thumb, or first finger (Teut. Daum, L. Pollex) was
dedicated to Venus and the Moon; and in Metallicks, lucky to Silver and Copper;
the fourth Finger to Mars, and lucky to Iron and Copper, red (and yellow,
artificial, that is Brass:) the third called digitus infamis (I know not on
what grounds) to Saturn and Jupiter: and lucky to Lead, Tin, Silver and Gold:
The second finger to the Sun and Saturn, lucky only to Gold: the first or
little Finger to Mercury, and lucky to Quick silver, Tin and Silver; and these
Notions are the chief Foundations of the Art of Chyromancy or Palmistry, so
that by the Fingers and lines in the hands, the temper of men might be the
better known for Metallic and Chimical Purposes (but the Poet who ever he was
that made this Verse) Miles, mercator, stultus, been nuptus, amator;
applicable to the 5 fingers, had I conceive another prospect, to show that
their Fate was at their Fingers ends, and by the Influences of the stars did
direct them to their most genuine Employments, whereby the Chiromancer might
know to what one was by Nature adapted; and accordingly, by that Artist, was
directed to apply himself: but to pass these Curiosities, it is writ by several
Authors, that the length and breadth of the fingers, and so of the hand, gave
the first Rules to the smaller Measures, the next is the Span, T. Span. L.
Spithama, which consists of three parts, viz. the Thumbs, (having three joints)
made one; the space between the Thumb and finger, making the other, and one of
the fingers (having also three Joints) making the third, so in all seven; and
though these seven do differ in proportion (the spaces and joints being
unequal) yet from the top of the Thumb to the top of either finger fully
extended, was the span, consisting of seven proportions: and it is observable,
That David calls man's Life a span, which afterward he explains, by saying the
Years of Man are seventy, that is, seven decimals, or seven times ten, which is
seven spans, so as the short span is from the Thumb to the end of the fourth or
little finger, but if he had a long Life or Span viz. from the Thumb's end to
the end of the middle Finger, it occasioned but pain in the extending it (from
police the Thumb to stultitia the Fools Finger) which is the Vanity he speaks
of, and as the spaces differ in proportion, so does our several Ages.

The next is a Foot, T. Fusz, L. Pes, and though this natural Foot is an
uncertain Measure, yet it retains its name, by a certain new Measure, called a
Foot-Rule; and as to the first, I may say, that that Foot has some Anology
with David's Span; for by the Span the length of our Race is adjusted, and by
the Foot that Race is to be run.

My next consideration is of a Cubit, which is accounted from the Elbow to the
end of the middle Finger. T. Cubit. L. Cubitus, and the same word Cubitus also
signifies a Couch or Bed, telling us, That before our Race is run, we grow
weary, lay down on our Cubit (or Couch) to ease our Limbs, where we lean on our
brachial Cubit or Elbow, and commit our Heads to be supported by our Span, or
handle of our Cubit, and then we consider of our abillity or disabillity, in
getting to the End of our measure of application, and the Divine Prize of our
Race proposed to us.

Next for the mensura capacitatis, it consisted only of the contraction of the
palm of the Hand, which was originally thought sufficient to hold so much as
might quench the Thirst of Nature.

But when by excess we forsook the proportion of our first Constitutions,
Frames and Pugils, some having Fingers, Hands and Spans, more than treble to
the common length, and also their Feet a Cubit long (as Pliny tells us) and of
the Sciopides (which Munster speaks of) that one Foot sheltred their whole Body
against the Sun, whereby in process of time, almost all Men and Women became
disproportionate to that perfect proportion (which I have mentioned in my
Volatiles on Adam, from Paulus Lovatius) it was time to make some certain
Measure both of Application and Capacity, least the large gripple Hand, should
take away all from the lesser, and justify it from its large Dimensions, and
therefore much to the Honor of the Botanists and Galenists; the Standard of
measures was made from the Barley-Corn, which is so Noble a Plant, that it is
observed (whether it grows upon a fertile or steril Soil, yet) it continues one
constant proportion of Measure (though it may differ in weight) and of these,
three in length or six in breadth do make an Inch, whic hthe T. calls ein
dannim breit, or the breadth of the Thumb, but in Latin the word is Vncia,
which they apply both to an Inch of Application and to the Ounce of
Ponderosity, still making the Grains of Barley or Wheat their Judges, both in
measure and weights: now this Vucia or Inch of Application (as Arrius Montanus
says) consists of the breadth of six Barley Corns, thereby making breadth to
have a Priority to length) but the later Writers, more properly make three
Barley Corns in length, to be the length of an Inch, and twelve Inches of a
Foot, and for Measure of Ponderosity, those who are for the Troy Weight, make
twenty four full Grains of Wheat, and twenty penny Weights to be an Ounce, and
twelve Ounces a Pound, which complyes with the measure of Aplication (or 12
Inches to the Foot) and this weight is used for Gold and Silver, etc. but
others who are for Aver-de-poise weight allow 20 grains of Wheat to make a
scruple, three scruples a dram, and 16 drams to an ounce, and 16 ounces to a
pound: and these of Ponderosities do also comply with the measure of Capacity;
for I compute that a Pound of Troy, viz. 5760 grains of Wheat will fill a
certain Vessel which the Latins call Hemina, and the English (and in most
Europian Languages a Pint (or Pint) two of which makes a Quart, and four a
Pottle, and eight a Gallon, so as the Pound of ponderosity and the Pint of
Capacity are both equal, and this agrees also with the Measure of Application,
for a foot square (on a cubical account, makes 144 Inches, so that for every
one of the 144 Inches, 40 grains of Barley being allowed (as the just
proportions of Capacity) it amounts also to 5760.

Now as (I have shown) that the Latins do apply the same word Vncia, both to
an Inch of Measure, and to an Ounce of Weight (and, it may be, for the Reason
which I have given) so they apply the word Vlna to a Yard, Ell and Fathom in
Measures (and so by Dictionaries jumbled together) whereby the genuine
proportions of those Measures are confounded; whereas a Yard, in T. Girte, and
L. Verda, is applicable to any Rod or Stick, that is not appropriated to any
certain rule of Dimension; but as Vlna or Yard is fixed to a certainty, it
signifies the length of 3 Feet, or 36 Inches; and an Ell, T. Ellen, and A. Ell,
from Elbow (or Ell-bone, because from that bone to the top of the middle
Finger, is accounted a Cubit or a Foot and half) so 2 of those Cubits makes a
Yard, and 3 Foot and 9 Inches makes our Ell, and a Fathom, which is a Measure
used about sinking our Mines (called also Vlna) is two Yards: I might mention
many more Measures of Application, used both above and under Ground, for the
guiding and working of Mines, as also of other Measures of Capacity, as
Furnaces, Ovens, Pots, Pans, etc. used for Metals: but I must not run too far
upon this copious Subject; yet because the Else length, and other Measures
(which I have named) are often mentioned by Erckern, and knowing that one Ell
English is two German Else, and the like of many other Measures; I intend this
at first, only as a Caution to Assayers, etc. in making Furnaces or
Instruments, according to the German or English proportions; which must be left
to their Ingenuity to judge, what lengths or bredths are best suiting to their
Operations.

MEDALLS. T. Schraw grochen, L. Sigillum fusile, that is, a piece of cast Gold
or Silver, wherein some observable thing is represented, and is given by
Princes, as Memorials of Virtue, or notable Accidents, and are accounted rather
gratifying Presents than current Coyns, and the word signifies also Counters,
or something impressed on them, worthy of our account.

MELTER. T. Schmeltzer. L. Fusor, and by our English, Mine-Workers, (as at
Consumlock and Tallibant, etc. in Wales) where they still retain the words
Smelter and Smelting, which was brought into us 1. Q. Eliz. by one Hosetter a
German; but in fining the Metals (after they are smelted) for distinction, the
work is called melting and remelting, or fining and refining, See Alchimist,
Metalls, Utensils.

MENSTRUUM, which we Translate Flowers, and define them to be Purgatio frigidi
and indigesti humoris quem natura quasi noxium ejicit; now the word Menstruum
as it relates to the Female Sex, (of which you may read in Pliny, l. 7. c. 15.
is pernicious: but our Menstruum relates only to Metalls (which are all seven
of the Neuter Gender) and the menstrual parts of them, do afford many great
virtues and excellent medicines, and is the most sublime part of the Scoria's
of metalls, and therefore also called Flowers, from its nature of flowing and
showing it self on the top or corners of the Vessels, where it usually resides.

MERCURY. See Metalls, Mineralls and Quicksilver.

METALS, T. Metal and Ertz and the Metal-Worker Berck-hawer and Berck-werk from
Berg, mons: (wherein they are generally found) and Werk, Opus: and the Latin
Metallum and Metallarius, A. Miner; the kinds of Metals are accounted seven
viz. Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Lead, Tin and Quicksilver, which I treat of in
their Alphabetical Discourses: But as a Deputy Governor for the Mines Royal in
England and Wales, I must aquaint you,

That, 1. as for Gold, (we have it not in Sands as in Africa or America) or so
intermixed with other Minerals, that it will requite the charge of Separation,
and yet upon information of two Mines (one at Pullox-hill in Bedfordshire, and
another in little Tawnton in Glocestershire) which, as was pretended, contained
a great quantity of Gold in the Oar, we granted two distinct Leases; but they
proved not at all successful: it is true, that among the Tin-Mines in Cornwall,
they find little pieces of Gold, and seldom above the worth of 10 s. But this,
as they dig for Metal, not in the Metal.

2. As for Silver, we have none, but intermixed with other Metals, especially in
Lead; And in the time of the late Wars, Mr. Bushel set up Mills at the Mines in
Cardiganshire, and made out of those Lead-Mines 20 l. of Silver out of every
Tun of Lead: and at Shrewsbury, a Mint by his Majesty's Permission was set up,
and then coined so much as paid that part of his Army, but it does not now
answer the Expense, or at lest the knowledge of it is kept from us: and I am
confident we have several Lead-Mines in England which would yield in every Tun,
from 20 l. to 80 l. of clear Silver, and why this is not put in practice, I
shall hereafter disclose.

3. Of Copper we have very good and plentiful; See the word Copper; and why
those also are not wrought, I shall say more hereafter.

4. Iron is not in our Patent, only Iron-Wire, for the making of which, we have
Mills at Tinturn in Monmouthshire; See more in Word Wire.

5. Of Lead We have the Government both in England, Wales and part of Ireland
(except the Lead-mines at Dovegang, in Darby-shire, and at Mendyp in
Somersetshire; and also all other Mines that do not hold Gold or Silver,
because in those two places, and some others, the Lead is looked upon to be so
poor that no Silver can be extracted from them, or at least, not proportionable
to the charge of fining, etc. of which you may see more in my Book called
Fodina Regalis.

6. Of Tin, we have also the Power of Inspecting them in all Mines, (except
Cornwall, where they are managed by a peculiar Court, called the Stanneries
from Stannum, the L. for Tin, of which you my see more fully in Cambdens
Britania, p. 185.) and for other Tin-Mines none do venture on them, because of
the great Product of Cornish-Mines.

7. Of Quicksilver we have very little or none in our Mines, so as we are
forced to have it from beyond Seas, for which reason, whatever others account
of this, as the seventh Metal, we cannot, because it is not our Native Metal,
and therefore we may rather choose Antimony, of which we have plenty; or Brass,
of which we may make sufficient for our selves and Neighbors.

And there is another Metal which Pliny makes the seventh Metal, by the name of
Electrum, containing upon dissolution the fourth part of Gold, and a fifth of
Silver; but we have none such, yet such a thing is mentioned in Holy Writ: see
Fodinae Regales.

And as for Gems, we often find in our English Mines, Saphirs, Amethists, etc.
but very imperfect, for want of a stronger heat, as in hotter Countries, and
about Bristol in the Callamine Hills, there are plenty of such Stones which
imitate Diamonds, where I had the luck to find one of a good value, which I
caused to be cut and set, and yielded a fine splendour.

MINERALLS. T. and A. L. Mineralia; these are Metals of a middle nature,
between the 7 Metals and Stones; of which sort, Erckern mentions these; Alum,
Antimony or Stibium, Armoniack, Arsnick, Brimstone, Sulphur, Calaminaris,
Cinabar, Talk, Vitriol, Nitre, Orpiment, Sandover, etc. which I treat of also
distinctly, in their Alphabetical Discourses; but of all these we have so great
plenty in England and Wales, that we need not have recourse to Foreign parts
for them, only in those Countries where the Metals are not, I do not find any
of these, or scarce any other Mineral, for it seems they are of a friendly
nature not to part.

Mines, Ertz-Grub, from Ertz-metallum and Grub fodere: (which Word Grub we
still retain in England in the same sense) L. minera, which relates to places
in the Earth, where Metals or Minerals are found, and I conceive the word Mine
is no other than a translation of Meus, which the Belgicks write Miine, and the
T. Mein, and A. Mine, so as doubtless they have all this sense; that, that
Metal or Mineral, which I find in the Earth is Mine (Proprio Jure salvo Rege)
and this is still a custom at Mendip, and at the Dovegang before mentioned)
however altered in other places; but here it only signifies the place or Bed,
where the Metal or Mineral is lodged (without relation to the Proprietor) and
they who dig for them are called Miners, it may be from Minores, being a People
of lesser Quality than those above ground, so that in the Romans time, they
were Slaves, or such as for Offenses, were (instead of other Punishments
condemned to the Mines (Goodwin's Ant.) See Alchimist.

Whilst I was writing this, a Friend of mine came to me, and seeing me intent
about this Book, ask't me why I left some other Subjects about Parliaments,
etc. of which I Published but some parts, and others were expected? I told him,
that I had not the opportunity of seeing Records, as I formerly had, and so did
betake my self to this of Metalls, being far more pleasant, in respect it
consisted of greater varieties than any one of the Liberal Sciences or Arts,
and withal added, That there is a certain Chain in all our Affairs, by which we
are invisibly guided, of which the Story of Joseph (sold for a Slave, yet
proved a reliever of those who inslaved him) is significant, and though that
Story does not quadrate in all Men's Actions, to have the like success; yet in
this, to me it does; for even those Notions which I had of this Subject, which
began with some dangerous Attempts (as I shall show) have continued in my mind
by accidental Occasions and Employments, till this very time, that by them I
now find my self full of content and happiness, in the Divine and Humane
Contemplations of them and their circumstances; and now, Sir, said I, give me
leave to begin with the first link of this Influential Chain, which is held at
both ends, by the Hand of Divine Providence.

Whilst I was a small Student of Pembrook Hall in Cambridge, my good Mother
(then a Widow) consulted with Sir Tho. Bendish (a near Neighbor, and related
to her) how I might spend the Summer Vacations to Improve my self, and thereby
keep me from other inconveniences, which usually attend Youth (being then 17
years of Age, and of that University 3 years) Sir Thomas (who was a Practical
Master of most Sciences, and insighted into all, and afterward Ambassador to
Turkey, whose Transactions there, for 14 or 15 years, deserves a particular
History (which in Gratitude I shall endeavor to perform) replied, Madam (said
he) if you please to entrust your only Son with me, I will my self accompany
him for two Months every year, till we have seen the chief Varieties which
England affords, that he may be the better accomplished for Foreign Travels;
this favor was kindly accepted, so in three Summers more (before I left the
University) he did perform what he promised, and the first Summer, our first
Gess led us through Darbishire, which affords more pleasing Objects of Art and
Nature, than any County of England; but I shall speak only of such things, as
relate to the subject of this Book, and of my entrance into the concern of
Metals; the Theory of which, with other Rudiments, my Tutor, Mr. Boswel
(Brother to the Boswel that was then Resient at the Hague) had impressed in my
thoughts: but as to the inducing Practicks, we spied several Wells near the
Roads over the Dovegang (which abound with the poorer sort of Lead Mines) so we
rode up to know the uses of them, and we were answered, That they were not
called Wells but Shafts like Wells, only Shafts were square, and common Wells
round, one made of Wood and Timber, the other usually of Stone or Brick, and
whilst we were speaking, a Basket of Lead-Oar was drawn up (as our Buckets are
to our Wells) I ask't, whether I might be safely let down in the Basket to see
their Works? they assured me I might, and so with Sir Thomas's consent (who in
respect of his Corpulency thought not fit to lead the way) I was let down (not
in the Basket) but by a strong stick, laid cross the Hook of the Rope, I sat
on it between my Legs, one hand holding the Rope, the other guiding me from
grating on the sides; so soon as I was down (being about 24 Fathom, or 48
Yards) the Labourer that waited for the Basket, was quickly informed of my
intents, who presently, at my request (promising Reward) fetched two Candles
lighted, by which I saw, that there was no other passage than what I came down
in, and by what I was to go into the Mine, but by that time we had gone half
way, I told my Conductor, that I could not keep my Candle light, and at the
same instant both Candles went out; Sir said he, I pray stay here, and I will
go fetch more Candles, for it is nothing but a damp; at which words, my Spirits
were much discomposed, yet I had so much left as to crawl back to the Shaft,
and sucked in as much Air as relieved me; my Conductor soon returned with more
attendents to light me, but I was very unwilling to return again, but gave them
liberally something to drink, which the more obliged them to persuade me to see
their Works, assuring me, That those Damps were not killing, but they had taken
care (by keeping open the passage of their Waters) that no such Accidents
should happen while I was there, and that they had good Aqua Vitae, Rosa Solis,
and good Ale to cheer me; with that, I went to the Mine, where their constant
Lamps and Candles, which they lighted for my sake, did make the glitterings of
the Oar very pleasant to me, by which I also savv their method of Digging, and
was well treated with their promised Drinks, besides good Beef and Bread, so
as their liberallity increased mine, and then I was attended to the Shaft, and
so drawn up as I went down, and in my gentle passage, I thought of Virgil's
Distick, Eglog. 3.
Dic quibus in Terris, and eris mihi magnus Apollo,
Tres Patiat Caeli spatium non amplius ulnas.


But I was not Edified by it, and so I came safe up, and gave a pleasing
account to Sir T. Bendish.

From thence we went to Eldon Hole, (being on the top of the highest Hill, in
the Peak-Forest, which we computed to be above an 150 yards long, and more than
an 100 broad, the bottom (as 'twas told us) not to be fathomed; and by prying,
I had certainly fallen into it (for the ground is slippery) if I had not been
caught hold of.

But Sir Thomas espying some work men making of Walls, (for there and in other
stony Countries, they make their Enclosures of loose stones (or slates) in
stead of which in Suffolk, Norfolk, etc. they make Ditches, and plant them with
Quicksets, on the sides of the banks, but in Devonshire, etc. they use high
Mounds of Earth and flag, and plant them on the very top of the Mounds, and
both are beneficial Fences by their Products, (whereas those walls affords
none) but he resolving to try some experiment did ride to them, and by our
generous Promises, persuaded three of them, with their Pick-axes and Tools, to
mount behind us, to the Hole; where first, they dig'd a pretty large stone,
which we tumbled in, and the noise of its motion pleased us: then they dig'd a
second stone, as much as six of us could well roll in (for the mouth of the
hole was declining) and presently laid our ears to the ground, and we could
tell eight score distinctly, before the noise of its motion ceased, and then to
our apprehensions, it seemed to plunge it self into water; and so we tried a
third stone, of more than the former Magnitude, with the like Observations,
which pleased the Laborers (with the Addition of our Gratuity.)

From thence we went to Buxton's Wells, bathed our selves that night, and the
next morning (of which I shall speak more in the word Waters.) we went to the
Devils Arse of Peak, (saving your Reverence, as the learned Mr. Cambden
expresses his Civilities) where we saw a large hole, in the bottom of a steep
hill, on the top of which stood an ancient decayed Castle (of which you may
read more in his Britania) We had Candles, and saw as much as we could, till we
were hindered by running Streams. Now of these two Holes, there are many
fabulous stories; but some years after, upon viewing other Mines, and their
Shafts and Audits to them, I apprehended that this Eldon-hole was an ancient
Shaft (made in the Roman's time) to a Mine, and that the Devils arse was the
Mouth of an Audit to that Mine, and I am the rather of that Opinion, because I
conceive, That the Level of the Water (which stopped our further passage into
that Audit, Arse or Fundament of the Mine) is level with the Water at the
bottom of Eldon-Hole, and the word Arse may be applied upon two accounts, first
that upon a Mistake of the word Arse, for the Latin word Ars or Art, where the
Romans, when they brought out their Oars of Lead, and probably made Silver of
it, and did thereby show their Ars Metallica, which the British not being
latiniz'd called Ars, and as an Art which they did not understand, they (as the
Vulgar do yet) attribute it to the Devil, and so called the Devils Arse or Ars
diabolica; (as we see in the Weapon Salve or Sympathy Powder, the knowledge of
which two great Secrets were attributed to the Devil, as we may see by
Godelmanus, and other Books, till they were convinced of their Error: or it
might come from Arce the Ablative of Arx, Latin for a Castle, and probably
this Castle was originally built to protect the Treasure which came out of the
Hole under it, or to keep the Miners in aw (there being the like Castle at the
Roman Mines on the Darren Hills in Wales) and possibly the Governor of it
being severe in his Duty, the Vulgar (as they are apt to do in any regular
Government) might call him, and it, Diaboli Arx, and since opprobriously the
Devils Arse, but I have said enough as an Apology for the Word, and for my
Opinions therein.

I conceive they are not so fabulous as those which are told in the Country
about these two Holes.

Here my Friend interrupted me, and asked how Eldon Hole, (from the usual
proportion of a Shaft) came to be so large as I described it; I answered, That
Gutta cavat lapidem; and if one drop by often cadency will make a hole in a
stone, it is easy to be credited, That the fall of Clouds of Waters, (from the
time that this was a Shaft, being about 2000 years) might well widen it, from
Virgil's dimension of 3 ulna's, yards or else square, (for I conceive he meant
the Shaft of a Mine) to this great Dimention, at which he smiled: and so I went
on; Sir, said I, the next two Summers, we made a further Insight to several
mines and Caves with no little danger (which I refer to other Discourses) and
also their several ways in their operations at those Mines.

Some few years after, the Wars came on, where my Speculations were improved by
the information I had at Oxford, that the Royal Mines in Wales were very
helpful to his late Majesty during those Civil Wars (as I have shown.) And,
after the Wars viz. 1650. telling these Stories to Mr. W. B. he told me, He had
a share in the Society for the Mines Royal, and desired to transfer it to me,
in trust, which I accepted, and did execute it, for near 10 years after; and
then resigned it, but the Societys finding my Diligence, and Insight into that
Affair, were pleased to bestow two quarter parts on me to continue me, and as a
Testimony of my Gratitude, in Anno 1670, I writ a Book of their Privileges and
Rules, which I called Fodinae Regales, and dedicated it to them, with a promise
to proceed in the publishing of Erckern, which now I have done, and some other
pieces which I hope to do.

And thus, Sir, said I to my Friend, I have given you an Account of several
Links of this Chain, which guided me into this Laborinth of Metals: But to get
out of it, that which I aim at, is to write a little more of their Products,
and to offer some Expedient how the Mines may be made more profitable to his
Majesty, and to other Proprietors, with some Advantages to the Societies,
which, God willing, I shall perform in due time, and then we parted, he wishing
me good Success to my Endeavors.

And so I went on, where I left, namely to Acquaint the Reader, that Erckern
does tell us of several Mines in Germany, p. 28. especially in Austria, p. 285.
Bohemia, Belgia, Flanders, p. 170. Hungary, p. 103. and Saxony, p. 77. he also
mentions the particular Cities and Villages to which they belong, and where
they are refined viz. at Brussells, p. 170. Cracow, p. 208. Cuttenburgh, p.
142. Friburgh, p. 6. Galmay, p. 285. Goslar, p. 78. Hessen, p. 285. Holland p.
170. Joakims-Valley, p. 34, Islenburgh, p. 285. Caufingen, p. 285. Knien, p.
100, (where he says the Mines contain good Duke-Gold) Lick-beter, Manhren, p.
4. Meichsen, p. 4. Mis^ia, p. 6. Norimberg, p. 86. Saxen, p. 4. Schwath
Slackenward, p, 83. Shesron, p. 4. Sorath, Suevia, p. 285. and Suabem -- Tyrol,
p. 285. Villach, and Waldenburg, and many other places which he and Geographers
do mention (See Heylen) and therefore I think fit also to mention the Counties
of England and Wales wherein Royal Mines have been discovered to us, viz. in
Bedforshire, Cheshire, Cornwall, Cumberland, Darbyshire, Devonshire,
Dorsetshire, Durham, Essex, Glocestershire, Hereford-shire, Kent, Lancashire,
Monmothshire, Notinghamshire, Northumberland, Rutland-shire, Shropshire,
Somersetshire, Staffordshire, Sussex, Warwickshire, Westmorland,
Worcestershire, Yorkshire, and in all the twelve Counties of Wales, so as of
the 52 Counties there are 38 of them Metallic Counties, but in many of the
rest, viz. Barkshire, Buckinghamshire, Cambridgshire, Hampshire, Hartfordshire,
Huntingtonshire, Leicestershire, Lincolnshire, Middlesex, Norfolk,
Northamptonshire, Oxfordshire, Suffolk, Surry, Wiltshire there are good
Minerals, but in some of them neither Metal, Mineral or good Quarries, and yet
they are recompensed some other ways.

Now, though Germany abounds in Metals and Minerals, yet Erckern acknowledges
that they have a better sort of Copper and Lead from the Mines in Poland (as it
seems p. 268.) and a better sort of Gold from Hungary, p. 108. India and
Aethiopia, p. 101. and a better sort of Lapis Calaminaris, (and other good Oars
of Metal) from England (which Erckern calls Britain, p. 286, and a better sort
of Soap, to contemper Metals, from Venice, than their own, so though we have as
good Mines in England, yet we are forced (for want of a constant use of them,
and thereby improve our Knowledge) to borrow the Products of their Mines, and
indeed our chief Knowledge how to work them (as I find by our Records) and they
may well have greater Experience than our selves, because Erckern tells us,
That the Mine at Goslar, formerly under the D. of Saxony, but now under the D.
of Brunswick, has been in constant working for above 700 years, to his time:
and Heylen tells us, That the D. of Saxony's Mines, (the Territories not so big
as England) yields to him above 130000 l. yearly; now why ours are not made so
beneficial to us: I attribute it either to Reasons of State, or want of Knowing
the several Arts which belong to the Working of them.

MINT, T. Muntz, vel locum ubi monetam cuditur, L. Monetarium, Officina
monetaria, Taberna monetaria, Officina Cusoria, A. it signifies with us, (as
Cowel renders it) the place where the the King's Coin is formed, be it Gold or
Silver, which is at this present, and long has been, in the Tower of London,
though it appear by diverse Stories, and other Antiquities, that in ancient time
the Mint was at Callis, Ann. 21 R. 2. cap. 6. and An. 9. H. 5. stat. 5. cap.
5. the Officers belonging to the Mint, have not been alvvayes alike: at this
present they seem to be these; the Warden, who is chief of the rest, and is by
his Office to receive the Gold or Silver of the Goldsmiths, and to pay them for
it, and over-see all the rest belonging to this Function (his Fee is an hundred
pounds per Annum:) the Master-Worker, who receives the Gold or Silver from the
Warden, causes it to be melted, and delivers it to the Monyers, and takes it
from them again, when it is made (his Allowance is not any set Fee, but
according to the pound weight:) the third is the Controller, who is to see that
the Money be made to the just Assize, to over-see the Officers and Control
them, if the Money be not as it ought to be (his Fee is one hundred Marks per
Annum:) them the Master of the Assay, who weighs the Gold or Silver, and
sees whether it be according to Standard (his Yearly Fee is also one hundred
Marks:) then the Auditor to take the Accounts, and make them up (Auditor-like:)
next the Surveyor of the melting; who is to see the Gold or Silver cast out,
and not to be altered after it is delivered to the Melter, which is after the
Assay-Master has made trial of it; then the Clerk of the Irons, who sees that
the Irons be clean and fit to work with; next the Graver, who Engraveth the
Stamps for the Moneys; then the Smiters of Irons, who (after they be Engraven)
smites them upon the Money; next the Melters that melt the Bullion (that is,
Gold or Silver in the Mass or Billot) before it come to the Assaying or
Coining; then the Blanchers, that do aneal, boil and cleanse the Money
(reducing it to its natural color, viz. to yellow if Gold, and to white if
Silver:) next the Porter that keeps the Gate of the Mint; then the Provost of
the Mint, who is to provide for all the Monyers, and to over-see them: lastly,
the Monyers, who are some to sheer or clip the Money, some to forge it, some to
beat it abroad, some to round it, and others to stamp or coin it (their Wages
is not by the Day or Year, but uncertain, according to the weight of the Money
Coined by them:) Other Officers have been in former times, now useless, because
Mills are used for that purpose, and the Art of Mintage and Assaying of Metals
is much improved, by his Majesty's great skill and insight into that Affair.
See Coin, etc.

Now it seems by Cowel, That Mints were erected in most parts of England, but
he mentions no particulars, except Cumberland, Northumberland and London, (see
his Title Moniers) yet under the word Mint, he cites the 21. of R. 2. c. 16.
and 9. of H. 5. c. 5. in which two Kings Reigns, the Mint was removed to
Callis, being then under the English Jurisdiction; and I do not find it, either
before or since, removed from the Tower of London, except in the late
Usurpation, and then his Majesty caused one to be Erected at Shrewsbury, to
Coin the Silver which was brought thither from the Mines in Wales (of which I
have spoken before.)

MISPICKLE. T. Miszpickle; I know no other word for it, being mentioned as a
kind of Oar, distinct from others (l. 1. c. 2. s. 11. and l. 3. c. 1. s. 6.)
but it may be derived from the next word Missy. See Oars.

MISSY. T. Missy. A. and L. Misy. which G. Agricola from Pliny, calls
Atramentum sutorium, or Shoe-makers Black; but Pliny makes it a kind of
Vitriol, and is confessed to be a mineral, and the Oar sparkling like Gold; so
as I conceive Mispikle is an Oar of the same nature, only spotted; which the T.
calls spickled, A. speckled: so it is a kind of Missy-Oar speckled.

MONEY. T. Muntz. L. Moneta, Pecunia, etc. see Coin, Metals, Measures and
Weights; and this Money is proportioned from 20 Grains of Barley Corns, which
make a scruple (according to Physicians terms) or a Penny according to
metallic terms; and 20 pennyes make an Ounce, and 12 Ounces (either of Gold or
Silver) makes a pound (according to the Trojan computation, and thence called
Troy Weight:) as for Haver du-poise weight, or Haver weight, it has 16 Ounces
to the Pound, and Metals and Gems are not concerned with it: however, the
Barly-Corn bears the sway in both; so the poor products of the superficies of
the Earth, seems to give Laws to all our subterranean Treasures, both before,
and when it is made passable, and communicable or current Money; whereby I
conjecture, that the word sterling Money, may not improperly be derived from
Sterilis, or natural unfructified Ground (which is proper for Barley) whereas
fertile, dung'd, or artificial Grounds, makes it more ponderous, and its Grains
not of so true a standard for sterling Money, as those of a more Natural Earth.

Now to all Silver or Gold Money, there is an Allay; that is, a taking away
part of the fine Metal, and adding the like part of the baser; that is of
Copper, etc. and this is done upon two accounts: first, that the baser Metal
may make the finer to be more apt for Coynage: the other is, that the Sovereign
of that Government where it is so allayed, may by the deduction or allay, be
paid the full charge for the Coynage or Minting of it: Now the less allay that
is put to the Coined Gold or Silver, does render the Government the more
Honorable, and the Sovereignty of a greater Esteem, than in other parts, where
they have greater allay (Vaughan.)

It is good for a Traveller to be skillful in the different allays, whereby, as
a Friend of mine told me, That he carried out an 100 l. with him, and with his
art of Exchanges* in Countries where allays differed, he bore his Charges of
Travel, and brought his stock home again; however, this Money thus allayed, is
called Coin, when the Sovereign Stamp is upon it (which is a Legal Stamp) and
every Sovereignty uses a different Stamp, as here in England, and in the
Empire, France, Spain, etc. proper to its Sovereignty; and every piece of money
so stamped, has almost a different allay: yet all Princes do agree in severe,
yet just, Penalties, for Counterfeiting allays or stamps, and make it, as in
England, High Treason. vid. Coke. 2. In. p. 575.

MONYERS. see Money, lately called Bankers.

MORTAR. T. Gips. L. Gibsum, made of Water, Calx viva, Lime and Sand, and used
in all sorts of Structures, to cement Bricks or Stones. See Calx and Sand.

MORTAR. T. Morsel, Morsner. L. Mortarium, which Minshaw says, is morte earum
rerum quae in illo teruntur, and though we write one with an A. the other with
an E. for distinction, yet the Beaters for that, and Pestles for this, makes
Minshaws description serve for both of them. See Sand and Pestle and Sculp. II.
and IX.

MOULD. T. Model. L. Modulus. A. Frames, etc. See Utensils.

MULLET, T. Mallen and schleifer, L. Molarius, marmorius, a little flat piece
of marble stone on which Painters grind their Colors, and Metallists their
Metal to dust, from molare to distinguish it from the Mullet fish.

MUNK, T. Munich, which I conceive, comes from the L. Munitus (and not from
Monicha) as an Instrument that guards and strengthens the Operation of Metals,
by covering it from the Air, and therefore though A. write it munk, it were
more proper to be writ munt, as an abreviation of munitus.

NE N NE
NEALING or Anealing, T. Abgeadnet. I find it not in our Dictionary, but in
Cotgrave it is Nelleure, and signifies a vernishing and enameling: the
difference is in the Arts; that enameling is upon solid Bodies, as Gold,
Silver, etc. but anealing is usually applied to the coloring of Glass, such as
we had in former times, and still have in Church Windows, in excellent
Varieties, and sometimes it is used for tinging or coloring of Stones, where it
is done by fire, but here the word is applicable only to such Coppels, etc.
which are covered and strengthened with Clar, for resisting the fire, and the
manner of anealing them, is always done by a gradual, and not a violent heat.
l. 1. c. 10. s. 1. See Amel and Clar.

NEEDLE, And it is applied to several things, and has thereupon several Names
in several Languages, but in Latin it is called Acus from its Acuity or sharp
point, (and is sometimes applied to ingenuous satyrick Wits;) the French call
it Aquila quasi Anquilla (as Minshaw) because it is proportioned like an Eel
fish, but the German here calls it Nadelen from Naeden or Naen, suere, i. e. to
sow or stitch together, and this word Nadelin is the nearest to our word Needle.

Which word being used in the New Testament, to show the difficulty of a Rich
man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: It stands such men in hand that deal
in Metals (in order to make themseves rich) to see how far they are concerned
in the impossibility mentioned in the Text, now St. John makes no mention of a
Needle, but St. Matthew. ca. 19. ver. 24. says, It is easier for a Camel to go
through the eye of a Needle, (per foramen acus transire, Sept.) than for a rich
man (that is he that abounds in Money, made of metals) to enter into the
Kingdom of God; and so St. Mark, cap. 10. v. 24. and in St. Luke 18. 25. but
the Latin is foramen acus, the Needles eye, which, my Author (whom, I cannot
readily call to mind, or else I should own him) says, there was a little
Postern Gate in the Wall of Jerusalem, which was called foramen acus, or the
Needles eye, through which a Camel could not pass without Kneeling (which says
Pliny Camels are taught to do) so as by going on their Knees, a Camel might
pass through that Gate, which otherwise it could not do; and so the Story
alludes to a rich and humble man, who by Humility may easily enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, but not a proud rich man, that will not stoop, but puts more
confidence in his money or metals, than in an humble or devout mind, which is
implied by the bending of the Knees of the Camel.

Now, this word Needle is once only used in the New Testament, by those three
Evangelists, and no more, but it is used oftener in the Old Testament to other
purposes, and is always joned with the word* work, as Needlework. But in the
Translations of the Oriental Languages, the Translators differ, for Dr. Walton
in his Polyglot renders Needle Work, Opus recamantis, Opus Polymatrii, Opus
Varietoris, Opus picturarum, Opus Imaginum, so as there is nothing of a Needle,
but from the Chaldee, and there he translates it opus acu pictum, and from the
Arabic which he renders Phrigianum, and Junius and Trimelius (published before
that Poliglot) in every place of the Old Testament, where the word Needle Work
is used (as in the 26, 27, 28, 36, 38, and 39 Chapters of Exodus, and in the
5th of the Judges, and in the 45 Psalm. ver. 14. for it is used in no other
places) do follow the Chaldee and Arabic, in the words Opus and Artificium,
but not in acu pictum, yet the two most eminent Poets of their time in England
and Scotland concurred in the uniting of those words, for Sandys writes thus,
Psalm. 45. 14. She shall unto the King be brought,
In Robes with Phrygean Needle wrought.
And Buchanan Dives opum, dives Pictai vestes and auri.
(where note he uses Pictai for pictae, as Virgil, Lucullus, and other Latin
Authors do often change the Diphthong ae for ai) so that Sands has the
Needle Work in the word wrought, and that he calls Phrigian (from Phrigia,
where it is supposed that Art was first taught) answering the Translation of
the Arabic: and Buchanan, Pictae answering the Translation from the Chaldee;
and these Needle-Works are there also called faeminalia torta, because the Art
is mostly used by Women, and therefore Acus for a Needle is properly declined
in the feminine gender.

Now, the shape of the Needle was taught us by Nature, for there is a fish
which I have often seen on the Coast of Suffolk, which commonly comes there
with the Mackerel, and differs only by having a snout of about 12 Inches in
length, being a firm bone in the shape of a Needle.

Now, whether this be one of the Needle fishes mentioned by Pliny, l. 32. and
called Acicula (and one of the 176 sorts of Fishes which he there enumerates,
or the Acus Aristotelis, or the Acus Opiani, mentioned by Jonston, lib. de
Piscibus, I cannot say; but Cooper, from Pliny (yet I find it not in Pliny)
describes it just like the Suffolk Fish; Acus, says he, is a Fish long, small,
and smooth, on the back colored as it were with green and blew, his Beak long
and sharp, and makes this of the masculine Gender, and we call it the Needle
fish.

Acus also sometimes signifys an order in Battle, and so called Acus belli,
when they are at point of Fighting, Acus also signifys the spiral parts of
Wheat, Oats, Barley, etc. being like so many Needles, and not chaff, as most
Dictionaries have it: And there is an herb called Acus pastoris, or Acus
moschata being full of Prickles like Needles, but vulgarly it is called Venus's
Comb or Charvell, the chief Virtue of which is to provoke Lust, and so may be
called Acus libidinis. There are many other Instruments of this name, Needle,
which are used by Carpenters to cripple, graple, or join houses together, and
Thatchers Needles to thatch withal, etc.

But the chief Application of this word Needle is in Navigation, and there
called Acus Navigatoria, or the Mariners Needle, or Compass, in respect that he
compasses the Seas, by the Virtue which it borrows from the Loadstone; (of
which I have spoken at large) and is of such a transcendent Nature, that which
way soever the ship moves, still the head of the Needle fixes it self to the
North, and the other point to the South, and this admirable Instrument has no
other title in our Language than Needle: I hope that none that shall read this
long Discourse of Needles will think it needless: but it was from Erckern's
Touch-needles which he calls Streith Nadelen, and Agricola, de re Metallica,
calls them sometimes Gold, or Silver or Copper Needles, by the touch of which
the worth of each Metal may be known, and they differ in the making, forming
and shaping of them, as may be seen in Sculpture 8. and 18: and in G. Agricola,
p. 199. which shows them in an acular or Needle*form.

Now, there being great trouble and nicity in making of them either way (for
indeed it is one of the most curious pieces about the Metallic Chimistry)
therefore the Chimists, Goldsmiths or Tryers of Gold and Silver (to save
trouble) do make use of a Touchstone, being a kind of soft Marble, of which you
may read more in Stones. I read but of one sort of Needles more, which Cambden
speaks of, in his Britania, p. 700. viz. of a Vault under the Church of Rippon
where there was a little hole, called St. Wilfred's Needle, through which a
virtuous Woman might pass with ease, but if she were otherwise disposed, she
did not pass, but stayed below to be tried of what Metal she was made.

NILE, or the River Nilus. See Gold, Metal, Mine.

NITRE, a light, ruddy, yet white substance, full of holes like a Spung, and
resembling common Salt almost in color; but quicker of Taste, and is mistaken
by some for Saltpeter; there is also a Nitre which comes out of Africa, of a
purple Color, but that which is now commonly sold to us for Nitre, is Salt
Petre refined and candied, and used sometime in stead of Borax.

NOSEL, See Vtensils.

NUMBER, See Arithmetic.

NUT, See Measures.

OA O OA
OARS. T. Erkes. A. and Saxons, Oar. Danes, Aare and Aaure, the L. Metallum
Crudum (Skinner) for I find no single word for it, unless it be Fodina, which
may be applied to other dig'd things; but in our Patents for the Mines Royal,
is writ Ewre, which signifies a place where Water is, for Water allways attends
Metalls, and from thence the Ewres, which was formerly made of Silver, to pour
Water into Basins, is called Ewre; and from thence comes Sewer, or one that
takes care for drawing of Water, where any Land or place has more than is
necessary, but generally in our Language, we call that which is dug from the
Bed of any Metal, Oar; as if one should say O admirablilia Rerum Metallorum,
for most of our Monosyllables are but abstracts of many words compacted into
one, as may be seen in Sir Edward Coke's Instit. and other Learned Etymologers;
also we usually call those Oars wherewith Watermen Row their Boats, aluding to
the pains and labor which is used with the Arms in both Professions, by
Digging and Rowing; there is also Leimster-Oar, of which I have spoke, under
the word Flocks: but of the Metallic Oars, there are as many sorts of them, as
there are Metalls: yet I find but four Latin Words, and those compounded; viz.
Balluca, for Gold Oar: Pomphilix, for Copper or Brass Oar: Stricturae, for Iron
Oar: and Plumbago, for Lead Oar (Holliack) and therefore Erckern sometimes
calls the Products of Metalls, from the Mines Erks and Oars, and sometimes
Stones, Goldt-stein, for Gold Erk or Oar: Silver-stein, for Silver Erk or Oar:
Kupfer-stein for Copper Erk or Oar: Bley-stein for Lead Erk or Oar: Zein-stein
for Tin Erk or Oar: Speiz-stein, for Quicksilver Erk or Oar: Ein-stein, for
Iron Erk or Oar: Slack-stein, for Steel Erk or Oar: But I conceive, that when
he uses the word ERK, it signifies the OAR joined with the Excrement, and when
STEIN, it signifies the entire Metal, separate from the first crude and heavy
Matter: Now the Names that he gives for distinction of OARS are these (as they
are variously dispersed in his V. Books) viz. Blent Oar, Cat-silver Oar, Cobolt
Oar, Copper and Coppery Oar, Crude Oar, Fleaky or Flacky Oar, Float Oar, Fresh
Oars, Glassy Oars, Glittering, Glistering and Glimmering Oars, Gold and Goldish
Oars; also white, red, brown, Goldish Oars; Gray Flints, called Iron-man-Oars
and gross Oars; horny, hard, harsh Oars, Lazure Oars, Leadish or Lead Oars;
mild and muddy Oars, Slate-stone Oars, Silver, silvery, spady, sparkling,
spelter, spizy and sulphury Oars; also Talk, Tinny Oars, Washed and Wolferan
Oars; and many others, which are dispersed in several parts of his V. Books:
and some of them discoursed of here also, in their Alphabetical order;
especially where we retain the same Apellations for the like Oars, to which the
Reader is referred.

ORANGE. Orpiment. See Colors.

OVEN. T. Offen. L. Furnax, and the same words are used for Furnaces; but
Kilns, which are a kind of Ovens, are called T. Calk and L. Calcaria and
Furnax: of the several sorts of these, you may see in the Sculptures, in their
proper pages: viz. the Athanor in page 2: 123. 161. 172. 177. 185. 207. a Wind
Furnace, p. 2. 56. 200. an open Furnace, p. 2. an Assay-Oven, used by the
ancient Refiners, p. 13. an Assay-Oven, used by the Norimbergers, p. 13. an
Assay-Oven made of Tiles, p. 13. 235. an Assay-Oven made of Potters-Loam. p.
13. 235. an Assay-Oven made of Armor Plates; p. 13. 153. a Granulating Kiln,
p. 56. an Oven to burn Silver, p. 80. a Roasting Oven, p. 112. the By or Side
Ovens, p. 123. 161. 172. 177. 185. Oven for Retorts, p. 177. a melting Oven for
Copper Oars, p. 248. and others. Now for your assistance in the more fully
knowing of these Furnaces, you may read Dr. Salmon's 5th Book of the New London
Dispensatory; which I have formerly cited, where from p. 821. to p. 828. he
makes 17 several Furnaces for several uses, and each of them may also be
varied, according to the Ingenuity of the Artist.

OUNCE. See Weights.

OUTLANDISH. T. Eintrembbling-Auszleanger, L. Extranens, Aliegena, Exoticus,
which A. terms Strangers, Aliens or Forraigners; all intending those who are
not of the same Country, and those the Jews called Heathens, and the Greeks
(according to Plautus) Barbarians. See Metallic Countries.

OX T. Oches, Rind and Rund. L. Bos and Teriones, quafi terra terat (Minshaw)
we call a gelt Bull, a Steir or Runt; but the Germans call a Bull ungelt, a
Steer; and the Lat* have also a Distinct name, Taurus: and A. properly a Bull:
so the Ox has three names, viz. Ox, Steer and Bullock, and these are of the
greatest size, and it is called Bullock, or more properly Bullack, because it
lacks something which it should have: the lesser sort are called Runts
(according to the Teutonick word) viz. Welsh or Scotch Runts, these and the
females of this kind have several other names, as Beeves, Cows, Neat, etc. in
which the metallic Art has little to do, but with their Blood, Bones, Dung
and Tallow, which are employed for several uses about Metals* and their meat
for the sustinance of the Artists. See Blood, Bones, Dung, Tallow.

OIL, T. Oele, L. Oleum, and Linseed oil, T. Lein-samen, L. Linarus: Which is
no other with us than the seed of Flax, which in other Languages is Line or
Linen: but for the Oil of Linseed it is well known to all that do paint with
oil, that it has this Quality, that though it be liquid like other oils, yet
is of a more drying nature than any other Oil, and therefore the more fit for
Metallic Lutings, etc. lib. 2. cap. 27. sect. 53.

PA P PA
PAGAMENT. I retain the word, because I find that in Florio's Italian
Dictionary, Pagamento signifies any kind of Payment, l. 1. c. 1. s. 1. which
signify any broken pieces of Coined Money, which before made good Payments, and
this word we abreviate from Pagamento.

PALE-COLOUR. T. Bleich, L. Palidus, and A. Bleak, Bleek or pale. See Colors,
l. 2. c. 43. s. 1. and we have a word Pale, which the T. call Pkall, L. Palus,
used for pieces of wood to pale in or impale a piece of Ground, or enclose it
with Wood, as with a Garment (from pallium an outward Garment, which being
decayed of its native color, there usually grows moss on it, of a pale color.

PAPER, T. Pappyr, L. Papirus (l. 2. c. 23. s. 3. of which Pliny says, That
all civility of this life, and the memorial and mortality also of Men after
Death (by which he shows that he was not of the Sadduces opinion) consists in
Paper, which says he, was made of a Plant, having the name of Papirus, and he
cites Varro to tell us, That the first Invention thereof was in the time of
Alexander the great when he conquered Egypt, and built Alexandria, where it
was first made; and till then their Memorials ever were writ on stone, lead or
Brass, etc. and, as I take it, Josephus tells us, that upon Enochs Pillar of
stone, (which remaind to Moses's time) were writ those things which were done
before the Flood. Also the Ten Commands were writ upon Stone: but for more easy
Portage, and transmitting the minds of men one to another, Paper was invented
(as Pliny says) in Egypt from the Bark of a Plant, lib. 13. c. 11. and 12.
where you may read the several names it had, the first and best sort called
Augusta, the next Livia; etc. and many more sorts of it, and tells you also the
manner of making it; and that, what they did not use of that Plant for Paper,
was employed for making little Boats, and the outward Rind, for many uses,
especially for Ropes, which makes me think, that the Withy tree which grows
plentifully in Worstershire (of which I have spoke in the word Coal) is of the
same nature, for this Plant Papirus (as Funcius says) was about ten Cubits
high, and so is the Withy, and that Papirus grew about Nilus, and other
waterish places, so does Withey, and that they made ropes of it, and so they do
of Withy: so that I conceive, the inward Bark may make the like Paper, which
may be tried for experiment-sake only; for our Paper (made of Rags by
Water-Mills, called Paper Mills, of which I have seen many in England) is much
better and more useful with less charge) however, the Knowledge of such ancient
things are not to be lost, and whatever Pliny says of the Antiquity of it, the
Chinists pretend to the use of Paper long before Alexander, as a Friend of mine
(Cap. J. Hall) told me who had been thrice at China, and the last time brought
me a fair Book, all written in their Language long before that Emperor, and
that the leaves were only made of the Bark of a Tree, but of that he could give
no certain Account.

To PEARCE, or Pierce, T. Booren, L. Forare (lib. 1. c. 34.) and we after the
T. to Bore, probably alluding to the Bore, who, in rooting up the Earth with
his Snout, does as it were bore it, for the Lat. calls a Bore, Aper, because he
does aperire humum, and so by boring it does open a passage into Metals or
other things.

PEEBLES. See Stones.

PELICAN. T. L. A. and all from Pellecanus (Sculpture 29. f. 4.) the Greek
word signifies perforare, or to pierce through; in allusion to the Bird called
a Pelican, which has a bended Bill, by which, (as it is said) when her young
ones are poisoned with eating Serpents, she picks an hole in her Breast, and
gives her Blood to them, which cures them; and so this Instrument, does as it
were suck the blood or spirits out of several Ingredients (for so Blood is
composed in Bodies) of which the Aqua fortis and Aqua regis are made, and by
those waters both Gold and Silver are cured of their poisonous natures.

PENDULA, See Sculpture XI, these are of two sorts, one hanging constantly in a
perpendicular line, the other is in a constant motion* and of a late Invention
for Clocks and Watches, and made of Iron or Steel.

PETREFACTION or Petrification, T. Stein-Drehen, L. Petrificatio, which is
nothing else than a making that to be, which before was not, a Stone; and this
effected by Art or Nature, those which are done by Art are the Counterfeits of
Gems, as Rubies, Saphirs, Emeralds, etc. and Counterfeits of Gross Stones, as
Marble and other common Stones: but I speak of such as are done by Nature, and
those of what I have seen, which I conceive are only performed by a peculiar
Water ordained for that purpose, as at Poolls-Hole in Darbyshire, where are
great gray Stones, like our Free-stones, made by the cadency of Water, and some
of those stones also cemented by Water, so as there are two or three large
Arches of those stones cemented by Water, and where they were not perfectly
joined; by the light of Candles, I could see through one Arch to the uppermost,
and so they lay promiscuously in the Vault, as big as a little Church: the
lesser Stones are in the nature of Icicles, but not bright, and so increased in
hardness, length and dimension, according as the Water descends on them, so as
at the points are drops of Water still condensing into Stone.

The next which I saw, was at Oky-Hole, near Mindip-Hills in Sommersetshire,
where the nature of that constant dropping, petrefy'd it self into a
Christaline Form, and so seemed (by the light of Candles, of which I had store)
as so many Crystal Icicles.

After this, I had occasion to Visit Sir Robert Coke, at his House called
Durdans, in Surry, now belonging to the Honorable Earl of Berkly, where I
found an Artificial Groto, made of Flint Stones, and looking up to the top, I
perceived many little pendent Stones like Icicles, hanging on the Arch*Flints,
and calling Pool's and Okey Holes to mind, I broke off some of them, and found
them to be congealed Stones, and as the others were of a Freestone and
Christaline temper, these were Flinty drops of Water hanging at the ends, like
the other almost congealed stones.

These Observations I made of Lapidinous Waters, condensing themselves from the
matter through which they pass.

The next are of the like Waters penetrating other Substances, so petrefying
them: and one of them is near Knasborrough Castle in Yorkshire, where there is
a Well which turns pieces of Wood and Leaves into Stone, and other things of a
complying nature: But I had a Honeycomb presented to me from thence, which was
made perfect Stone by that Well, which I the more wonder at, because things of
cerasious tempers, are usually Resistables to Water.

The other is that at Deepham in Norfolk, there is a Tree 13 yards about near
the root, and at least 80 Foot high, which bears a flower very pleasing to the
Ey, and Smell. Sir Tho. Brown Doctor of Physic, eminent for universal
knowledge, called it while he lived, a Teasle Tree, and said, That he never saw
but one of them, about the further part of Germany, and that many had tried to
graft or inoculate part of it, but without success. Now at the bottom of this
Tree there is a Spring of the like nature, with that in Yorkshire for
Petrefaction; now, I wish, that a Graft might be carried from thence into
Yorkshire, and planted near that petrefying Well, by which it might be seen
whether the Tree gave any such Virtue to the Spring, or the Spring to the Tree:
from which, and other Inquiries I have still been diverted by public
Employments.

The last which I shall mention, is of Earth which has a petrifying quality,
and this I was only informed of by Mr. Castle, a known person both for
Integrity and Estate, in one of whose Manors, near Cambridge there is an
Earth, where as he told me, He had taken up several pieces of Wood which were
turned into perfect stone, and this is confirmed, in Cambden's Brit. p. 401. of
a Ladder turned to stone, which, he says, was taken out of the Earth at Asply
Gowish (I suppose in the same Manor) which was kept in the Cistertian
Monastery, near Asply, as a great Rarity, and I have both read and heard of the
like Earth in other places: But it is an Error to attribute this to the Earth,
whenas it is only a lapidinous Water, which is in the Earth, and infuseth it
self into such porous Bodies, and so makes it become stone, and that which
confirms me herein, is, That near this, there is a Quarry of stone* or Earth
and water turned to stone, but it is of that nature, as Mr. Castle informed me,
That if it be dug by the Rule of the Compass, and marked N. for North, and
S. for South, etc. and laid in any structure as it was dug from the Quarry,
it proves a very durable stone, but if laid otherwise, it moulters to sand;
which is of late years not only observed, in digging and placing other Stones
(though more consolidated) but also in removing Plants, derived from Water and
Earth.

Now I observe in the whole matter, That this Water that thus petrefies it self
or other substances, is adapted with a lapidinous Nature, not only to
condensate it self but such other substances as may imbibe that quality: so
that it is not properly called, cold (as is commonly said) that turns water
into Icicles, but a volatile lapidinous water, that flies about, which as cold
or coldness does improve to petrefaction, so Heat or other warmths do hinder
from condensation, and this petrefying water is of a salt and frigid nature, as
we may see, that if Snow and Salt be put into a silver, tin or pewter Pot, and
set on a Board, wherein fresh water is to be poured, and then move the liquor
about in the Pot with a Stick, and in less than half an hour the water under
the Pot will be congealed to an Ice, and so will glue or freeze the Pot and
Board together, of which you may read more in Berkley's Argenis. So I shall
referr the further Discourse of Petrefying to the word Waters.

PEWTER, T. Speauter, but the Pewterer or maker of it is called Kanngiesser, L.
Plumbus Cinereus (Holliock) and Argentanus (Minsh.) but the Italians call it
Stagnaro, from Stannum, Tin, for it is properly an Art derived from the
Stanniries or Tin Mines; because the best Pewter is where all or the greatest
part is Tin, yet they put with it sometimes Silvery Lead, but for want of that,
a little poor Lead, or the Ashes or Dross of Lead, but when it is much
adulterated with Lead, it is quickly discerned by the weightiness of it: but
the T. calls a Pewter Dish, Dish Zienen schueshel, which is a Dish made of Tin.
l. 2. c. 20. s. 2.

PIBBLES, T. Keisel-steine, from Kisel a Flint, L. Calculus a Calcando, because
it may be kick't up and down; and as they are little of themselves, so they are
of little use about Metalls, otherwise then as they are beaten and mixed with
Metallic Flints, l. 1. c. 4. s. 2.

PICTURES, T. Bilden-Geinaild-a-maklen, L. Pictura and Imago; the Makers of
these are called Picture-Drawers, Limners and Painters, and these are of
several sorts, but the chief Composition of their Colors are from Metalls;
especially the Effigies on Coyns, which may be numbered amongst Picturas
solidas, and this admirable Art of Picturing is borrowed from Nature; so that
in this Age the Art is come so near to the Original, that nothing but want of
Life, seems to distinguish them. l. 2. c. 48. s. 2. See Sculptures.

PINCERS, T. Zangs, from thence we have our word Tangs or Tongs, that is, to
hold fast; L. Forceps and Volsella, these are of several sorts and sizes,
according to the uses; for common Fires they are called Tongs, for small Works,
Plyers and Nippers; but in Metallic Work, Pincers or Tongs: see Utensills, and
Sculpt. 11. etc.

PIPKIN, T. ein Topfein, from whence our word to tope or to drink, and the
Potters Clay, of which these Pots are made, is called Toepff, L. Ollula, a
little Pot, and these are used about Metalls. See Utensils.

PITCH, T. Pech (according to Minshaw) but Erckern, Bech, L. Pix, and so most
of other Languages, writ with P. and this Pitch is a Black Gum, which comes
from a Tree of that Name, but are of the sort of Pines (whereof we have none in
England) but have the Gum plentifully from other parts; the white Pine yields
a white Gum, the Pitch or black Pine, a black Gum; we have several uses of this
Word; viz. the pitch of an Hill; to pitch a Bar; to pitch Tents; and a pitched
Battle: and all are but Allusions to the glutinous nature of this Gum, used in
Luting of Metallic Vessels: l. 4. c. 12. s. 2.

PLANCHES: see Blanches, both of them signifying white pieces of Silvery
Tin-Plates, and sometimes for Wedges of Gold or Silver, or other Metalls, and
from thence the word Planks are used, for flat or plain pieces of sawn Wood,
thicker than Boards: l. 1. c. 1. s. 1. See Blanches.

PLATES of Metal, T. Ein Blat ven Metal, also Blech, L. Lamina, l. 4. c. 4. s.
4. or pieces of Metal made flat and smooth, and these are of Iron, Tin, Brass,
Copper, and such as are of Silver or Gold (wrought in various shapes) as Cups,
Dishes, etc. are still called PLATES.

PLASTER, T. Gips and Tinchwerk, L. Gipsum and Emphlastrum, this is a
composition of Quicklime, made of common Lime-stones, but the best is of
Alabaster, and this is used without any mixture of Sand, and is an excellent
Fence against Water; but Pliny tells of a natural Plaster in Cyprus; but we
have none such, and therefore do use Alabaster or Talk, both of which he
mentions (l. 36. c. 24.) wherewith in those days they made Fret Works and
Images; but of later years they are grown to a great Perfection, by a Past of
that Plaster, to mould and fit it to any part of Man or Woman, and so take the
perfect proportion of that part, be it of Face or Hand, and when that is dried,
they put a like past into the Mould, so as by joining of the part so molded,
the whole Body of a Man or other Creature may be represented, in a pure white
shape; which may be colored as they please: These are graceful Figures (and
may be seen at many Stone-Cutters, but very subject to break) yet much less
than those of Wax, which Art is also come to great Perfection. See Utensils.

POLISH. T. Polieren and Polirs. L. Polire. l. 1. c. 34. s. 6. and this is done
by rubbing Metal with Puttee (made of calcined Tin, or withother Stones (as the
Hemathite, etc. see Boodstone) or other smooth and hard Metals, as Steel,
Iron, etc. to make it render its natural or artificial color more beautiful;
and it may have a just relation to Policy, by which Art, even Governments of
Kingdoms, States or Cities are made smooth and pleasing to the Judgments of
Men. See Hemathite.

POTTERS-work, and Pots, T. Toepffer, Zeug or Werck, L. Figulus, and Operator
Figuli, (l. 1. l. 2. l. 4.) that is a maker of Pots; which the Jews well knew
when they wrought in that ART under Pharaoh, but whether they were metallic
Pots, as Crucibles, Tests, etc. it is not said: and he that is a good Assayer
as Erckern was, will see them made himself, and not trust to the Potter. See
Clay, Pots, Cruises, Jugs and Utensils.

PRECIPITAION, T. Nider Schlag, (l. 1. c. 33. s. 3.) L. Precipitatio, or to
beat or to make that Nider, or Nethermost, which was uppermost, and I do use
the words often to cast down, for so L. precipitatio signifies: Now how Metals
are thus cast down or precipitated, is seen in several parts of the four first
Books: but the general way of Metals is first to dissolve them in Aqua fort. or
Aqua Regis, or Spirit of Nitre, or Vitriol, and then they may be precipitated
with Sea water and Alcalious Lixiviums.

PROCESS, (l. 2. c. 45) is no other than the proceeding in the Metallic Art,
as it is in the proceeding of the Civil Law, till Judgment, etc.

PROOF, proving, l. 1. l. 5. Vid. Assaying, of little difference, for Proving
is but an Assaying

PULVERATION, and Pulverising (l. 1. c. 8. s. 4) signifies the beating of any
Oar, Metals or other things to dust, (sometimes called T. Slaut. L. Pulvis) or
to ashes. (T. Aschen. L. Cinis,) or to Powder, (T. Pulvir, L. Pulvis:) and
these three are made by natural or artificial Fires or Heats (for contunding or
beating things to dust, ashes or powder, is but an artificial motion of Heat
(for no motion is without heat:) and these dusts, ashes or pouders are but the
last Works of Nature upon all Bodies, for the next work is a metaphysical
reducing the Ashes of all Bodies to a Purity; and as we see here the dust of
Metals and other things by Calcination, Incineration or pulveration, what
admirable products are from them; so we may thereby be convinced that the
Omnipotent Chimist of all Creatures will show his Divine ART, in improving the
Dust and Ashes of our Bodies into a greater Purity than what we in this World
(or terrestrial Mine) can enjoy: for here we are subject to all impure Mixtures
till a super-celestial fire shall purify us, and who knows but that the Spheers
of the seven Planets are the Gradations of those seven Fires which David speaks
of, with which we must be seven times refined, before we can be admitted into
St. Paul's third Heaven or the Heaven of Heavens: and I cannot here but call to
mind the Rapsody of Dr. Done (Ser. vol. 2.) speaking of the Resurrection of
our Dust; says thus, Where be all the splinters of your Bones which a shot
has shivered and scattered in the Air? (or, of those Bones which the Metallic
fires have consumed to ashes?) where be all the Attoms of the Flesh which a
Corrosive has eaten? or a Consumption has breathed, and exhaled away from our
Arms or other Limbs? in what wrinkle, in what furrow, in what bowel of the
Earth, lie all the grains of the ashes of a Body burnt a thousand years since?
in what Corner, in what Ventricle of the Sea, lies all the Jelley of a Body
drowned in the general Flood? what Coherence, what sympathy, what dependence
maintains any relation, any correspondence between the Arm that was lost in
Europ, and that Leg which was lost in Africa or Asia (score of years between)?
One Humor of our Bodies produces Worms, and those Worms suck and exhaust all
other humors, and then all dies, and all dryes and moulders into dust, and
that dust is blown into the River, and that pudled water tumbled into the Sea,
and that ebbs and flows with infinite Revolutions, and still, yea still God
does know in what Cabinet every seed pearl lies; in what part of the World
every grain and particle of every man's dust does lie.

Now we are to believe, that this scattered Dust over all the Elements shall
(in the twinkling of an eye) have a glorious Resurrection, far more glorious
than what is producible by Metallic Art, which serves here but as an
Illustration of what may be expected hereafter; but to return to our Chemical
Dust, Ashes and Powder, the dust of Diamonds is most remarkable, because
nothing can master, cut, or polish a Diamond, but by its own dust; and it is a
delicate Art, especially their Mills, by which with the dust of it they make so
many curious Angles, as that they are all reflectionary glitterings, and
sparkling Lights to each other.

Then for Ashes, the several Lixiviums or Lees which are made of the several
sorts of them, they are of great use in Chimistry, especially those that are
made for Saltpeter, without which scarce any Metallic Operation can have good
effects.

And for Powder, the most eminent is, that which is made for Guns, viz. (of
Saltpeter, Charcoal and Brimstone, and some other ingredients to heighten
their tempers,) and when it is perfected for the use, it does as it were
revenge its own Contusions, by shattering the pieces of others almost into
Atoms, and therefore called T. Buechsen-pulver, L. Pulvis tormentarius, as if
it had been invented by the Friar, to torment others before their time.

Now seeing I am writing of Gun-pouder, I have long since considered of the
vast quantity that is spent in Salutes, etc. and it was my chance to meet with
an Ingredient of a cheap rate, with which, supposing a pound of powder to be
used, I took a 4th. part of it, and three parts of my Ingredient, (which was
not of the charge of a 4th. part of Powder,) and with that mixture did make a
Report rather greater than less than the whole pound of powder would have done;
but this compounded powder is more for noise than execution, which is the chief
use of Salutes, or for Triumphs, whereby half 3 parts of 4, in the charge of
common Gun-pouder may be saved.

And seeing I have told you of a powder of Salutation, give me leave to tell
you, That I have found out a powder of preservation, such as without Salt shall
keep Meat in its Blood and Gravy, untainted or unputrified for more than a
year: of which some little experiment I have made, but not sufficient to
satisfy my self.

There is yet another Powder which I am to speak of, viz. a Powder of
Dulcification, which is a peculiar Art, but for that I shall conclude with
Herbet, that Divine Poet, as an admonition for the good use it, When Hair
smells sweet through Pride or Lust,
The Powder has forgot the Dust.


PURIFICATION, purifying, T. Rein, Reinigen, Saeuberung, L. Mundatio, Purgatio,
Purificare, Clarificare, Defaecare, to separate Metals from dross, either by
washing, by clarifying, filtring, digestion, or distilling; and this is done by
water only, or by fire only, and sometimes by both jointly: See Cleansing,
Purging, Clarifying.

PUTREFACTION, T. Verrottung and Verfalung, L. Putrifactio. A. Rottenness,
Corruption, Putrefaction, etc. as Bees from a Lions Carcass (Judge. 14. 8.)
Snakes from the Corruption of Horse-hair, Magots and Flies from corrupt Flesh,
Eels from corrupted Dews: and in all Histories of Nilus it is said, That the
Mud thereof breeds (besides other larger Creatures) an infinite number of Mice,
in which Experiment, we need go no further than the Island of Foulness, in
Dengy hundred, in Essex; where, as my Author Mr. Bernard (a very credible
Gentleman) affirmed to me, and it is confirmed by Chiswell in his Britania
Baconica, that about the end of every year, in his ground there, a prodigious
number of Mice, were bred from the Soil of his Grounds, so as he had often seen
some of them not fully shaped, and these Mice about August, did devour all the
roots of the grass, whereby the grass being withered, the whole ground seemed
like a bed of chaff, wherein the Mice delighted themselves; but whilst they
were in their sports, about the end of every September there came a sort of
little Owls (in great numbers, but much less than those which are bred in
England,) and so being filled and fatned they flew away again, and what with
the chaff and carrion of the Mice, and dung of the Owls, the next Spring the
grounds produced again plenty of Grass, which fatned him yearly many good Oxen:
Now this putrefaction is not only seen by producing such Insects, but in
Metals, for the Rusts of them are but rots or putrefactions, as when Ceruse is
produced of Lead made rotten with Urine or Vinegar; and Verdigrise produced
from Copper made rotten by fumes of Wine, and many such like putrefactions. See
Pulveration, etc.

QU Q QU
QUARRY, T. Steinegruben (which word Grub is used in English to search for
Stone, etc.) L. Lapidicinia, Latonia, Latumia, Lithomia, and Fodina; and for a
Quarry of Millstones, Cotaria.

It is not agreed from whence this word is derived, but the French comes
nearest to the matter, viz. Querir, from the Latin Quaerere to seek (or pro
qua re quaerit; and so an Hawk is said to have her Quarry, when she has got
what she flew at; however it is called also fodina, which is the title to a
Mine, and indeed the Mines for Metals, Minerals and Stones, are so near of kin
that they may all be called properly Fodinae, See Mines, Minerals, Stones,
Waters.

QUENCH (or to Quench) T. Ermorden, that is, to put to Death, also Andeschen,
L* extinguere, which (in Metals) is, when the heat of them are taken away by
cold water, so quenching thirst is the allaying of heat in the body by some
cooling liquids: and it may also come from the Quince Apple, which has the
quality to allay flames, thirstiness, etc. coming from hot causes.

QUICKSILVER, T. Quecksilver, L. Argentum vivum, Argentum liquidum, and fufile,
and Hidrargirum* or Argenteum aqueum, and this by Chimists is devoted to the
Planet Mercury, and so by them also called Mercury, for its Agility; and
therefore the Heathens (who worshipped it as a God, yet) put an humane shape on
it, with Wings to his Feet.

But our Metallic Mercury or Quicksilver is of two Sorts, viz. Adulterated,
and Natural; as for the Adulterated, it is easily discovered, by putting some
of it into a Spoon, and so over fire let it evaporate, and if it leaves a
black, or duskishness, it is false, but, if white or yellow, it is good. As for
the Natural (as I said in the word Metal) we have very little or none in our
Mines, so that we do fetch it from our Neighbors out of Hungary, Spain or
America, etc.

Many have written largely of the Nature of it, and therefore I shall only tell
you, It is seldom found in the Earth with any of the beforenamed Metals, but
delights it self in the Cinnabar, Vermilion, or Minium Stone (of a Metallic
nature, (much used by Painters and Dyers) and there naturally is enclosed; and
Mr. Nicolls (in his description of America) tells us, That in the Vermilion
Mines at Palcas, it yields to the King of Spain every year 8 or 9000 Quintals
(which is so many 125 l. weight of Quicksilver) and that of later years they
refine more Metals by Quicksilver than by Fire, in which operation it has
this peculiar virtue, that it separates and consumes all of them but Gold and
Silver, and though it will not ly in one Bed with them in the Earth, yet when
they are made Play fellows, or Fellow Laborers (for the use of man,) it does
most naturally sympathize with Gold, and divides and separates it from all
other Metals, with which it is at any time intermixed: circling it about without
any other intermixture but it self; but it does not so intimately and perfectly
unite it self with Silver, for it does not pierce it, but consumes the courser
Metals from it, if there be any mixture; and though it be the heaviest of all
Metals, yet if any Fire offer to meddle with it, it evaporates it self into the
lightest substance* smoke, to some colder Region, (as its refuge or shelter,)
where it again embodies it self, and becomes as perfect as at first, by
assuming again its natural color, white; and it is observable, That though it
lies in a Bed of pure Vermilion, (which gives a glorious red color to all
things wherever it is used;) and though it is used, and in a manner
incorporated with Metals and other things of various colors and natures, yet
this noble active creature still retains its whiteness, purity and efficacy.

For though by the strength of Art (as Paracelsus tells us,) it is sometimes
forced to assume a yellow color, (to show its affection to Gold) and sometimes
to a pure red (to show its native kindness to Cinnabar, yet these are rather
assumed and assimulated colors (in respect to other ingredients and
compositions with it,) than any real change of its own whiteness, and so for
its Medicinal uses, it is sometimes called Mercurius dulcis, Mercurius vitae,
Mercurius sublimatus, and Mercurius praecipitatus, yet in all these
dispositions of it, it still reverts to it self, (especially by the assistance
of Fire, to make it Volatile) that it may be the better fixed in its original
purity.

Now these observations cannot but raise my Thoughts, to make them applicable
to the great Mystery of Resurrection; wherein I consider, That as the
Gallenists are, or may be confirmed in the verity of it, by St. Paul's Argument
to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15. 35, etc. So the Chimists may be also confirmed
in the fame by their Chimical practice, for they see that Mercury does by heat
so evaporate, that nothing of it is discernible to the eye; yet that
evaporation being stopped in its career, by the top of the Limbeck, it there
fixes again in its form, color, and indeed in all its qualities, properties,
and perfections.

Now it is an undoubted Principle, both with the Gallenists (who follow St.
Paul,) and the Chimists (followers of Moses,) That all Terrestrial Bodies
confist of Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, (which last is the chief) so as our
bumane bodies being of a more Mercurial temper than other bodies, may
experimentally, and therefore rationally believe, That all the Atoms of our
bodies being incited to it, by an internal heat, do like Mercury ascend to some
other limiting Sphere or Orb, and there stays, till GOD (the Worlds great
Chimist) thinks fit to dispose of them at the general Resurrection, or
particular (as he thinks fit.)

Now, where this Sphere or Orb is (which some call Heaven and Paradise, others
Limbus Patrum, and Limbus Infantium; and others have another place, called
Hell, and Limbus inferiorum, (as it were Antipodial to the other:) I shall
venture to give my guess, and possibly with as little satisfaction to the
World, as others have done in theirs: and that which guids me to mine, is this
consideration, That the name for Quicksilver is Mercury, and that that Name
Mercury is also fixed to the Planet of that Name (next above the Moon, whereby I
apprehend that the Chaldeans and Egyptians (who are said to be the first
Authors of the Astrological Characters of the 7 Planets) did make both the
Planet Mercury, and the Metal Mercury to bear one and the same figure, thus
[(...)] well knowing more of the sympathies and concurring operations of the
Celestial and Terrestrial Mercuries than is yet communicated to us; but the
Hebrews (before them) made seven of their Letters to signify the seven Planets
and seven Metals, and thereby the figure of Mercury (before it was altered by
the Egyptians, was in this form [(...)] and sometimes thus [(...)] And the
Jewish Rabbis did hold, that those two Letters did contain great Mysteries,
(not yet also unfolded to us,) and therefore I hope it is no offense to
conceive, That the Sphere of Mercury is the Paradise or Receptacle of all the
Mercurial spirituous Forms; of which our bodies do consist, and when they are
evaporated from hence they (by an invisible ascension) are received and remain
in that Paradise or repository, so that the Globe of earth being 21600 German
Miles in circumference (accounting 6400 foot to a German mile) and the Diameter
7200 Miles, and the Planet Mercury in the lower part of its Sphere (next the
Moon, being 10255773 German Miles, and the upper part of that Sphere next to
Venus, being 22855511 German miles, then the space of the Sphere of Mercury
(considered Diametrically) between the lower part of the Sphere of Venus, and
the upper part of the Sphere of Luna is 11599738 German miles, which great
space may easily contain all the Mercurial forms which can possibly arise from
the content in the small circumference of the Terrestrial Globe, and allow also
sufficient room for the body of that Planet, (being as it is said, but 442 miles
in Diameter,) so that it has a space of 62999698 German miles above, and as
much under its own Globe, in which it may move and actuate.

And, as the Planet Mercury is employed in its own Circular Motion, within its
Sphere to order and put every Mercurial Matter that ascends to it from the
terrestrial Globe into peculiar Repositories; so the Moon may be admitted also
in her Sphere to give the first rarification, and purification, to the
ascending Spirituous forms to make them the more fit in their Passages to
Mercuries Reception of them, and retain the refuse within her own Sphere, which
consists of a space also (viz. between the Spear of Mercury, and the outward
Circle of the Terrestrial Globe) of 10234173 German miles, for the Planets
themselves, viz. of Mercury and the Moon (as I have shown of Mercury) do take
up but a little Room to roll about in each of their proper spaces or Spheres,
and though Kepler, and others of late do not agree in their Computation about
the dimentions of these two (and the other Spheres) yet these which I have set
down (being generally so computed) may well serve as ^n instance, that so great
spaces were made for some such uses as I have expressed: so that by the active
Operations of the Bodies of these two Planets (Luna being but as a Servant or
vebicular to Mercury) the Mercurius Dulcis and Mercurius Vitae of all humane
Bodies may be sublimated into that celestial Paradise, and the Caput mortuum or
Mercurius praecipitatus thrown down into a Limbus, either in the space of the
Moon (at present) or to the Abyss of the space of the Earth, when it shall (by
the last conflagration) be evaporated or annihilated into a kind of Vacuity for
that purpose.

But having spoken something more of my Conjecture in my Volatiles on Adam and
Eve (under the Discourse of Resurrection) I must refer you to it; and shall
only add this following Sculpture for Demonstration.

Sculpture XLIII.


RA R RA
RATTER, l. 2. c. 2. T. Raeder, I find no Latin word of kin to the sense of
what Erckern intends by it, viz. a riddle, screen, or sieve, that is an
Instrument to separate the clean from the unclean Oars, before they come to the
fire, and so may be called magnum Cribrum, or a great sieve; yet it may come
from Rotatilis, that is, moving swiftly like a Wheel, or Rota, showing the
proportion of Metals, or of any thing else; Riddle, which in the T. is Ratzall;
that is, that the Question being what part of the Oar is clean, and what
unclean, this instrument does unriddle it by separation: and for the word
screen, it is doubtless from secernere, to divide, and sieve from segregare or
severe, to know truly the quality of the thing by separation; There are other
Words to the same effect, as seirce, boulter, not worth the trouble of
examining their Original, but by Ratter is to be understood the great seive,
and the other the lesser seives. See Sieves.

RAW* (l. 2. c. 3. s. 4.) T. Rohe and Rode, also ungesotten and ungekockt. L.
Crudus and Atrox, A. Raw, which is some old British word, signifying not
concocted, and so applied to Metals before they are brought to the fire to be
boiled or roasted. See Roasted.

REEDS, l. 5. c. 4. s. 3. T. Rohz. L. Canna and Arundo. See Utensils.

RECIPIENT or Receiver, l. 2. c. 20. s. 6. T. Emphahen, L. Recipere, signifying
Glasses, Pots, or Vessels which are made to run or hold Metals made liquid, or
what is drawn from them by fire, or otherwise.

REFINING signifies no more than when Metals are melted and fined; yet to make
them better, they do refine them, that is, melt them again and again, till they
be clearly cleansed, purified and purged from the unclean metal or matter,
cleaving to the more pure.

REGISTER, T. L. A. Register, and it signifies with us a Memorial or Record, so
the Word is applied to the Records in several Courts of the Common and Civil
Law; and these are very ancient (as appears by Sir Thomas Smith, de republica)
but in the Metallic Art it is used for Pluggs or Stopples to be put in or
taken out of little holes made in Furnaces or Ovens (called wind holes and
air-holes,) whereby the fire may be better governed, by giving heats or cools
to the Metals, according to the discretion of the Chimist.

REGULUS, l. 2. c. 35. etc. L. A. Regulus (which signifies a small King,) but
Erckern in all places (where he has occasion to mention it,) does make use
only of the word Koenig (or King, and not Regulus,) from konnon, signifying
knowledge, power and ability to Govern; and the Old Saxons called him konning
and cunning, which we translate subtle, (yet not as the vulgar interpret it
crafty,) but one that is Learned, and judicially polite in his Government; now
though Metals, (by some) are put among inanimates; yet others believe that they
have a vegetable Soul, which is improved to an higher Soul by Obedience to its
king; for it is agreed by Chimists, That this king does give such a soul and
temper to Metals* that thereby they prove beneficial to the World, and gain an
esteem to themselves, both for their Origination to Wealth and to medicines,
colors, sounds, etc. and all these they obtain by obedience to their king: and
this puts me in mind of our Alphabetical Letters (which I think is included in
the Talismanical science) whereof God himself says, That he is the Alpha and
Supreme King of them, (as of all mankind, and other creatures:) so that if we
consider them in their virtual effects, then such men as are Learned in them,
and do pay their obedience by Devout Vows and Promises to him, may be called
Vowels; such as act and do his Will at Land, may be called Consonants, such as
admire him for the Wonders they see at Sea, may be called Liquids; and those
that sit still in their passive Obedience (not grumbling or mutining) may be
called Mutes, and these are the Grammatical methods of Letters and men's
Obedience; now from the consonants, liquids and mutes, with the conjunction of
Vowels (like Magistrates) they are formed into Words; and therein also God the
Son will be owned as the chief of Words; and when they come to a Talismanical
Operation, they may be ascribed to the Holy Ghost: In short, though the Letters
seem to have no visible virtue in them, yet this is evident, that by submitting
themselves (or men like Godfathers doing it for them) to that order which the
great Alpha has thought fit, mysteriously to direct, they are formed into
syllabical words, sentences and discourses, whereby God, Angels, and Men seem
to have a mutual correspondency; but when there is no obedience to that order,
there is nothing but misconstructions, nonsense and irregularities, pernicious
to themselves and others; And it is not only thus in Metals and Letters, which
(though accounted inanimate, as I said, yet are or will be forced to be
obedient and regulated by a King: but in sensitives, the Bees have a King, and
by their obedience to him, they enjoy the fruits of their Labors, and take
pleasure in returning each to its own Cell, or House, which is guarded with
Waxen walls, and filled with Honey sufficient for its own food, and an overplus
to supply others, and this proceeds from the happy product of Obedience, whilst
the stubborn, refractory, or lazy Droans are thrown out of their Hives, Houses,
and Homes, which they might otherwise have enjoyed, if they had not been
disobedient; I might instance more, but it is enough for me that I have shown
the advantages which Metals have by their Obedience to their King or Regulus.

RETORTS, See Utensils.

ROASTING of Oars or Metals, l. 1. c. 10. T. Groesten Roesten, A. Roast a Rore
usta, or the burning away the Dew or moisture of Metals.

RUBRIFIED, l. 2. c. 44. s. 2. T. Fast rotten, L. Rubrificatus, and I suppose
the Red Sea is called Mare Rubrum, from some red Mineral under it.

RUSSET cloth, T. Vnbercite, L. Pannus fusci coloris, A. Russet cloth, which
is Brown or between a white and black color; it may come from Rusticus,
because Countrymen seldom use dyed or undrest cloth, but only the natural
color of Sheeps Wool, when it is neither black nor white, but as a mixed
color; however this is recommended by Erckern for retaining of the Gritts or
Sands of Gold, so as they may not suddenly be washed away with other Rubbish.

SA S SA
SALT, l. 1. l. 2. l. 3. l. 4. and l. 5. T. Saltz, L. Sal, which may come from
salus, Health, according to the Verse, Non sapit esca probe, quae datur absque
sale: for indeed it gives not only to Humane bodies, but to Metals a vivacity
and sanitude; Minshaw deduceth it from salire, because it sparkles and leaps in
the fire: Now of Salts there are several sorts, (as may be read in Pliny, lib.
31. cap. 7. to the 11. and in other places and Authors) but most Chimists do
agree, that there are seven several sorts, which are influenc't from the seven
Planets, to attend the seven Metals; and these Erckern accordingly makes use
of, viz. Sal alkali (or sandiver, or Salt of Glass,) Sal Armoniaci, Sal Nitri,
Sal Vitrioli, Sal Petre, (and common Salt,) Sal Tartar (or Argol, of which I
have spoken,) and also Sal Gem, (which is the seventh Metallic Salt,) and is
produced from a Rocky Christalline stone, and of these he speaks* and of no
more, it being a subject of great extent, for I conceive there may be as many
sorts of Salts, extracted, as there are Terrestrial Creatures, for all things
do consist of Salt, Sulphur and Mercury (as I have said) but that which I aimed
at, was to give an account of our natural salts, from Springs in Cheshire and
Worcestershire, and from the Lands on the South sides of Devonshire and
Cornwall, which are full of Salts; for with those Sands, so mixed, they manure
their Lands to a great profit, and of which most other Coasts of England are
wanting, and have only the Seawater to make their Common-Salt, but I cannot
enlarge my observations upon any more words, because the Printer calls for what
I did write of a Metallic Dictionary, after I first proposed the Printing of
Erckern, but intending within the compass of a year to publish Georgius
Agricola, de re Metallica (being fully translated,) in English, and also to add
a Dictionary to it, I shall reserve my remaining Essays (if what I have done
hitherto, be approved) till then, and so I proceed in the Dictionary.

SANDS, l. 1. 6, 29, etc. T. and A. Sand, and so the Belgic, but the Italian,
the Spanish and Latin call it Arena, and the French, Sables, (which in
Heraldry signifies black,) also it is the name of the Furr of a little Beast,
called sabellus, and mustulus, sarmaticus, of a sandy color. However sand is
of various uses in Metallicks (as sand-Ovens, etc.) and consist of great
varieties in England, which may admit of curious speculations See Earth, Gold,
Mortar, Ovens, Petrification, Stones, Water.

SANDIVER, l. 2. c. 5. s. 1. etc. is the same with sal Alkali, which Pliny, (l.
31. c. 7.) calls the Tragasean salt, and is the same with sal Vitri, or salt of
Glass.

SCALES, are of a Balance for weighing Metals, whereof you will find two sorts
in Erckern, viz. Proof scales, l. 1. c. 34. s. 12. and inset scales, l. 1. c.
35. s. 2. T. Tung, schuell, L. Lanx, also for scales which come from Metals, T.
schuepen, being the same word which they use for the scales of Fish, signifying
the scurf or flaky matter taken off from Metals, sometimes by filing, but
chiefly by fires, l. 2. c. 26. s. 2. and c. 36. s. 2. See Fleaky and Flaky,
Shivery, etc.

SKIM or skum, l. 2. c. 47. s. 2. and l. 5. T. schaum, L. spuma, A. froth; but
in Metals it is, when they first rise into a drossy matter, yet not so thick as
dross till it is more condensed; but in other things it has only the name of
Froth, fit to be skimm'd or skumm'd off: See Dross. Scorias, Yeast.

SCORIAS, l. 2. c. 35. s. 2, etc. T. Trufer, L. scoria, A. drossy. See Dross,
Skim.

SEARCE, to searce, T. salter, L. cribrare, A. to searce, serce or sarce
(Skinner,) which is to express the operation of a seeve. See Seeve.

SEEVE, T. sib and sieb, L. cribrum, A. seive, seeve, or sive (Skinner.) See
Ratter.

SEPARATION, T. Absouderen (from souderin, to soder or to join, and so
absouderen, to disjoyn,) L. separatio, A. separation, and in the infinitive of
separo, it is separare, or segregare, from whence the T. call a separating
Oven, a sagar Offen, l. 3. c. 15. and so sagar work, which is a distinguishing
or dividing mixed Metals from each other, or other matters, adherent to the
Metals. See Quicksilver.

SHIVERY, or to shiver, l. 1. c. 34. s. 3. T. schivern or schiffern, L.
disrumpere, when Metal is loose, and easy to break into pieces; and sometimes
light Oar is called shiffer Oar.

SILVER, T. silber, from the Greek silbo, (Minshaw,) A silver; now as to the
enlarging the Etimology of this word, used by the T. and Old Saxons, and so
continued here; I must refer it to another time: only I observe that the French
and Italian do comply to the Latin word Argentum; but the Spaniard calls it
Plata, probably from the chief City and Province of that name, in America; or
from the great River Plata, which runs 2000 miles through the American Mines,
before it unloads its Wealth to the Spanish Navy (termed his Plate-Fleet) which
supplies himself and his Neighbors with its Treasures of Silver, Gold, etc. I
might also add many things about the fining and refining of their Silver,
before it comes unto that Fleet, but I refer that to Erckern's four first
Books, and N. N's Survey of America: for I know not the Author, but I find it
ingeniously writ. See Metals, Mines, etc.

SLACK, Slackstones, and Slicks, T. Schlack and Schlick, (often mentioned by
Erckern, l. 1, 2, 3 and 4) L. Laxus, and all signifying the loose parts of
Oars, or the Oars made into Metals, yet still do remain slack and shivery in
some part, and sometimes is taken for Dross, and that Dross calcined goes for
Calx, or slack'd Metal: See Calx, Calcine, Lime, Dross, Flakes.

SMELTING, l. 4. c. 14. l. 4. c. 1. etc. See Assaying.

SOAP, T. Seiffe. L. Sapo and Smegma; Pliny, l. 28. c. 12. gives an account of
its Virtues, and how it is made, but I question whether that be the Venetian
soap, mentioned by Erkern, l. 2. c. 47. s. 2, etc. or the Tin-sope, l. 4. c.
13. or the Gold soap, l. 5. c. 10. s. 8. of which I shall discourse at another
time.

SPAN. T. Spann. L. Spithma. See Measures.

SPAR. l. 3. c. 27. s. 6. T. Sparstein, a white stony Matter, that usually
embraces the Oars of Lead and Silver, called, L. Fluor; the word is also
applied to long pieces of Timber which serve for the Roofs of Houses, called
sparrs.

SPARKLE, vulgarly spartling Oars, T. Fuencklen-erkz, L. scintillare.

SPELTER, T. is the name of a course Oar containing little silver, l. 1. c. 2.
s. 11, and 15. of which there is a better sort of Oar called Bismuth or Wismet,
viz. when it runs bright and well in the fire. See Wismet.

SPIZE, or T. Speizy-Erks, or gross thick Oars, reckoned among course or
unclean Oars, and in Erckern (l. 1. c. 2. sect. 11.) fully described cap. 16.
for the melting of which, particular Ovens are made, See Ovens.

SPONGE, l. 2. c. 4. s. 1. T. Schwam, L. Spongia, but how it is produced from,
and used for metals, deserves a longer Discourse.

STEEL, l. 4. c. 20. and 27. T. Stahel, and Stahel steine, L. Chalybs, now this
and all other sorts of Iron, are by Pliny (l. 34. c. 14.) comprehended under
the word stricturae, and he farther says, That the goodness of Steel arises
from the goodness of the Iron-Mine, from whence it comes, with the assistance
of Waters, and various Quenchings of it in Waters or Oils, to which he adds*
That it is wonderful that Man's Blood should have such Virtue in it as to be
revenged on the Iron-blade that shed it, for being once imbrewed therein, it is
given ever after to rust, and canker. See Iron.

STONE. T. Steine. L. Lapis and Petra, which has hanc Petram in the Accusative
Case, for making such work in the World, by its affinity to hunc Petrum: But
not meddling with those Disputes, I might very well have enlarged my self upon
this Subject of Stones, especially of those which English Quarries do produce,
but I must also defer it.

SUBLIMATION, l. 1. c. 28. L. Sublimatio, which is a separation of thin and
fine Bodies from their gross and impure parts by means of a gradual Heat,
whereby there is a white powder called Sublimate made of Calcanthum,
Quicksilver, Vitriol and Sal Armoniack, which is used as a strong Corrosive
upon Metals, etc. See Calcination and Quicksilver,

SUDS, See Lees, Lixivium.

SULLAIN, Stubborn, that is, Oars or Metals that are not easily melted by fire,
as the soft flowing Metals or oars are.

SULPHUR, T. Schweffel, L. Sulphur, and lapis ardens; of which there are
various sorts, both natural and artificial, and many delightful Observations
may be made on them: See Brimstone and Bitumen.

SUN, T. Sonnen, L. Sol, from which Celestial Heat and also from the
Terrestrial Fires, many excellent things are produced in Metals; viz. in making
Aurum Potabile, as also a most sovereign Water from the rays of the Sun, by
reflection on Gold, which I may hereafter communicate.

TA T TI
TALCK, l. 1. c. 4. s. 2. T. A. Talck, L. Talcum, (by Pliny, l. 36. c. 22.
called Lapis specularis, of which he gives a large Account. It is a foreign
stone (for I do not hear of it in English Mines) of a glassy transparent
Nature; resisting both heat and cold; the red is mentioned by Erckern, but the
white more common.

TALLOW, l. 1. c. 17. s. 3. T. Vnschlet, L. Sevum or sebum, A. Suet or Tallow,
much used about Metals.

TARTAR, See Argol, Dregs, Feces.

TEST, T. Schirbin, L. Proludium (Holiock) but I had rather take it to be an
abreviation of Testis, as a Witness of the goodness of Metals, by trying and
proving them in little vessels, prepared by Assayers for that purpose: See
Crucibles and Utensils.

THORNELS, T. Deerleins, fully explained by Erckern what they are, L. 3. c. 22.
s. 3. In short, it is a term of Art, for that which remains of the roasted Oar,
unmelted: See Keinstocks.

TILE, l. 2. c. 41. s. 1. See Brick, Earth, etc.

TIMODE, l. 2. c. 2. s. 8. T. a name for Cloth made of Flax, or Hemp or Wool;
and so in A. called Linsy-woolsy; which is used sometimes for strainers of
Metals.

TIN, l. 3. c. 12. s. 6. T. Zin. L. Stannum, from whence we have the word
stanaries; by which Court the Tin-Mines in Cornwall are governed: now this
English Tin is esteemed to be the best in all other parts of the World; the
Spaniards and Italians calls it stagno de cornoij valla: the French de Corno
Vall en Angliterre. See Zwitter.

TIN-plates, are properly Iron plates covered with Leaves of Tin, and because
of the outward Color, called Tin-Plates.

TIN-sope, T. Zinseife. See Soap.

TONGS, See Vtensils.

TOUCH-needles See Needles.

TOUCH-stones See Stones.

TOWER, Trayes, Trevet. See Utensels.

TREMBLE, l. 2. c. 48. T. Beben, and Zuttem, L. Tremere: see Boiling, Seething,
Quivering, etc. All expressing a different motion in Metals, whilst Melting.

TROY- weight, See Measures and Weights.

TUB, l. 1. c. 11. s. 5. T. Fas, L. Vas, A. Vessel or Tub: and are of various
Forms used about Metals. See Utensils.

TUNNEL, l. 2. c. 16. s. 5. etc. T. Ein Tunnen, L. Tinella. A. do account it
the same with Tunnel or Funnel, and yet the T. L. and A. have different words,
viz. T. Tas, Trehter, and L. Vas and Infundibulum* A. Tunnel and Funnel. See
Utensils.

TURF, l. 4. c. 9. s 1. T. Hin Grasz-buch, L. Caespes, A. Sods, Turf, Peat,
which will admit further Discourses, viz. which of the three is best for
melting Metals, when other Fuel is scarce: See Utensils.

TUTTEE. l. 2. c. 39. s. 2. T. Tutian, L. Tutium, Pomphilix and spodium (which
Pliny does distinguish) but in A. they all go under the Name of Tuttee; which
is nothing else but the the volatile part of Brass, when, in burning it sticks
to the upper part of the Furnace, and the common sort of it is only Calamine
stone calcined, of great use for Medicines. See Calaminaris.

VA V VI
VAPOR, T. Duust, and Dampff, A. Vapor, which arises sometimes from heat,
and sometimes from cold causes. See Evaporate; Quicksilver and Sublime.

VERNISH, l. 2. c. 29. s. 4. T. Furnaess, L. Vernix; a compounded liquid
substance made with Oils and Gums, to make Metals or Metallic Vtensils look
slick, and resemble Glass, in which the Indians do excel.

VEIN, l. 2. c. 12. s. 1. T. Gengen, L. Vena, A. Vein, which Minshaw (I
suppose for sound-sake) writes vain, so making our veins but the efflux of
vanities, but those who thought the Terrestial World to be a great Animal, and
that the ebbing and flowing of Seas are but the systole and diastole of its
breath, might well believe that Metals and Minerals were the Veins of its body;
but of the nature of Metallic Veins, G. Agricola gives the most exact account.

VENETIAN Glass, l. 2. c. 16. s. 5. T. Venidischem-glassz. L. Vitrum
Venetianum, from the City Venice, where Erckern speaks that the best Glasses
for Metallic use are made, and probably so in his time; but now that Art in
Venice is thought to be equaled in England: See Glass.

VERDIGREASE, l. 2. c. 27. s. 1. T. Gruen-span, A. Spanish green, L. Aerugo, or
the Rust of Copper, by hanging plates of it over the fumes of Wine, from whence
a Crocus will arise, which we call Verdigrease; See Brass, Copper, and in
Colors, Blew, Green.

VIAL or Glass Bottle, l. 2. c. 30. s. 1. T. Roelblein*Fiale, and Angster,
according to the proportions, L. Phiala and Ampulla, A. Vial, to distinguish it
from the Musical Instrument called Violl.

VINEGAR, l. 1. c. 33. s. 1. T. Essig* L. Acetum, A. Vinegar, now the various
ways of making and using it, in Metallic experiments, may deserve a large
Discourse, as being one of the great secrets of Nature.

VITRIOL, l. 2. c. 33, etc. T. Schuster-schwaeitz, L. Vitriolum and Calcanthum
(which latter makes a black color.) Now of Vitriol there are many natural
sorts; but the three chief are 1* of a Sapphire color, (which comes from
Hungary and Cyprus:) 2. of an Emeral or green color (from Swethland and
Goslar,) often mentioned by Erckern; 3. a white (from Denmark, etc.) there is
also an Artificial Vitriol, made from Copper or Iron, or both, which is called
Roman Vitriol, or Lapis Coelestis, from its transcendent virtues, of which
(besides what Sir Kenelm Digby writes; I could add many from my own
experiments, but must refer them also to my intended Essays on Agricola; See
Brass, Copper, and in Colors, Black.

ULTRAMARINE, which the Italians call Azuro ultramarino, and is a Gem found in
Mines, sometimes called Lapis Luzuli (often mentioned by Erckern, l. 1. c. 2.
s. 11, etc.) and is of a pure blew, and of which (either considered as a Gem,
Oar or Stone) the Italians do make a precious Blew for Painters, sold beyond
the price of Gold.

VOLATILE, l. 1. c. 10. s. 9. T. Flutch-tigon, L. Volatilis (which signifies a
Bird, Holiock) according to Paracelsus it is used for any light matter, either
ascending from Metals, or other light substances. See Quicksilver.

UPBUCKING, l. 4. c. 14. signifies some extraordinary washings of Metals, and
so the word upboyling, is more than ordinary boiling.

URINE, l. 2. c. 8. s. 2, etc. T, Dertlarne and Bruntz, L. Vrina, from Vro,
because it is of a scalding and burning nature, of great use about Metals, it
is distilled and extracted, by a natural heat and internal Furnace in all
Creatures, by which natural extraction, we learn the method of all salous
productions. See Salt, etc.

UTENSILS, T. Brauchers, L. Vtensillia, A. Instruments, useful tools, or
household necessaries; but I must refer those which are mentioned by Erckern, to
the Contents of the Sculptures, placed immediately before his first Book,)
where you will find most of them recited, and referred to their pages, as also
in the second part to their Capitals; only there is an omission of the T: and
L. words for them, which will be rendered in Agricola.

WA W WA
WARDENS, l. 1. c. 1. T. Gwardeins, L. Guardianus, A. Guardian and Warden; I
intended an addition herein; to show that the Original of this word, as to an
Official duty, was first given to the Warden of Mines, and that all other
Offices which bear the Title of Wardens, were derivatives from thence, viz. of
the Mines, Mint, Stanneries, Church, Ports, Fleet, Colleges and Companies,
which I shall hereafter enlarge and place according to their Antiquities.

WARM, T. Warm and waerm, L. calidus, A. warm, that is to bring Metals into a
moderate warmth or heat.

WARTZ, l. 1. c. 35. T. Wartz, A. the Pin of the Beam; and these are little
pieces of Iron (like Excrescencies) filed out of the Center of the Balance on
each side of it, which are fitted for the two little holes of the Fork, whereby
the Balance is made capable to move, and from hence our English word Warts;
for excrescencies on the hands, or other parts, is used.

WASHING, l. 3. c. 2, etc. T. washein, L. Lavare, A. Lavations, and Washings;
Now you may have a full account of the manner of washing Metals in N. N. before
recited.

WASTE, T. Vermuesten, L. Vastare, A. to waste, consume or lessen the bulk of
Metals.

WATER, T. Wasser, L. Aqua, ex qua omnia (as Scaliger and other more ancient
Philosophers define it.) See Erckern in many parts; and this subject of Waters
might afford many pleasing Discourses of ours in England, and of such also as
are of great natural uses in Metallic Operations besides Artificial, yielding
curious varieties, especially from some Waters in those Countries which do not
consist of Mines, where the waters only by heat of the Sun, without their fire,
do yield a perfect sediment of Gold Sands.

WAVER, T. Schwenneken, L. vagilare, A. to wag to and fro: See Trembling.

WAX, T. Wachz, L. Cera, A. Wax. See Cement and Glutination.

WEATHER, l. 1. c. 34. s. 8. T. Wetter, L. Ether, this has great operation in
Metals, for as the Weather, so Metals are hard or more ductile, etc.

WEIGHT, l. 1. c. 36, etc. on which subject I did intend to enlarge; See
Measures, and Agricola de mensuris.

WELL, T. Brun, L. Puteus, A. Wells, for Springs of Water, and called Shafts
for Metallic Wells; See Mines.

WHEEL for waters, l. 4. c. 8. T. Wasser-Radst, L. Haustrum, used for the
raising of Waters out of Springs or Wells, with which the Miners wash and purge
the Oars from the earth or rubbish, and then the Miners may say well, the Oars
are well washed with Well-water, but of the description of the several sorts of
Wheels you will see more in Agricola

WHETSTONE, l. 1. c 34. s. 9. T. Wetzsteine, L. Cos, which is used to Metallic
Instruments, and to rub Metals.

WHITE, T. Wize and blank, L. Albus. See in Colors, White*

WINE, T. weine, L. Vinum, of various sorts and uses in Erckern. See Pliny.

WINE-stone, See Argol, Tartar.

WOOD, T. Wald and Haltz. L. Lignum, A. Wood, of several sorts for Metals, See
Charcoal Coals.

WOOL, T. Wolt, L. Lana, used about Metals.

WRINCLE, T. Runtzel, L. Ruga, that is, Metal not polite* but shriveled,
distorted, and full of contracted parts, unusual to its natural smoothness, as
in hands, faces, etc.

WYRE, T. Kufforn dratt, or Copper drawn, L. Aurum netum, i. e. Gold Wire, or
Gold drawn or spun out of Gold; and Filum Auricalcum, or a kind of Thread drawn
from Copper. A. Wyre, but I find no Monosyllable for it in any other Language.

XA X XE
XANTHUS, a precious stone, which Pliny l. 37. calls also Henui, of great
virtue to give success in Men's Employments, and consequently to Metallic
Works, Erckern does not mention this, but speaks of Hazel-Nuts, from which
Plant, the Virgula Divina (or Divine Rod) is made, by which Mines of Gold and
Silver are discovered; and one of these I have out of Germany, but I cannot yet
promise any effects by it: See Georgius Agricola, and my Notes on him.

XEROCOLLYRIUM, which is an unguent made of Copper, or Copper and Lapis
Calaminaris mixed, to apply to such Eyes as are prejudiced by Metallic
Operations, and this is helped also by Tuttee, washed in water, then made into
powder, and so into an Ointment, which is commonly called Vnguentum Tutium or
Oil of Tuttee.

XIPHION or Phasgenion, Pliny l. 25. the root of which Plant stamped and mixed
with Wine and Frankincense of equal Proportions, takes off all excrescent
Scales from Bones, and may have the like effect upon the scales of Metals.

YA Y YE
YARD, See Measures.

YELLOW, T. Galb and Geilb. See in Colors, Yellow.

YEST, T. Yest, (but Erckern calls it Hafin, l. 2. c. 1. s. 3.) A. Yest, also
Barm, God's*good, Rising, Beer-good, Foam, Froth: the Latins calls it Spuma:
and the froth, flores Cervisiae, or the Flower of Ale or Beer, and Cervisiae
they derive from Ceres, the Goddess of Corn, who first taught the sowing of
Wheat and Barley, and of Drinks from thence: so that in Norfolk where it is
called Gods-good it may well be alluded to the spirit of that Goddess's Good
which she infused into it, as a firmentation: but more properly to be
attributed to God himself, for communicating so great a Secret for the Benefit
of Mankind: for without Fermentation scarce any useful thing is perfectly
attained unto, and that Motion does operate not only in the terrestrial Orb,
both by Sea and Land, but on the Elements and celestial Orbs. See Litarge.

ZU Z ZU
ZUITTER, l. 4. c. 11, 12, and 13. explained to be Tin well beaten, and it is
not only thus with Metals which must be beaten, (that the Advantages may
redound to themselves in a more refined temper, and make them useful to the
World) but we see that Corn must be thrash'd, and ground for food: Grapes and
other fruits contused to make Liquors more acceptable, and man himself must
undergo Oppressions to make him happy, which I here mention as my Conclusion,
in Imitation of Erckern his Zeal for God's Glory, wherewith he concludes the
last page of his five Books; for according to the Maxim of the Rosy Crucians
(and best Chimists) Excellentissima dona absque Pietate vana: which may be
rendered thus, By true Piety the bravest Sciences are accomplished.

FINIS.

