THE PAMPHLET OF THE LIAR DISCOVERED, (Printed Anno 1678) IN A Brief Reply to a
Malicious Sheet spread in and about Hartford, etc.

CALLED The Voice of the Light, etc.

Ezekiel. 34.2, 3. Woe to the Shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves, should
not the Shepherds feed the flock?

The Heads thereof judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for hire,
and the Prophets thereof divine for Money, etc.

Micah 3.11. Printed Anno Domini 1678.

The voice of the Light, etc.
THe simple Reader at the first view may take the Pamphleter to be a Friend to,
and a Lover of the Light; but on more serious consideration will find him to be
as great an Enemy to the true Light, as ill deserving that maintenance he
pleads for, were it allowable to any in the Gospel times; which it is not.

I cannot compare his dealing with the Light, and his mangling of it to any
thing more pertinently, then to the Levites tearing and dividing his Concubine,
Judges 19.29, 30. and then sent her through all the Coasts or quarters of
Israel, as he has dispersed his abuse of the Light amongst his Neighbors or
quarters, from whence he seeks his gain, as the false Prophets did of Old. And
I doubt not but the serious Reader when ^^e considers his nonsense on the one
hand, and his violence to the Light on the other, he will say to his
Neighbors, as the Israelites did of the mangled Concubine, viz. And all that
saw it, said, there were no such things done, or seen, since the time that the
Children of Israel came up from the Land of Egypt, unto this day.

Consider the matter, consult, and give Sentence.

The whole Pamphlet comes under two heads; First, some seeming Arguments to
prove Tithes due to Ministers of the Gospel, Secondly, his gross abuse and
mis-application of the Light to prove the same.

I shall briefly as they fall reply to them both; as he begins, so he ends with
a lie, and throughout the whole Pamphlet thou will find it hard for him to
forgo his lies serviceable to his Interest, and designs. He begins,

Thus says the Light Woe unto you Quakers, for ye are an evil and perverse
Generation; a Generation that walk not in the Light, but love your own darkness
better then the Light; you honor the Light with your lips, but your hearts and
ways are far from it.

Now this is a blasphemous lie, for he immitates the style of the Holy
Scripture, and there is no such place of Scripture, and adds and unites his
own malicious words with the words of the Scripture, and Prints them in the
same Character with the words of Scripture, as if purposed (intended) to make
the Reader believe they are all the very words of the Scripture; what gross
abomination is this.

And in like manner he ends his Pamphlet, (viz.) So that thus says the Light,
Repent and return; O ye Quakers; for oppression and violence are in your hands,
and the ways of Peace, and of Justice you have not known; turn your eyes to the
Light, and your hearts to Righteousness, and judgment, that you may do
Justice, and love mercy, and walk as the children of the true Light, that
enlightneth every one that comes into the World, Amen, says the Light. Either
he speaks these words scoffingly, or seriously; if scoffingly, then he man
fests what a Minister of Satan (and not of Christ's) he is; if seriously, then
he manifests what a blasphemer he is, for to take that to himself which is one
of Gods glorious at tributes (for it is said, God is light) is blasphemy. Now
his beginning and ending words are not found written in Scripture, and no body
I suppose takes this Pamphleter for a Prophet, and that he has things
immediately revealed to him from God, for himself (with the rest of his
Brethren) I question not, believes immediate revelation to be ceased. Now then
how can this Pamphleter say at the beginning of his Pamphlet, and also at the
end of the same, Thus says the Light, and quit himself from lying, and
blasphemy: it becomes him to consider.

Thus Reader from his beginning and ending thou may guess what stuff thou art
like to meet withal in the middle. For the Author himself thou may take to be
a Mendicant -- if thou will, because he lays so much stress upon the old
Crutches, Petitio principii, for it is the best bottom too he has to stand
upon (viz.) to take that for granted which is denied, that so he may deceive
his Reader with less suspicion, and this generally is the foundation of the
whole sheet; but now I come to his Arguments to prove the right of Tithes under
the Gospel.

His first Argument is taken from the National Laws, which says he, preserves
what we have, and makes it ours, and that the same Laws that made the ninth
part of increase yours, give the tenth to the Minister, or Rector, etc.

Ans. Here he takes for granted which is denied, for the Laws do not make any
man a right that had none before, it only preserves or conserves to every man
his right. So that this Argument serves only to prove himself ignorant both of
the Law of God, and of the National Law also; for all those Laws that preserve
meum and tuum, men's rights and properties, do imply the right of the whole ten
parts to be in the owner thereof, therefore he must give or set out the tenth
part as his voluntary act, else the Minister or Rector by Law cannot take it;
so that the very National Law supposes the right of property to be in the owner
or occupier of the Land, and it is in his power to give the Minister or Rector
(as he speaks) much or little, or not at all; for if he Plow he may give much,
if he Grase then he may give little; or if he let it lie, lag or fallow, or
turn it into a Warren or Park of wild Beasts, then nothing at all. Now if the
Pamphleter was not a scoffer at the Light, he might see how the Law of the
Nation has not fixed the right of property to be in the Minister or Rector as
aforesaid. Neither can he sue in right of property by a common Writ (quare
clausum fregit,) which supposes every man's property to be enclosed by the Law,
though it lies in the common field, but must sue upon the Statute of treble
damages; which also says Tithes are to be sued for in the Ecclesiastical
Courts.

The Light (says, the Pamphleter) says thou shall uot steal, etc. those are
Thieves and Robbers that pretend to a Right and Title which the Law disowns,
for the Law owns no Title, which is not derived either by Descent, Gift, or
Purchase: by Descent the Minister or Rector, (so called) cannot legally claim
them, for that cannot descend to another which is not [in rerum natura] as the
increase and renewing of my land by my labor, is not; and therefore that cannot
descend to another which never was in being it self; and if I Plow not, no Corn
will grow, and I Mow not if no Hay is made; and by Gift he can have no Title,
because Nemo dat quod non habet, i. e. no man can give that which was never his
to bestow: as the labor of the Child yet unborn: And by Purchase he cannot
claim it, for the same reasons also; and if a Father should Sell and inslave
his Child without his Child's privity or consent, the Law of England disowns
such slavery: And therefore when England turned Christian, it disowned all
those Laws and Customs and Villinages that were before. And if the Whites
should turn Blacks, and Sell their Children for bondslaves, yet it is not
unlawful for such Children to free themselves, when they come to a good
understanding. Tithe is no property (as has been said) until by my own Act I
set it out, for it comes not by the Land, nor challenge the tenth of the Rent,
nor tenth Acre, bu the tenth of the increase, renewing and growing in, and upon
the Premises, etc. Thus its manifest by the true Light (which the Priests
scorn) that the Minister or Rector so called has no Right or Title by Law,
without my free Gift or Consent. But says the Pamphleter the Seller abates of
his Rates, on consideration that the Lands are Tythable, etc.

Ans. Those that buy Lands the cheaper in times of trouble when great Taxations
are laid upon them, that hinders not, but they may, and ought to enjoy them
free, when they come to understand that such Taxations are unjustly or
wrongfully laid upon their Land.

The Light, says the Pamphleter, says do unto others as you would that they
should do unto you, etc.

The Quakers say so too, and affirm the Pamphleter to be that unprofitable
Servant, or Rector that is guilty of the breach of this commandment who
requires Tithes, where he has done no Service, nor given any Spiritual thing,
and would reap where he has not sown, and demands dues of them that never
reaped any Spiritual benefit by him, and yet claims it by the Law of the
Nation, which says quite the contrary (viz.) Dr. and Student [an approved Law
Book] Cap. 4. p. 7.8 The Laws of Princes, the Commandments of Prelates, the
Statutes of Commonwealths nor yet the ordinances of the Church, is not
righteous, nor obligatory, except it be consonant to the Law of God, and by
such Law of man as is consonant to the Law of God, it appears who has right
to Lands and Goods, and who has not; for whatever a man has by such Laws of
the Nation, he has righteously: and whatsoever a man has against such Laws,
is unrighteously had.

Now the Divine right of Tithes being long since quitted, and not insisted on
by the Pamphleter himself, (as I have heard) has been denied openly in
Westminster Hall; and now I know not how he can get them, except like the Son
of Belial mentioned 1 Samuel 2.16. who said, If thou will not give it me, I will
take it by force.

And for his Plea of Usage and Cust me, etc.

Ans. All Customs and Usages are either good, or bid; now good they cannot be,
because they are both against the Law of God, and the old Laws of the Land, as
is proved before, bid then must they needs be; and [mala cousuetudo abolenda]
says the Lord Cook i. e. bad Custom; ought to be abolished.

The Light says the Pamphleter, tells you that you should give unto Caesar the
things that are Cesars, etc.

Ans. The Pamphleter is so concerned with getting his Tithes, that he forgets;
or like SATAN purposely omits part of the Text, (viz.) to give to God the
things that are Gods; but it seems if he can get Caesar on his side, he cares
not though God be against him, and if he can get the [thing] of Tithes, he
matters not what becomes of the things of God; if he has but the Fleece he
cares not what becomes of the Sheep. But the Quakers light (as he calls it)
teaches them first to fear God, and then they honor the King. First, to give
God the things that are Gods, and then to give Caesar the things that are
Cesars, and when both those are done, no Tithes belong to him as Minister or
Rector.

The rest of his sheet is stuffed with such nonsense as this; sometimes
charging the Light with what it never said, and sometimes the Quakers, with
what they never did, and deals with both as wicked Ahab dealt with honest
Micaiah, (viz.) if possible he could have forced him, to speak what he would
have him to say. I find him complaining of his honest Neighbors; You, says
he, remove my Landmark; You, says he, withold my Dues, etc. just like
Athaliah against Joash, Treason, Treason, when the will of the Lord was
Executing upon her.

Let us now for poor peoples sake consider, whether the Quakers in this day be
not justified by many of the ancient Martyrs in their days, whobare the like
Testimony against Tithes, as may be seen at large in the Book of Martyrs, (viz.)

John Wickliffe in 17. Article charged against him in these words, (viz.) That
Tithes are pure Alms, and that the Parishioners may for offense of their
Curates, detain and keep them back, and bestow them upon others at their own
wills and pleasures.

William Swinderbey says, that no Priest ought to Sell, by Bargain and
Covenant, his Ghostly travel, ne Prayer, ne Gods Word, etc. nor anyworldly men's
reward, to ask or take for these, or for any of these, etc.

Walter Brute in these words, that Tithes are mere Alms, and in case that
Curates shall be ill, that they shall be lawfully bestowed upon others by the
temporal owners, and that a Priest receiving by bargain any thing of yearly
annuity, is in so doing a Schismatic, etc.

William Thorpe says thus, After Christ's Ascension, and when the Apostles had
received the Holy Ghost; they Traveled with their hands to get their
livelihood, when they might thus do for busy Preaching; therefore by the
example of himself, St. Paul teaches all the Priests of Christ to Travel with
their hands, when for busy teaching of the People they might thus do; whose
Priesthood God accepts now, and will do unto the worlds end: and says in the
year 1211. Pope Gregory the Tenth, Ordained new Tithes, first to be given to
Priests in the new Law; but St. Paul whose example all Priests of God ought to
follow, etc. who wrought with his hands to get his living, and it were good
Counsel if all Priests took good heed to this Heavenly learning of St. Paul,
following him here in willful Poverty, nothing charging the People for their
bodily livelihood, etc. for certain in whatsoever Dignity or Order that any
Priest is in, if he conform him not to follow Christ and his Apostles in
willful poverty, and in other Heavenly Virtues, etc. though such a one be named
a Priest, yet he is no more but a Priest in Name, etc. Augustine, Gregory,
Chrisostom, and Lincoln approves of the same, with much more to the same
effect; which would be too large to Transcribe: yet he further says, that
Tithes were given in the Old Law to the Levites, and to the Priests that came
of the Lineage of Levi; but our Priests came not of the Lineage of Levi, but of
the Lineage of Judah, to which Judah no Tithes were promised to be given, and
therefore Paul says, since the Priesthood is changed from the generation of
Levi to the generation of Judah, it is necessary that changing also be made of
the Law; so that Priests live now without Tithes, and other Duties that they
claim, following Christ and his Apostles in willful poverty, as they have given
them example. For since Christ lived all the time of his preaching by pure Alms
of the People, and by example of him his Apostles lived in the same wise, or
else by their own labor as abovesaid. I find in Eusebius lib. the 5th cap.
16. mentioning Apollonius against Montanus saying thus, That Montanus fed the
maintainers of his Doctrine with Sums of Money, and great hire to Preach, which
was forbidden in the holy Scripture, that the Prophets should take hire, Christ
commanded his Disciples to take no man's Gold, or Silver, or Apparel, or two
Coats; and by their fruits you shall know them; and further says, that if hire
be taken by a Prophet, he is no longer a Prophet; and Matthew. 7.15, 16. Christ
bids beware of false Prophets, etc. and says, by their fruits you shall know
them which come unto you in Sheeps-cloathing, but inwardly they are ravening
Wolves, tearing the poor Sheeps Fleece a pieces to cloth themselves: and they
are also compared to Thorns and Thistles, rending and scattering their poor
Neighbors, etc. Matthew. 10.8. Christ says to the true Prophets and Ministers,
freely ye have received, freely give, but the false take maintenance by force,
so by their fruits you may know them, and Luke 2.46, 47. several marks more are
set down by which they may be known; as going in long Robes, loving Salutation
in the Marketplace, highest Seats in the Assemblies, and chief Rooms at
Feasts, and devour Widows Houses, (which says the Margent) by mentioning, is
the goods and substance; and thus by their fruits you may know them says
Christ.

Woe be to the Pastors that destroy and scatter the Sheep of my Pasture says
the Lord, Jer. 23.1. Therefore thus says the Lord God of Israel against the
Pastors that feed my People. Ye have scattered my flock and driven them away,
ver. 2. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran: I have not spoken to
them, yet they Prophesied, ver. 21. Behold I am against them that Prophecy
false Dreams, says the Lord, and do cause my People to err by their lies, and
by their lightness, yet I sent them not, nor commanded them: therefore they
shall not profit this People at all says the Lord, ver. 32. Whose possessors
slay them and hold themselves not guilty: and they that sell them, say, Blessed
be the Lord, for I am rich: and their own Shepherds pity them not, Zecha. 11.5.
The Stone which the builders rejested, the same is become the head of the
corner; this is the Lords doing, etc. Matthew. 21.42. And whosoever shall fall on
this Stone, shall be broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind
him to powder.

These who desire to know why we refuse to pay Tithes, may be more largely
satisfied in these Books of Antony Pearson of Tithes.

Francis Howgill, the Great case of Tithes, and Maintenance once more revived.

T. R. William Gibson Tithes ended by Christ, these were never Answered yet
that we hear of.

JAMES PETERSON.

FINIS.

