WE whose Names are subscribed, do Testify, That we have often seen Mr. Thomas
Spatchet in many strange and violent Fitts, some of which disabled him for
joining with others in Religious Exercises, as Praying, Preaching, etc.
concluded to be by Witchcraft: And many others in these Parts can testify the
same: Witness our Hands May the 4th. 1693.

Richard Whincop. Daniel Sheppard. John Fell.

A Faithful Narrative OF THE Wonderful and Extraordinary FITS WHICH Mr. Tho.
Spatchet (Late of Dunwich and Cookly) was under by WITCHCRAFT: OR, A Mysterious
Providence in his even Unparalled Fits. With an Account of his first Falling
into, Behavior under, and (in part) deliverance out of them. Wherein are
several Remarkable Instances of the Gracious Effects of Fervent Prayer. The
whole drawn up and written by SAMVEL PETTO, Minister of the Gospel at Sudbury
in Suffolk, who was an Eyewitness of a great part. With a Necessary Preface.

Job 2.6. And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold he is in thy hand; but save his
Life.

LONDON, Printed for John Harris at the Harrow in the Poultrey. 1693. Price 6 d.

Licensed July 17. 1693. Edward Cook

ADVERTISEMENT.
1. THE Revelation Vnvail'd: Or an Essay toward the Discovering, 1. When many
Scripture Prophecies had their Accomplishment, and turned into History. 2. What
are now Fulfilling. 3. What rest ^till to be Fulfilled, with a guess at the
Time of them. With an Appendix, proving that Pagan Rome, was not Babylon, Rev.
17. And that the Jews shall be Converted. By Mr. Sam^el Pet^o, of Sudbury in
Suffo^k. Price One shilling six pence.

2. The Life and Death of the Late Ancient and Eminent Divine, Mr. Hanserd
K^ollys, who Died in the 93d Year of his Age. Written with his own Hand to the
Year 1672. and continued in general, in an Epistle: By Mr. William Kiffien. To
which is added, His last Leg^cy to the Church. Price stitched Six pence.

3. A Compendious History of the* first Inventers and Instituters of the most
Famous Arts, Mysteries, Laws, Customs, and Manners in the whole World: Together
with many other Rarities and Remarkable things, never before made Public. To
which are added, several Curious Inventions* peculiarly attributed to England
and English men. The whole Work Alphabetically digested: Being very helpful to
the Readers of History. Price One shilling.

4. A Collection of Modern Relations of Matter of Fact, concerning Witches and
Witchcraft upon the ^ersons of People. To which is prefixed a Meditation
concerning the Mercy of God, in preserving us from the Malice and Power of Evil
Angels. Written by the Late Lord Chief Justice Hale, upon occasion of a Trial
of several Witches before him. Part I. Price One Shilling.

5. Necessary Questions concerning Witches and Witchcraft briefly Answered. By
the same Author. Price One shilling.

All Printed for John Harris, at the Harrow in the Poultrey.

A Preface to the Christian Reader.
THE fol^owing Narrative and Letter concerning the Case of Mr. Spatchet, to the
Postscript I did draw up many Years ago when the matters were fresh in Memory.
I my Self was an Eyewitness of many of his Fits, and there are others (not a
few) yet alive about Walpoole and Cookly who can attest them; So as the matter
of Fact has c^nvi^cing Evidences, and is undeniable in the Substance of it.

There are Atheistical and Irreligious Pers^ns in this Age, which would
persuade us that all such matters are Cheats, or come only from a Natural Cause.

If some be Cheats and Counterfeits, must all be so? Surely not. It is not
imaginable that this should be a Cheat, for the dispensation was so Stupendous
and Terrible, that no Man would Voluntarily have been biassed by Interest; or
hired into such a Condition for such a number of Years whatever Worldly
advantage could be laid before him.

If some strange Convulsive Motions may be from a Natural Cause, yea even in
this Person in part, yet it is Irrational to think that the Principal or chief
of his unusual Fits should be reducible thereunto. Men might more probably say,
that the sore Boils which Job was smitten with were from a Natural distemper,
and not from Satan, Job 2.7.

Many of these Motions were beyond Mr. Spatchets skill (as his acting the part
of a Drummer, a Musician) others were apparently involuntary, even against his
own Life, others not only Morally, but Naturally impossible (without Super
added strength) as far transcending his Natural power; which together with the
speedy recovery (in a quarter or half an hour after the removal of the Fits)
from such Tormenting Wracking Pains by Violent Distorting of Limbs,
sufficiently argue its not proceeding merely from a Natural bodily distemper.

To this I might add what I my self and my Friend Mr. William Bidbank (a
Minister) did observe in another Famous Case at Lowstoft; where diverse persons
(not only Dissenters but also others) had Torturing Fits, and raised or Vomited
many Pins, all Wrankled and bent, so as I could not observe two Pins of th^se
which I saw that were bent in the same manner.

Can any imagine that these Pins were from a Natural Cause, engendered in their
Bodies and thus bent? and when diverse of them had Fit^s together at the same
time, if one recovered and did but go and lay a hand upon the others, they
would immediately recover, and be well again Surely these things may be enough
to evince that these things were praternatural.

And those Lowstoft Witches had their Trial before that Renowed, Cautious and
Judicious Judge Hale, were found guilty and Executed, and afflicted persons
freed, we hope as an answer of Prayer Solemnly made there on the account of the
persons before so sorely Visited.

It remains then that if those things were not merely from a Natural Cause,
then they must be Diabolical. And in the present instance of Mr. Spatchet, it
is unquestionabl^, it b^ing confessed by the Witch her self.

I would therefore Caution such as are Witch-Advocates to take heed of being
incredulous, Mockers and Deriders at such things, lost the Lord leave them to
find by sad Experience that there are such wicked Creatures in the World.

If any should stumble at it, that such a good man as Mr. Spatcher, should
suffer by the hands of Witches, such Children of the Devil.

Let them know, that God, (for Wise ends) permitted Satan sorely to afflict his
Servant Job; a man who had a Testimony from the mouth of God himself, Job 1.8
and 2.3. That he was an upright man, one than feared God, and escheweth evil;
^ea he had a high Encomium, that there was none like him upon the Earth. And if
a Godly man may so deeply suffer by the hand of Witches, why may not Satan be
permitted to take the shape of a graci^us man? may he not do that as well as
trasnform himself into an ^ngel of light? This is the Comfort of Believers,
that God does limit Satan and set bounds to him, that he can hurt them no
farther than God will permit him. As to Mr. Spatchets being afflicted after the
Death of the Witch; I would answer, he had abatements soon after, and I have
been informed that the Witch said before her death, that although ^he dyed, yet
he would not be free, for others had a hand in his trouble, as well as she.

I have been importuned by a Person of Quality and diverse others, to permit
this Tragical Story to be published, as being seasonable in this juncture of
t^me. I shall be glad if it may be blessed to the awakening of some to seek a
freedom from the Dominion of Satan, over their Souls, by observing how he
exe^cieth his Cruelty upon the Bodies of Men, and also if it may be rendered
useful toward exciting us to admire God in Preservation, from such Bodily
Sufferings by his Instruments, and for Glorious Victories over his temptations
by Jesus Christ; which that it may be shall be the Prayer of him; Who is

Thine to Serve thee in the Gospel, SAM. PETTO.
June 29. 1693.
A Letter to a Friend.
SIR,
YOU are very desirous to obtain a faithful Narrative ( a Capite ad Calcem) of
these wonderful and almost unparalled Fits wherewith Mr. Thomas Spatchet was
afflicted for some years: I here present it to your view, as a matter that
deserves to be had in remembrance in Ages to come.

I have lived some Miles distant from the place of his abode; but yet co^ing
often thereabouts, I had the advantage to be an Eyewitness of a great part of
what you find in this Story, and more I had from his own mouth; for he was
always free to declare how it wa^ with him before many Witnesses.

The various passages seemed to me so remarkable, as from time to time I could
not but commit them writing, for a memorial of them; and I suppose some others
have done the like, yea many (if they have not yet) might have done it; for
this was no private business, but commonly known in this Country.

I submit it to your Judgment, whether all proceeded from a Natural Cause, or a
Diabolical.

He still finds those shatterings in his head (within mentioned) in Religious
Duties, at some times, especially if he travelleth beyond his strength.

I shall add no more but this, that the wording of it is not all his, but
partly mine, and therefore I must crave excuse for failures therein. I have
expressed as clearly as I could those wonderful Works of God, and I am glad I
can tell you, that he ha^h made the latter end, letter than the beginning.

Yours, Samuel P^t^o.

A Mysterious Providence.
Chap. I. Of the Lineage, Birth, and former place of abode of Mr. Thomas
Spatchet, together with some remark^ble Providence he met with, in Infancy,
and afterward.
THE purpose and design of this Undertaking is, to give a faithful Narrative
and true Relation, of the extraordinary, and almost unparalled bodily
Afflictions, which (of late years) an Eminent Servant of Christ has been
exercised with, by a variety of violent and torturing Fits, the History whereof
may be admirably useful for the striking conviction and astonishment into the
hearts of Sinners, and especially such who are of an Atheistical Spirit, hardly
persuaded that there is either a God or a Devil, here they may read of both;
and if this be done to the green Tree, what will be done to the dry? It may
also serve for the Encouragement and Consolation of True Christians, who may be
exercised in a like condition, and may labor under doubtings and despondency
of spirit upon that account, crying o^t* No sorrow like our sorrow; here they
may see that one dear to the Lord has been in a like case or condition: And
this also may conduce to the Exaltation to the glorious Name of God, by
magnifying his work, in declaring the remarkable Protections, and wonderful
Salvations, which have been vouchsafed to him.

But it may not be amiss to look back and touch upon the foregoing part of his
Life.

His Name is Mr. Thomas Spatchet; he was born ^^out the midst of the Month of
January 1614 and has been Bailiff twice in that ancient Maritime Town of
Dunwich in the Country of Suffolk; his Fathers Name was Mr. James Spatchet, his
Grandfathers Name was Mr. Robert Spatchet of Dunwich, who was a very prudent
man, and conversed much with Sir Edward Coke, late Lord Chief Justice.

The aforesaid Mr. Thomas Spatchet is one, whom the special Providence of God
has watched over for good, even from his Childhood.

He had almost a miraculous preservation in his very Infancy; for, being then
carried by a Servant carelessly upon her shoulders, in a Yard set with Stone;
she stumbling, he fell over her head, and pitched his head upon a Stone,
whereby his Skull was broken, and the wound so deep and dangerous, that the
mark is still apparent; there is a great seam to be seen on the left side of
his Head, down toward the outside of his Eye, and the upper part of it turns
like a square about the midst of the sore-part of his Head; it seems to be
two Inches or more both ways. But here the Lord had given his Angels such a
charge concerning him, that although he dashed his head against a stone, yet he
was preserved and kept from this threatened death, and delivered, that he might
declare the mighty Works of God.

Afterward^ when he was between 21, and 22 years of Age; being in a married
state, going to a Well (in the same Yard where he had the aforementioned fall)
upon occasion to draw Water; the Pully and Bucket falling, he fell with them
headlong into the bottom of the Well, which was about 21 yards deep; the Water
therein was at that time about knee deep; but the All-wise God so directed his
fall, that he missed the bucket, the fatt* and great s^ones at the bottom
(which were afterward seen there) else his brains had been dashed out; the Lord
brought him out of this horrible Pit, and since has pitched his Soul upon the
Rock of Ages.

A Man going down, found him standing on his legs, and fetched him up; but when
he came to the Air, he grew very ill, and kept his Bed many days after this his
retirement into the Chambers of Death; he having been but a little while in the
bowels of the Earth (that whilst he was alive he might have a foretast of the
Grave) he hardly knew how to live in the common Air any longer; but the Lord
had intendments to make his Power known in his restoration; he had further work
for him to do, and more for him to suffer; and therefore although the dreadful
effects of this fall began now to show themselves in a Vrin red like blood, and
many other ^istempers of body, such as at first he could not turn himself in
his bed, yet a Vein being opened, and other means used, with a Divine blessing
thereupon, he so far recovered within the space of a month, as he was able to
go a little about the house* and so by degrees returned to a good measure of
health again.

It is not to be passed in silence, what mercy was mixed with this sad
dispensation, that in this dangerous fall not one of his bones was broken; that
hand that held the Rope lost some flesh, almost to the bone, and he had a hole
in his wrest, a range on the forehead, and the skin beaten off his ankles, no
other hurt outwardly appearing either in head or elsewhere, the skin not so
much as broken, but as aforesaid.

It also deserves observation that a Woman in the same Town falling into a
Well, was taken up alive, but soon died.

Moses in his Boat of Bulru^hes being laid by the Rivers brink, was preserved,
Exodus 2.3. and this is upon Record for after Ages; and surely the preservation
of this Man, in falling into the Waters, with many Instruments of ^eath
attending him, deserves to be had in everlasting remembrance.

Chap. II. Of his Fits, their beginning and continuance for some time;
Benumming, Shaking, Skipping.
IT pleased the Lord after walking toward him in such a variety of merciful
Providence, at last by his Spirit to bring him into a saving acquaintance with
himself in his Son Jesus Christ, through the exceeding great and precious
Promises of the Gospel; with what brightness the Grace of Christ has shined
forth in his conversation, to the refreshing the bowels of other Christians, is
well known to those who have had the advantage to converse with him. For many
years such a Gospel-conversation has been found with him, as (though he has
infirmities common to all men and Christians, yet) men who have made the
strictest observation thereof, and have pryed into it with the most curious
Eye, could not descry any Apostasy or Backsliding; his steps have not visibly
declined from the ways of God to this day; yet the Lord (whose ways are in the
deep, which does great things and unsearchable, mavelous things without
number Job 5.9.) has in those latter years showed him great and sore troubles,
led him in unwonted paths, which few have known, tried him with a variety of
strange* if not unpresidented violent Fits, the rise, progress, and end whereof
so far as can be remembered) will be rehearsed in these following lines.

About the m^nth of March 1660. as he was speaking to some, he found a mutation
or alteration in his head, causing such a failure either in the use of his
understanding, memory or senses (call it what you will) as put him to a stand;
he was at a loss, knew not how to go on in speaking what he intended to his
friends, but quickly recovered again; and not long after (the same day) was at
the same loss again, finding a grinding pain round about the crown of his head,
near half way downward (as he has done ever since upon such occasions) it was
not violent, but moderate and easy to be born; this to his head has been
answerable to the jarring of the elbow by a blow; much differing always from
the ordinary pain of the head, without belching.

Here was the ri^e of all the ensuing Tribulations; from so small a beginning,
has sprung all those subsequent troubles which have been asto^ishing to the
beholders.

I might have noted (once for all) that since, the aforesaid pain ha^h
sometimes lasted two or three hours after he has been well recovered out of
those Fits.

But to proceed, the next day after he was first taken (and since) he was
subject to the same distemper, to be at a loss upon speaking; yet went up and
down that week, and when he did set about Religious duties, as Prayer, he could
go but a little way without faultring and failing therein.

The same spring, he seemed to have inward nippings and smitings in his head,
which caused a great amazement and astonishment in him, and has continued in
some degree long since, at times; and has hindered a free and uninterrupted
exercise of his understanding, or rather the use of speech; for it was not so
much a failing in perception or apprehension of things, as inability for
expression, he knew what he would say, and what others said or did, but could
not utter it: he was disabled for proceeding at present in what he would say;
so that it seems to be rather a failing of speech than of understanding.

Afterward it brake forth into Fits of two sorts or kinds.

1. Benumming him, that he could neither stir hand nor foot, nor rise from the
seat he sat on, and by and by did fly up; his hands would hang down, he not
being able to lift them u^; his eyes shut, not able to open them; no breath
sometimes perceived to be moving a great while together, yet then knew what
others said; his teeth fast set, that it was difficult (if any thing were put
into his mouth) to get the spoon either in or out; his nether chap sometimes
would fall, as when a man is in a swound, and then immediately it would come
outward: Sometimes these benumming Fits would continue two or three hours; Then,

2. A moderate shaking followed (when it came outward) like a Palsy; and then
it would proceed to a shaking with violence, first his head, his Body then
standing still; then from the Neck to the Middle, hi^ Head that time standing
still, after this from the Middle downward shaking in great Violence, and in
that ^ime his head and other upper parts would stand still; after this one Leg
would shake and no other part, and then his whole Body, Chair and all in
Violent Motion.

Before the shaking fits came, his hands would be lifted up, and cast down upon
his knees, beating them for some time.

Afterward his legs and feet would move with much agility and harmony, in
fits striking upon the ground as if in ringing of Bells, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. without
Changes, a great while together; sometimes as if in playing in Music, diverse
Musical Tunes, and keeping orderly stops, a^though he never was acquainted with
the ^rt of Music, cannot dis^inguish the Tunes if they be played on Music
Instruments; yet such as were with him in his Fitts, and knew the Tunes, were
able by their hearing the beating of his Feet to discern his acting the part
of a Musician therein: His Feet would strike 7 or 8 times or oftener, one Foot
first and than the other answering imediately after, except where the Tune
required to have it otherwise, and in ringing, his Feet every st^oak had a
several place of the ground, in its setting down.

Also he has by the beating of his Feet in his Fits, acted the part of a
Drummer, Sounding a Call, a March, a Retreat, etc. Yet he never did Drum, nor
does he know (if he hears a Drum beat) how to distinguish those each from
other.

After this, his whole Body has been of ten in impetuous motion, his Hands and
Feet flying about with great swif^^ess, with such a variety of Motion as is
unexpressible, till he has sometimes fallen out of his Chair, and if he has
so fallen, although in the height of the Fit, yet it has presently left him.

At first he had but two or three of these fits in a day* then they came to
Four in a day constantly, and so continued week by week, and month by month,
and when Four in a day, than each of them were two Hours in a day, and
sometimes he had half an hours respite between, at other times a quarter of an
hour, and it may be one day in a Month or Five weeks without a Fit.

Then they altered from 4 to 5 in a day, and than to 6 or 7 or 8, and so on to
20 or more in a day, but then came to be shorter when more in number, yet in
the same manner for actions as aforesaid. After he coming to be tired out with
being in the Chair, he did lie down on a Bed, and rising to come off his Bed,
both legs would go sidewise or not at all, and then his whole Body raised up
two Foot, Capering about in the Chamber, till he fell down, and then the fit
left him.

Also he had Skipping or Iumping Fits, wherein sometimes his Feet being close
together his whole Body has been lifted up, and his Feet from the ground (as
has been said) two Foot or more, sometimes right up and down often at other
times has been lifted up and both his legs carried sidewise at a great
distance as if he had jumped, and then back again as far sidewise, thus a great
while together till his strength has failed, and Spirits have been spent, all
this time bearing himself upon a strong staff; If he has been beaten against a
Wall, or after his strength has failed, if a Chair has been set behind him
and he helped into it, then he has rested there until he has been a little
revived.

Some Fits did begin first benumming him, than shaking, than skiping, and some
of these have lasted 4 some 5, 6 or 7 hours from the beginning to the end, and
as some part has been playing or stamping, so the end has been with great
Violence.

Thus his Fits continued many Months.

In all these things there was occasion to Sing of Mercy and Judgment.

Here is Judgment, not only upon the account of the Terribleness of the Fits
themselves which rendered him an Object of Pity and Compassion, to all who were
Spectators of him therein, whose hearts were not harder than Flint, but also by
an aggravation of this dispensation through a disablement for Religious
exercises which did attend it. For the first year he had some liberty to wait
upon God in Prayer at some times, and could hear the word Preached, afterward
could hear but one part of the day, then could hear the Prayer and part of the
Sermon, and so by degrees could not hear at all.

Within a year and half or thereabout (after his being first taken with the
Fits) he lost his liberty for any such act of Worship; he could not attend upon
God in any Religious Service^, so much as a quarter of an hour without falling
into Benumming, Shaking, and other violent Fits; He could not^ Pray or join
with others in Prayer, not exercise himself about the word of God, or hear
others Preach the word, not crave a Blessing himself before eating his Meat or
give thanks after it, nor be present when others acted therein ^unless they
were very Brief) but presently he was cast into those aforementioned Torturing
Fits thereby.

This was such a dark dispensation, as put the Wisest men and those of greatest
experience, and understanding in the ways of God to a stand, they were at a
loss how to interpret these dealings of God with him; that a man whose heart
was so deeply engaged for God and his Services, should now be incapable of
rising up thereunto, or be hindered, not by a decree of Man, but by the
Providence of God. That he who had been so many years under a new Birth yet
should now be thus disabled for crying unto God, that he who had so much of the
Spirit of adoption as a Spirit of Prayer, should now be disabled for crying
Abba, to his Heavenly Father; this was such a Mysterious Providence, so cross
to his ordinary proceeding, as it was am^zing to the beholders of it.

But here was Mercy still, in that when no such Spiritual breathings might be
discerned by slanders by, yet his Pulse was beating Heavenward, in inward
workings and groanings of Spirit after God, and in that sedate quiet and
cheerful frame of Spirit, that was found with him under this stupendous
dispensation, which manifested it self, when he had any intermission, that it
may be said of him as of Job of old, Job, 1. v. 22. So in all this he sinned
not, nor charged God foolishly. I might here give some account of his
Experience, but I shall defer that a little longer.

There was Mercy not only in sustaining his Soul, but his body also; for so
soon as the Fits were off, he could now eat his meat whether the fits were long
or short.

Also he had a partial ^not a total) freedom from his Fits in the latter end of
the year 1662 For the space of near ten weeks and this was a great Mercy.

Chap. III. Of other Swingling, and Wringing Fits.
IF he were upon his Feet in the time of the moderate shaking, and made any
offer to go, he could go no way but backward, and so he could go, and hardly
keep from running, he could not readily stay himself; if he sought to set a
step forward, either his trouble would strike inward and then he should look
gashly as a Dead Man (yet not sensible of sickness) his Spirits exceedingly
quenched, failing and yielding as when a Man is giving up the Ghost; or else he
was necessitated to go sidewise in the manner aforementioned.

Or else he was Swing^ed round, round, round, till he fell down, if none were
by him to hold him up. If any attempted to stay him when he was in the said
motion, and before he was ready to fall* he so attempting though a strong man)
would also be swingled round, round* like a Feather, until he fell off.

Yet at some times (before Swingling) if he would force himself to stand still
he could, but if he would go it must be those ways: stirring sometimes to go
forward two or three steps, he should be forced as many more backward and
sometimes his legs crossed, thus he has tried half an hour together and could
not get forward the breadth of a house, but giving liberty to himself then to
go backward, he could go with great swiftness that way. Sometimes lifting up
his foot to go straight on, his leg has been lifted up a great height and must
stand there, he could not get it down again whilst one might go near forty
paces, this was but seldom, the other often.

In the Winter 1693. then it came to a Continual shaking like a Palsy head and
body, and not many violent Fits, but shaking all the day long, from the time of
his rising, till night six or seven a Clock, and then went off with a sharp
shaking Fit.

At the beginning of the shaking he could neither eat nor drink, nor all the
day long, till it was off at night about six a Clock; afterward he could eat,
if he would walk up and down in the House eating. If he felt those nippings in
his head, he must keep it in his Mouth until the fear and amazement was over,
and then chew and swallow it down, and thus by degrees he could eat a Supper;
but if he ceased walking and sat down (as many times he did for trial) by that
time he had eaten 8 or 9 Morsels either he could not rise off the Seat he fate
on, or could not speak, or else could not keep the Seat, by reason of Violent
shaking, and thus it continued about 16 or 17 Weeks.

Some that sympa^hized with him in this condition, did set some time apart to
wait upon God in Prayer, on his behalf, and then was there a cessation of these
Fits, as an Eminent return of Prayer.

After that for the space of ten days he had a respite, an intermission or
breathing time, a little reviving in this Bondage, and then they came to their
former course again, as to stamping, shaking and skipping in the usual manner,
but not exceeding 8 Fits in a Week, whereas before he had 8 or 10 or 12 or more
in a day; this was in the Summer time.

Afterward they ceased from shaking Fits, and came to Wringing Fits. His Hands
lying one upon or in another would Wring one out of the other* and then the
fore finger would rise up first, and so the rest one after another, till all
met, viz. the Forefinger of one hand with the forefinger of the other hand,
the Second finger of one hand with the second of the other, and so for the
rest; at some times they would be spread abroad finger from finger of the same
hand so wide as if one would have been rent from the other. When they were all
met as aforesaid, then they would gradually by a slow motion be raised above
the Crown of his hat, till his hands clasped both together fast about his Neck,
and then were Immovable till they did of their own accord remove, and then they
were wrung Backward, and the Palms of his hands turned upward at his Back, and
then were carried by degrees under his Arm-holes till they met right behind,
and were carried up to his Shoulders, with much Pain and so as a Crashing about
the Joints has been heard by standers by; these Fits are so Terrible as he
felt them a great while after, and does to this Day: then they were brought
back again* the one hand to his Mouth then to his Eye, and the other stretched
out as if he had been shooting in a Bow drawing it to the utmost; after tha^
one hand would be carried right up as high as possible spread open, and the
other right down at the same time, till it has woun'd about part of the Chair;
afterward that which was upward came downward, and that which was downward went
upward as before, then sometimes wrung about with various motions unutterable,
as if his Arms would have been wre^ted, re^t and torn from his Body.

After ^his, his hands would be still* unless he forced them to his Thighs, and
then they would fly out and beat one against another very smartly, and he dur^^
not seek to alter the motion. Or if one hand did at any time get hold of the
other, it was so wrung as if it would tear it in pieces; If any did seek to
hold him in a Chair (though he were a man of strength) yet he was easily cast
off, and it added to his affliction, made it the more fierce if any attempted
to stop the Motion*

Above half an hour would these Wringing Fits continue, and all that while no
shaking.

When his hands had done, then his head was wrung the one way, and his mouth
the other contrary way, the former so far till he did see right behind him, and
there stood a Considerable time; then his head would be turned the other way
till he saw right behind, and his Mouth not so drawn, and thus backward and
forward Five or Six times; after that his head would be still, and his Body
wrung almost off the Chair, and then the Fit ceased. His Legs have some times
been drawn under the Foot of the Chair, and there set fast for a Considerable
time. Every Day he had one of these Fits.

Some Christian Friends being deeply affected with his Condition, did betake
themselves again to Prayer, where he was present, and was in all those Motions;
in the time of Prayer he was put upon kneeling down, and did so for some time,
and had (as he phraseth it) a Nip in his Head, whereupon he started up, and
almost struck one down which stood by, yet the work of Prayer went on. He was
then put upon bowing his Body (without pulling off his Hat) and moving his Hand
like a great Complimenter, also upon drawing as at a Bow, Skipping, Wringing,
and such like, being set on a Chair, endeavored to gather up his Legs (being
turned sidewise) and his Head was Bowed backward, his Mouth strained wide open
at such a distance as if his Jaws should have been ^ent asunder; his Tongue
being doubled in his Mouth, his whole Body was hoysed up; being set down again
in the Chair, he brake forth into Roaring out in a hideous and Dreadful manner
till he was almost spent and like a dying-man, and another while he made a
blowing with his Mouth and Nostrils, that the noise thereof was like that of
the Smiths Bellows when stirred* which Actions were a great disturbance, yet
they went on in seeking the Lord, till he sat still and quietly among them;
and although he heard but the sound of the Words, could not give attention or
use affection, by reason of his Extremities in his Fits; Yet the Lord appeared
here also as a God hearing prayers; and was entreated by others for him, so far
as that from that very day for the spac^ of two and twenty weeks he had a
freedom from Shaking, and Wringing fits; ^nly when he has adventured to join
with others in Prayer* or such exercises; he has found such disablement and
shatterings as were first mentioned, but enjoyed immunity from those dreadful
fits which before he was molested with.

Also he had an enlargement of his Spiritual Liberty in some degree from this
time; for, whereas for a great while together* he could not read four verses of
a Chapter, nor hardly write his o^n name, without dreadful affrightments and
amazements, loss of Speech and other sad symptoms; that Summer and especially
since that two and twenty weeks, he has been able to rea^ either the
Scriptures or other Books; sometimes an hour together, and could also write,
mostly without weariness*

Before I pass on, I shall briefly hint what the frame of his Spirit, was as to
matter of experience, under these terrible dispensations.

He was desirous to see friends, but it was a great trouble to him, that when
they went about any Religious exercise he must go away, and this has so
affected him as by the working of his a^fections he has been cast into fits.

But the way which the Lord did ordinarily lead his heart in, was to be quiet
under his hand, and to submit to his will patien^ly; leaving him to his own
time for deliverance if he saw it good for him, and this he found when he was
under the most violent fits: In his greatest extremity there was such a
bo^edness to the Divine Will, as he could as willingly sit down in the Chai^ to
receive a fit from the hand of the Lord, as rise out of the Chair when it was
off.

And the thoughts of that, did often encourage him in his fits* viz.

[Lord thou know when it is enough, and thou know when to make a
cessation* I leave it unto thee.]

And sometimes upon the account of Divine ^rerogative; his heart has been
quieted: he may do wi^h his Creatures what he pleases, and there has been
deserved infinitely more. Such has been the mercy of God toward him, that for
the most part his body was more tried out, than his Spirit. Only twice he found
a little working of discontent.

Once he had some fear lest that quiet which he had, should be but a carnal
quiet, through the carelessness of his own Spirit

It pleased the Lord presently to leave him to some discontent of Spirit about
it, and at that time his Fits were not by many degrees so high as formerly or
since; this frame continued but a day and a night, and the next morning after
the Lord convinced him of the evil of it, that he had been discontented with
his hand, when he laid it so lightly upon him, in comparison of what he
experienced formerly; he saw wisdom, goodness and mercy in God, even in leaving
him to be discontented; the Lord turned this to his good and helped him against
it, letting him see that contentment comes from him; it is of the Lord to make
a man contented in any Affliction: Content was the Lords and none of his, he
could not quiet his own Spirit.

Another time after he enjoyed some respite from fits, and God had been often
sought concerning it; he found a great unwillingness to come under the yoke
again; he considered the manner of the affliction, that God did strike at him
in respect of his Ordinances that if he came near where he was worshipped, then
he did strike with heavier strokes than at other times; upon the return of his
fits after some weeks respite, he had such workings of heart as these; the
People of God generally sought the Lord, and he denied Prayer, yea God himself
excommunicated and shut him out, it was a dark dispensation.

Immediately after these thoughts he had this as a quiet to his Spirit [wait on
the Lord, and wait for God.] It is better to wait for God in the want of a
mercy sometimes, than to enjoy a mercy we desire; for while we are waiting upon
God for mercy desired we are honoring of God, but while we enjoy mercy desired
God is honoring of us.

And this Scripture came to his thought, Hab. 2.3. The Vision is for an
appointed time, but at the end it shall speak wait for it -- Vision is of dark
things, these are to be waited for: His unwillingness now was removed, and his
heart brought in some measure, to wait upon and for God, though it were a dark
dispensation* God would give deliverance if he did see it good.

He was wonderfully quieted and made willing to submit to the will of God; and
unless these two times he has not found such discontent and thus the Lord did
help him over it, and his fits returned to their old course again.

Chap. IV. Of other Fits disabling for eating of his meat, and some continuing
twelve hours; also Kneading Fits.
AFter the two and twenty weeks of such freedom, his Fits returned again to
their former course of Stamping, Shaking, and Skipping, but these fewer in
number, and with intermissions, sometimes a fourtnight together.

For the sp^ce of about three weeks he had none of those Fits, unless he did
offer to eat his meat, and then he could not get down above four morsels at a
time before he should be cast into such a Condition as he could neither stir
hand nor foot, nor speak a word for the space of near an hour after, and whilst
that has been in his mouth his jaws have been closed, that his fourth Morsel
could neither be brought out or taken down: He could get down no other succor
or refreshment during that time* but a little Beer and thin Broth; so that his
body was brought low, and he ready to famish.

Then the Lord was sought unto in that case also, and that very night he could
eat 9 or 10 morsels, and the next day he could eat to satisfy his Appetite if
he made haste; but as soon as he had done he fell into fits again of another
kind, all parts of his body moved as if one limb would have been plucked from
another, his hands in such swift motion as his fingers could hardly be
discerned therein; and so his legs also, looking very gashly* this lasted a
fourtnight longer, every time that he did eat.

Prayer was made to the most high God as to this particular also* and that very
night and from that time forward he could eat his meat without trouble, except
as in the next particular.

In the Winter 1665. it came to shake him like a moderate palsy in the head
several weeks together: Twelve hours the fit lasted every day; the ^haking fit
lasted ten hours daily, and went off ^ith two hours of roaring fits, or howling
or barking like a Dog, and his mouth wrung in a dreadful manner* with grievous
faces. He has been so hoarse with these fits as he could not speak to be heard
in all that time: He could eat no meat till the 12 hours were ended; he has
tried several times, but soon has been able to eat no more, and has been in
fear that he should be raging mad and fly upon the people, yet never did any
hurt.

The Lord was sought unto for that also, and he was present till two Prayed,
and had four of the Roaring Howling Fits; and from that Day; for the space of
ten days he was free from the Shaking and other Fits. Then they came again like
a Palsy for about 11 Days, then Skipping fits one in a Day, after that he had
Roaring fits again* but with intermissions three or four Days, or a fourtnight.

Also in the aforementioned Roaring fits, as he lay on his Back on the Bed* his
Hands and Legs were drawn right upward one Leg against one Arm and Hand, and
the other Leg against the other Arm and Hand, and so stood right up for some
time, then they would fall down and be raised up again in the same manner,
three or four times in a fit, his fingers being stretched so wide as if they
would have Parted and been Rent one from another; and at one time when his
Hands and Legs were so stretched upwards, at the same time his Body was lifted
up from the Bed three or four times, and falling down again upon the Bed, he
was acted thus up and down without his putting forth any Natural Power to
promote such a Raising up of his Body from the Bed.

Also during the same time as he did lie upon the Bed, his Legs were drawn
B^ckward and gathered up to his Back parts, still his Head being upon the
Pillow, then his Head has been raised forward by degrees to his Knees, and
they being met would lie togeth^r a little space, and then loosen or part again
and the Fit go off.

Also sometimes his Head has bent backward off the Pillow, and then his Legs
have been so gathered up as his Toes stood on the Bed and his Back bent like a
Bow, and so they stood for some space of time, the chief stress being upon the
feet, Neck, and Back, and then returning back again the fit left him.

Thus when he has said his Bed should Comfort him, and did lie down for ease,
he has found the contrary, that there they have been as Violent fits, and his
Shakings more tedious to bear than if up.

Also some Fits have kept hours like an Ague in their coming, that exactly the
same hour in which they came this Day, they would come the next Day, and so in
after days; he for a diversion has put himself upon such an exercise of Body
and Mind, as might be most likely to put by the thoughts of it; but his fit
would return the very Hour and Minute as in the former Day, and whatever
postures his Arms were found in at that instant; that they were kept in for a
Considerable time; as if one Arm were stre^ched right out, he could not draw it
in again* but must stand in that posture a great While.

His disability for attendance upon God in Ordinances still continued, In the
Year 1665. he was so far from j^yning with others in acts of Worship, that if
he attempted himself to go to Prayer, if he were upon his Knees he had ^u^h
Smitings in his Head, that he could not without much difficulty raise up his
Body; If he stood to Pray, so it was also, his Countenance changed, and he
reeled and staggered and was not able to speak a Word; So likewise if he
aslayed to do it walking in his Chamber; only he had a liberty for an
Ej^culation or two, and at sometimes lifting up his Heart for half a quarter of
an hour together; he has tried when he has gone first to Bed, and it was so
with him for a great while there also, he could not proceed for these Nipps;
But for some Months ^n that year he was free of these Nipps, being affrighted
out of it, i.e. Out of Praying work, with dreadful Representations.

For, when he was certainly awake he had diverse times the Apparition of
diverse faces, he never knew any of them, but Hers who discovered her self to
be a Witch; his freedom from these Terrible Apparitions was also a return of
Prayer: and in regard he is apt to conclude a delusion of sense herein, hence I
shall not here give any further Particular account of those Apparitions, only
as it is necessary in the relating the manner of some following fits; although
I understand not how it could any way darken this story* seeing in former Days
it has been a common thing for the Devil to Appear in several shapes: there
were such Apparitions, and it is doubtless one precious Privilege attending
the bright ^hinnings forth of the Glorious Gospel; that since there has been a
greater freedom from these, than in foregoing Ages, and ordinarily Satan has
fallen before it like Lightning from Heaven.

But to return to our Story, about this time (1665) When the Lord has given
him any Intermis^ions or freedoms from his fits, for some days, a night or two
before their return again when in Bed, he has been cast into a heavyness and
benumness, as if in a sleep, yet not asleep, if any were on the other Chamber,
he knew what they said; after that, he has had a blow as if a punch with the
finger, either on his Breast^ Side, or shoulder, soon after as if two did
strike in the same manner; Presently as if a Hand did smite him, and then a
Kneading on his Side or Breast, (as if Bread had been kneading there) for some
space, until he has been Sore, with some Intermission; and then it has been
repeated again in like manner, till he has seemed to be near Death, and then
he has revived again and come to himself; and for the most part the next Day
or the Day after, the Fits have returned again. In these Kneading Fits he has
thrust down his hand and seemed to Catch a Hand, and put it into his Mouth and
bite it; at one time he thought it was a Thumb that he did Bite, and it was
observed that about the same time, She (that since has confessed her self to
be the Witch) was seen to go with a great shoe* which She borrowed, and her*
Toe was hurt; when She was Searched since, her Toe was found with an impression
as if sawn (...); and since that seeming to Bite the Hand that hurt him, for
about a Year he was free from that way of Kneading, and since the Fits have
been as if gr^sped in Arms, and as handling his backparts to his great Trouble
and affrightment; these were but seldom.

He continued (...) under ^ disability to join with others in Prayer, or to
hear the Preaching of the Word, or to exercise himself unto any deep Meditation
ordinarily; but (t^rough the Mercy of the Lord) had more Liberty for ordinary
Common Discourse, by many Degrees, than before that time; he could speak about
ordinary Matters, but if he attempted to hold on in ^peaking of the things of
God, for S^^ritual Edification, he has by his fits been hindered, unless
occasionally, and that very seldom, by the Mighty Power of God, he has enjoyed
that Liberty.

Chap. V. Of a Witch Confessing privat^^y her (...)* and ^estimony offered
before others, yet nothing done against Her.
ABout the* Month October, or November, (If I mistake not) 1665. He informed me
what here follows in this Chapter. Abre Grinset, alias Thrower, (for she was
a Bastard) did Confess to E. C. That She had been Instrumental to Afflict this
man Mr. Spatche^, and many more. She Confessed but little as yet; and therefore
some set a time apart to seek the Lord, that He would cause her to Confess
more; and there was a manifest answer of Prayer; for the same day, when they
were Praying* or that Evening, of Her own accord She said to those in the
Horse, that She would not tell them all.

And then She Confessed, that She had made a league with the Devil, and was
enticed to it by a Witch at a Wedding, that She had been a Witch above Twen^y
Years; and She had Bewitched John Collet of Cookly, and H^nry Winson of Walpool
to Death; and She must see John Collet before his Death, and by a wile did get
a sight of him, calling at the House, said that there was the greatest Snake in
the way that ever was seen, (which was not ^o) they all run out to see it, and
She in the interim went up to see him, and he Dyed two days after or
thereabouts. Also She Confessed to them, that the Devil had drawn Blood of her,
and that he did appear in the form of a Pretty handsome Young Man first, and
spoke to her (...) a hollow Solemn Voice, but She would not declare what he
spoke; and since Appears to he^ in the form of a blackish Gray Cat or
Kitling, that it sucketh of a Tett (which Searchers sin^e saw in the place She
mentioned and has drawn Blood.

After this, Mr. Spatche^ spoke with her, and did seriously and solemnly charge
her as in the presence of God, that She would speak the Truth, that if She were
not such a one, She should not own it, and if She were, then not to deny it,
for God would bring it to light.

She answered, that She must Confess the Devil had beguilded her, and that She
had been a Witch above 20 years, that She (...) made an agreement with the
Devil, and She thought the time was nea^ out; she declared also as before, how
She became a Witch, and in what shape her Imp (which She imployed^ appeared* to
her, and such like.

He asked her whether She had employed her Imp to him* and why She did it?

She Confessed that She had sent it to him and* said that She did bear him no
Ill will, but it was against her Will, She could not help it, the Devil would
let her be at no quiet till She had done it; adding, that he never did her
hurt, but had been loving and kind to her, in giving her Money (for She was
Poor) but She was the worse to him.

He speaking to her about his biting, in the aforementioned Kneading Fits; She
s^id that he had bitten too hard sometimes*

She said, if it were possible She would never send her Imp to him again,
adding* O that I could not, it would be happy for you, and more Happy for me.

When She would have Confessed more to him, She was stoped in her Throat and
could not, saying if She could tell all, there might be Mercy for her.

She also said, if She were to be Hanged presently She had no Hand in his
Roaring Fits.

Some Women Searched her and found the Tett She spoke of, and her Body then
Whole; but searching a second time a few Days after, her Body was well nigh all
over as if scratched with briers and thorns* the like has not been seen; and
one that searched before ^aw ^his alteration* it is probable the Devil did much
torment her after her Confession, for those that lived in the same House, heard
a very great rumbling noise; also* She was gone diverse Nights and was seen*
Wandering abroad in distant places.

She was also called before other Gentlemen, and some Credible ^ers^ns offered
to give Testimony of many things aforementioned, as of her free and Volunta^^
Confessing, that She had a Familiar Spirit, and that She had been the Death of
some etc. Some Depositions were taken, but one standing up said,

That if she Bewitched ^one but Spa^chet, and Ma^^ing, and such as they are,
She should never be Hanged by him.

And thus notwithstanding what could be witnessed against her, yet ^he was ^^nt
home and nothing in point of Law was done against Her*

Neither can any excuse the matter by saying that in Distemper of body she knew
not what she said, the contrary was clea^ to those that conversed with her; and
was also evident; for being asked a question, and the same question being put
to her a considerable time after, she could answer as before; and therefore she
well knew what she said.

Aft^r ^his tim^ ^wo Gentlemen questioned with her* and she confessed to them
the same things* the manner of her becoming a Witch and her hurting Mr.
Spatchet, but was not so ready to confess her being the death of those men
afore^mentioned, and grew hardened to deny some things before acknowledged.

It could not (one would think) but deeply affect this poor man, and procure
much inward disquietment, to see that his case, and such a case should be so
disregarded by men, but still he encouraged himself in the Lord his God; and
soon after (if not the next day) reading by course (for now he had liberty to
read) that in Eccles. 5. v. 8. If thou see the oppression of the poor, and
violent perverting of judgment and justice in a Province marvel not at the
matter, for he that is higher than the highest regards, and there be higher
than they. Th^s did wonderfully relieve him, as to their actings, he had
nothing to do against them, this was enough to him* he could say, thou lord
regardest it, though these men regard nothing of it, and his heart was
wonderfully quieted herein.

Some excited him to s^ratch the Witch or such like, but he had no disposition
to it, his heart was so tender that he durst not do it, though his fits
continued; that Scripture helped him, Prove. 20.22. Say not thou, I will
recompense ^vil; but want on the Lord and he shall save thee* He was enabled to
wait on the Lord for his Salvation; and that, Deuteronomy. 32. v. 35, 39, 41. It was
enough to him that their foot shall slide in due time, and their ^^lamity
makes haste; if there be any such means of his affli^tion a^ by Witch^^* yet
vengeance was Gods, and he would recompense any that oppress or abuse his
People.

Chap. VI. Of his Dumb fits, also of Shackling and other fits: especially
hindering him in traveling*
FOR some months he had Dumb Fits; if ^e has been well in the house, yet
attempting to go out to visit friends, beforehe ^ad gone the length of one
Close or Field, he was struck Dumb, and has remained so all the day, being
necessitated to return back again to his house, where he could either sit or
walk butwas speechless; these would go off and speech return ordinarily (yet
not always) without any violent motion; these were not every day*

In some part of the time he had a moderate shaking like a Palsy, all the day
long, from the time of his rising till a quarter of a^ hour after he was laid
in his bed, and then it would cease* and then he could speak; If he leaned his
head against any thing, then immediately his speech was gone, nor could he move
his head from the place; nor raise himself on the seat whereon he sat, till it
was pulled away, or they did give him Tobacco; and then it would go into
outward shaking again,

He had the use of his senses in this time, knew what they about him said and
did.

In those years 1665 and 1666 he had Roaring Fits, his mouth being stretched
open, and such violent Fits, and those which hindered travel were superadded.

Sometimes he had liberty to walk in the house or yards, but if he attempted to
go into the Field, then before coming half way in it, his feet would be as if
they were nailed to the ground; that by all means he could use, he could not
remove them thence for a considerable time, nor get any further to any Friends
house that he intended to go unto; he finding this coming, was necessitated
timely to turn himself, and then could sholving remove one foot first about an
Inch* and must stand there till one might have gone a quarter or half* way in
^he Close, and then could remove the other foot an Inch, and so each removal at
such a distance of time, if it were plain ground it was the better, but it was
very tedious to him to ascend* or go up when he came at a Hill or Ascent.

And thus he must move home again if none brought a Chair to him to sit down in
till he revived; these Fits went off without shaking or other violent motion,
and he remained in the former posture, till he attempted to travel again.

In some of those fits resting, sometimes on a sudden one leg would be forced
over the other the full reach, and so he must stand cross legged; but by
degrees with great trouble it would be gotten back again to the other foot and
with much difficulty get over it, which done, presently even the same instant,
the other foot was struck cross the full reach also, and must stand till by
degrees that also was gathered up and then he stood in the old posture, as if
fastened to the ground; on a sudden he should have liberty to go as far as from
one side of the house to the other, and then his feet were fixed to the ground
again; after that he had a liberty to go a few steps further, then at the same
pass again* till at last he did get into the house.

After these fits ceased, if he attempted to travel, he should soon be buckled,
^is knees bowing as if he were to sit down* and if he offered to right up
himself, then he was buckled twice as much, so he must return home in that
posture, bearing on his toes only; and so he could travel thus bowed down, but
if he offered to raise up his Body, then he could not stay himselfbut fell to
the ground, and rising up after a little time revived; but if he offered to go
again a few rod, he was buckled and bowed down as before.

Sometimes two men have been present when he has been in these Fits, and they
fearing he should fall, would take hold of his Arms to raise him, and not the
strength of both of them could keep him up, but then he must down to the
ground; all they could do was not enough to prevent it, else he did never fal^
down in these fits, which continued a long time, a year at least as is
supposed, but with some intermissions, for nine days or a fourtnight; in which
time he had liberty to visi^ friends, but then the fits returned again: They
continued sometimes twenty two weeks, sometimes thirteen, or nine, more or less.

Afterward complaining to friends that he could not go; then for some time, if
he assayed to travel, his heels were lifted u^ from the ground and he was
forced to stand on his toes, leaning on his staff* and if he would stand s^ill*
then he found no shaking* or other violent motion: but if he offered to go*
then his feet were violently moved forward running upon his toes* till by his
strong staff or by a Tree he did get a ^tay or stop, and a little revived: and
then he was car^ied violently again* run^ing on his toes as before, till a new
stop; these running Fit^ ^as^ed some weeks.

Afterward being free^d of these* if he would travel* hi^ strength was taken
away; he found* an utter di^ability in all parts* he might stand still, and
could not readily get back again; but ^^ddainly he fell to his knees* and and
resting on them for a season, then he could rise up and go a little way* and
^uddainly down again to his knees and no further* these Fits did not hold long,
a month or thereabouts.

Also in these last years, someti^es his hands have been t^r^ed behind him, the
palms upward on his back, and his body being bowed low toward one side, his
face turned upward; he has been hurled round, round, round, in the yard till
at the door, and then being helped into the house, was caused to sit in a Chair.

In such a condition he remained until the death of that Woman which confes^ed
her self to be a Witch, with fits of one kind or another above mentioned.

And the two last years before her death, he had no liberty either to Pray or
to join with others in Prayer, or other Religious exercises more than is before
expressed.

Also, when some have said they could believe for his full freedom, he h^d not
such a Faith, but in the time of his fits he has earnestly desired of God (as
he was able) that he would raise his Soul into a Faith about deliverance with
submission to his Will, and if it were his pleasure, that he would give him a
persuasion that he should be delivered.

When he has thus done he found his heart wonderfully overpowered, and
carried out this way; leave it to God, commit all to him, be quiet in the will
of God, and let him alone till his time comes* Neither was there any thing of
Faith further this way, near the deliverance than before, but that if the Lord
saw it for ^is own Glory he would deliver him.

Chap. VII. Of things of more general observation in the tim^ of his Fits, and
not Limited to any particular one, but Common to more.
THere were some things remarkable in the forepast years, which cannot well be
confined to any particular ^its, which I shall here take ^otice of.

1. The working of* his distemper upon his acting, or joining with others in
Religious Exercises as Prayer or such like, has been in this manner.

Either he has found a failure of Spirits which did leave him in a great
confusion* ^tammer and amazement; yet he did not loose his senses hereby* he
knew any person present, or any thing that was* spoken or done to him* and how
it was with himself; he had no lo^s of apprehension but of expression* so that
endeavoring to speak would help forward his amazement and affrightment.

Or he found it contrary viz. an amazement and affrightment, caused by a
working in the Crown of his Head, and a Failing of Spirits following that; this
working in his Head was above a third part of the way from the Crown, downward
round about, and when ever that came presently a failure of Spirits followed,
as if his very Life would have gone away; he felt such a quenching of Spirits
that he knew not how to subsist* Yet felt no Pain till the amazement was over,
and then found it only in that part of his Head where the Working was, and not
elsewhere.

When he has employed his mind with much earne^tness about any Civil Business,
as Writing and Inditeing any matter, he could continue far longer herein,
without such shatterings, than in hearing a Sermon or such Religious Exercises;
thus it has been in latter times, but in the former years of his Fits he could
not act in either. So in making up of accounts or reckonings he has found some
shatterings, yet could recover, get into his Work again and accomplish it.

Whereas if he continued Religious Exercise, till the beginning of failures of
spirit, then if he set himself to regard and attend to what was next to be
spoken, he knew it, but should take up the next following sentence and either
lose it immediately, or else speak that many times over till he lost it, and if
he stayed to hear an other sentence he would go over and over with that also as
before.

Also under these failing of Spirits, and Workings of Head, there was a
Manifest Change in his Countenance, Staring with his Eyes, like one affrighted,
and a Paleness in his Face during this astonishment, a great alteration in the
fetching of his Wind, it was very deep with Haling and Blowing. In an Instant
his Spirits were quenched, and in an Instant revived again; and then
immediately his former Counte^ance and strength did return again, not gradually
as it is in ^ailing of Spirits by ^ickness, but on a sudden.

2. When he has been under Torturing Fits, till Nature has seemed even spent,
and he has stretched out all Parts like a Dead-man, yet after a quarter of an
hour or little more, he has recovered, walked in the House and been Chearly
again and well; only has found soreness or Weariness after such tossings; ye^
could eat his Meat and go abroad (unless when his Fits were such as hindered
Eating or Traveling) or if he has been at a Friends H^use, he could soon
return home again; Whereas standers by have thought he could not have recovered
or stirred all the Day; This was by the upholding hand of God, beyond what is
ordinarily found where the Body has been spent by Natural Distempers.

Also when he had many weary days spent with Violent Fits, yet (through the
Mercy of the Lord) he has rested very well all the Night, and has been much
refreshed by the Morning, yet within a quarter of an hour after awaking (when
that was the ordinary time for the Fits to come, as when they kept hours like
an Ague) he has found a return of them in Bed before he did arise, and there
has had them in such Violence, that the very Bed and Chamber has shaked; Here
the Lord did vouchsafe great favor to him, in affording the Comfortable rest
of the Night, when yet his Bed was not his freedom; it was only the Work of God
to give him sleep.

3. In any of his Fi^s, Numb, Dumb, P^lsy, Conv^lsive at the worst, yet he was
so far sensible* as he knew every Motion of his own Hands or Feet, every Noise,
when Hallo^ing, when Howling, when Barking, at the time his Mouth was about to
be opened, he knew what it would come to, and sometimes did to his Power oppose
it* has gotten his Mouth together to stop it, but it would be forced open in a
Dreadful manner: he knew what he should have done and could not, as when he
should step forward and could not; he knew what he did, and what others did, or
said to him or one to another.

In his Roaring Fits he had no Pain to cause him to Roar, but it was a forced
action; the Violence of Fits caused Pain or soreness, but no Pain felt caused
any such crying out.

4. In all these Afflictions and violent Motions of Body* he Sustained no
Damage or Hurt, unless once or twice b^ating the skin off his Finger and Ancle;
he has been in Fits abroad, yet in any of them h^th not fallen down but once
(unless as aforementioned as when any Crossed the Motion) and then falling in a
yard, his Body rolled till it came to the side of the House; but neither then
nor at other times did he receive any prejudice more than was aforementioned.

5. Often in Praying times where he has been present, and Occasion has been
to mention the Devil, and it has been asked that if it were by Satan (before
it was discovered) that God would rebuke him; he has found hereat a grinding
of Teeth, and such an alteration as if the Devil himself would oppose what was
spoken.

6 He often made observation that in the Old of the Moon, he has been
ordinarily worse than either in the New or Full Moon. Also he has observed
that in the former and latter Spring he has enjoyed the greatest freedom from
his Fits, as in the Months called March and ^pril, and also sometimes in
February, and so about September and October, and when ^he Weather did grow
cold then his Fits usually returned.

7. Ordinarily after taking Physic he was the worse; often Physic did greatly
increase the Violence of his Fits, all the time of his taking it, and after
ceasing to take, they would return to the posture they were in before.

About two years before the Violent Fits left him, he had some respite from
Fits for several Days before he began with Physic, and the first Day wherein
he took it he had a Fit, and so one Fit every Day that he was taking, till it
came t^ the last Dose, which (upon some occasion) he deferred, and that Day of
omission he had no Fit, the Day followi^g he did take it, and then had a Fit,
and so having finished it he had no Fits for some time.

He desisted taking Physic almost two years before his Violent Fits ceased,
and yet the last Fits were very Violent.

One Professing Physic, observed him in his Fits, and concluded it was no
ordinary Contraction of Nerves, but a continual Motion sometimes of all parts,
Arms, Hands, Legs, Feet, first stamping his feet, beating upon the ground very
swiftly and strongly, at a great distance each from other; his Arms at the same
time flying out with a swift and Violent Motion, inward and outward all at once
as fast as may be, for a considerable time together, till at last the Fit went
off, leaving him sometimes stret^hed out like a Dead-man.

Yet in all the time of his Fits (when he could Eat his Meat) there was not any
abatement or Consumption of his flesh perceived, no Pining away, though there
was some Weakness of Body by them.

Chap. VIII. Of his Fits a little before and at the Death of the Witch, and his
gradual freedom since, with his Condition at Present.
HIS Violent Fits continued until the Thirteenth Day of the Month of Febru^ry,
166^* and from that Day he has been freed from them, which was about 8 weeks
before the Death of that Woman which Confessed her self to be a Witch* for she
Dyed about April, 1667. before this 8 Weeks she was under Tortures from the
Devil, and whether she had no leisure to send to and Afflict him, or whether it
were only from God, laying a restraint upon that grand Enemy of Mankind Satan*
that he enjoyed this Eight Weeks freedom from those Fits, must be left to
others to Judge: it is good to ascribe all to God; but it being thus long
before her Death, this argues that it was no Corroboration of his Imagination
by her Death that was the Cause of his freedom.

Indeed, he had not a freedom from all Fits so early, he was under a Restraint
from Travel until the very time of Her Death.

About a Week before she Dyed, Mr. R. (a Conformist) sent for him to go to her,
when she was Ill; he went about a Close length, and the^, if it had been upon
his Life, he could not get one step further forward; he endeavored very
earnestly to go on but could not; he did get back again in ^ long time and with
much difficulty; and was forced to make many Courtesies (like Women) all the
way back again, with many other like actions which were unavoidable.

Mr. R. Went to her without him, and came to Mr. Spatchet saying* he never saw
such a Spectacle: for all the Skin of her Hands and Arms was scratched or torn
off, hardly one place appeared whole as big as his Finger.

She would not Confess to him any thing of Witchery, but only this; That She
had made an agreement with the Devil, and it was now too late for Her to
Repent; for she was Damned, or to this Effect she spoke.

She had two Cudgels lay on her Bed, and he asked her what she did with those.

She answered, she had them there to Fight with the Devil, he did so misuse her.

She was there alone, and he dragged her out of the Bed, and under the Bed:
they below, hearing such a Noise, and knowing there was no Body with her, they
went up and she was Bloody; she Confessed to them it was the Devil that came to
her. So she Dyed near the time called Easter, 1667.

Mr. Spatchet was under restraint for travel at the time of her Death, and
possessed with some fear that he should so continue until his Death, because he
was so at her Death, and nothing done to her to bring her to Justice. He had
not any Imagination that he should then have freedom, but rather limited the
Holy One of Israel by thinking the contrary.

Also she had said to some persons before her Death, that if she Dyed, yet Mr.
Spatchet should not be fully Free, for others had him in hand as well as she.

But yet the same Week that she Dyed, and the next time after when he attempted
to visit Friends, he found a liberty for Travel; and has enjoyed that freedom
ever since, viz. for the space of above two Years.

Thus Gods thoughts were not as his thoughts, Divine Mercies did surpass his
Faith.

And yet the Lord would have it known to be his Work; his will was the
determining rule how far deliverance should be afforded; it was not all at once
but gradually, for although he had then a freedom from Violent Fits, and such
as hindered travel; Yet, immediately after the Death of that Woman he had no
Liberty for Religious Exercises, either to perform them himself, or to join
with others therein: he remained without that freedom until the latter end of
the September following, (which was almost half a Year) and then only Mentally;
he tried after her Death (as well as often before) Vocally to Pray, and could
not, either alone or with others; but at the end of September, 1667. he could
Mentally Pray a quarter of an hour together or more daily, with Invention as
clear, and Affection raised as high as ever before he had Fits; and he had no
disturbance.

And because he found such a freedom that way, after some time he would try to
express it, and when he did so, though he did it with a whispering Voice, yet
he had not spoken usually Twenty words before he found a shattering in his
head, so as he was utterly disabled for Invention of Expression, and for a time
could not rise up from his Knees, in case he were Kneeling.

After this he would Pray Mentally, and still before the ending would try to
utter words, but found it as before, lost his speech and Invention, and reeled
and staggered about the Room, yet even when he was worst of all this way, he
knew how it was with him.

Thus he continued until the first Day of the Month of January following, when
meeting with a rebuke; one blaming him for what was his Duty, and reflecting
that as the cause of his great Affliction; though probably there was not any
other cause than Divine Sovereignty for Trials sake.

And as if the Lord would witness against such undue reflections upon this Holy
Man; he returning home, the Lord was pleased that very Night (after he met with
that rebuke) to give him a Liberty by himself Vocally to Pray; he had tried the
Morning before and could not.

But it was only by himself, he could Pray before others, but if they desired
it, and he did adventure; then that very night after he had Prayed before
others, he lost his Liberty of Praying by himself, and had no Liberty that way
nor with others for the space of a Week.

And then at the Weeks end he had Liberty again Vocally by himself, and so
continued till he did Pray again with others, and if it were but with one on a
sick Bed, or with more, it was all a Case, he lost his Liberty by it for a Week
or a fortnight as before.

Thus he continued until November 5 1668* and that very Night he had a Liberty
to hear one Pray; although he had tried the Lords Day before to hear a Sermon
repeated, and could not, yet now he could.

And the same Person that was the last he had Liberty to Pray with, before his
Fits disabled him, was the First that he had Liberty to Pray with, when his
Fits le^t him: and at the same Persons House was his First Liberty to hear one
Pray, and also to Pray before others, and not love the Liberty his self.

The next Day he Prayed in the Family, and did not lose his Liberty by it then,
nor at any time since.

Only, if his head fails by hearing others exercise, then sometimes he loses
his liberty of praying by himself or with others exactly for a week, and then
it returns again.

He finds less liberty to hear others exercise than to pray himself. He can
^ear a a Sermon if he does not hear the Prayer before, and sometimes can hear
both Sermon and Prayer, but that is seldom.

In case he adventureth, usually he finds a great distemper, disturbance and
shattering in his head, which unfitteth him for any service till it be over; it
is sometimes procured not only by Religious, but other actings, as he has
attempted often to ride on horseback since his freedom from Fits, but cannot:
Even in the month called May 1669. He tried, but he found that he lost all his
strength, could neither go, stand, nor speak, nor so much as hold a stick in
his hand; but was in a confusion, his head much disturbed by the motion of the
horse, yet had a knowledge of all things done or said at this time.

And it is to be noted, that since his Fits have left him, he finds no
alteration in his body, as to working of humors any other ways more than
formerly when he was under Fits or before: Only finds some decay of strength
by reason of Age, yet he has more strength now than he had in the time of his
Fits.

And this is the true account of his Condition both formerly and at present
1669. Whereby it may be seen that he injoyeth a wonderful Salvation from the
Lord, which all that have waited upon God in prayer on his behalf, are to own
him in, although (it be but partial not total.) There be some remainders of
bodily distempers, yet there is great cause to sing forth the high praises of
God in all the Assemblies of the Saints, and to say, What has God wrought?

It is a mercy that has been waited for, prayed for, and believed for, by many
Christians, and now the Lord expects the tribute of praises.

As for Mr. Spatchet himself, he is desirous to glorify God by offering up
praises to him.

When he had been many weeks under great tossings formerly, so as it was a rare
thing in six or seven weeks to have one days intermission, yet when he had that
short breathing, he was quieted* and did not so much make account of liberty,
as earnestly beg of God a preparation of heart for what was behind; and so when
he had ten days, or a fortnight, or a months liberty, the Lord did then put him
upon begging a submissive frame of heart for what was yet coming.

Whereas since the death of that Woman, and his freedom that did ensue, he is
less begging submission, but more praising God for what he has afforded, and
begging an improving Spirit of that freedom.

It is true, he had not an absolute and firm persuasion of deliverance before
it came, but at some times was not without Faith about it, yet submitting it to
the Divine Will. That Scripture was a wonderful stay to his heart, and a great
incourag^ment to believe, Romans 16. v. 20. The God of Peace shall tread Satan
under your feet shortly. And that also of Aeneas, who kept his bed eight years,
and was sick of the Palsy, Act 9 v. 33. Peter said unto him, v. 34. Aeneas,
Jesus Christ makes thee whole. And indeed this man was eight years and a
little more under this Trial, and sometimes as if he had been in Palsy Fits,
but at last Jesus Christ has in some measure made him whole.

Indeed it was gradually and not all at once; thus of old, the Lord said to the
Children of Israel concerning the Canaanite and the Hittite* Exodus 23. v. 29. I
will not drive them out from before theee in one year -- v. 30. By little and
little I will drive them out from before thee, until thou be increased -- So
the Lord would not drive out this man's Distempers in one year, but by little
and little; and it is hopeful his design was, that Spiritually he might the
more fructify and increase to the advancement of his glorious Grace through
our Lord Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
A Postscript.
I Lately Conversed with a near Relation of M. Spatchet, with whom he lived
after the time of the foregoing Narrative, until he Dyed, who informed me that
he had Fits to the last, Shaking his Head, and other Limbs, but not frequently,
sometimes many weeks without; yet ordinarily could not Pray or Ioyn with others
in Prayer. And thus he continued till his Death.

ERRATA.
PAge 2. Line 20. read Exaltation of, p. 9. l. 14. for stirring, r. striving*
l. 23. for 1693. r. 1663. p. 10. l. 25. for are r. were.

Advertisement.
MAthematical Di^inity: Or, A plain Demonstration from the Holy Scriptures,
that the Times of this World, were fore-appointed by the Covenant made with
Abraham; And determined to be according to the Measure of the Age and Fullness
of Christ Kept* Secret since the World began, but is now made plain upon Twelve
Tables, in a Solar Calendar* as familiar to the Understanding as a common
Almanac. With a full Proof, that this is the last Generation, which shall not
pass away till all things be Fulfilled, and the Gates of Righteousness be
opened. Being the Result of many Years Study. By Elias Palmer. Price One
shilling.

Printed for John Harris at the Harrow in the Poultrey.


