THE DIALOGUE BETWIXT CIT and BVMPKIN ANSWERED In another betwixt TOM the
CHESHIRE PIPER, AND Captain CRACK BRAINS.

Dedicated to the RIGHT WORSHIPFVL THE MAYOR OF QUINBOROUGH.

Difficile est Satyram non scribere.
London, Printed in the Year 1680.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL THE MAYOR OF QUINBOROUGH.
SIR,
THough it be a very customary thing, many times, for no other reason, but to
show a man's special acquaintance, to make all Addresses of this Nature to some
great Duke or other, yet I have declined that common Road, as well knowing,
that if there be no intrinsic value in the matter addressed for, the greatest
Prince is no more able to protect from Censure than the Mayor of Quinborough;
yet, as if there was some Spell in the point too, I am not ashamed of my
choice; for there was a time within the Ken of many now living, when there was
never a Duke in England, and no complaining in our Streets, yet then there was
a Mayor of Quinborough; and that time may happen again, without Natures
inversion, yet then the Mayor of Quinborough will bear as considerable a Figure
in the Government as ever. I shall now take upon me to say something, which
possibly has not occurred to your reading, of Corporations, they being as so
many Idols, adored by many in the Nation, they are all alike in their Original
Constitution, small ones differing from great ones, as little Devils do from
the higher Orders, viz. in respect of capacity to do hurt; and are all like so
many Commonwealths in a Monarchy, being absolutely independent of the Crown, as
to bearing Places and Offices of Trust in all their several and respective
Districts; for though all Offices, Civil and Military, determine at the Death
or Demise of the King, yet your Worships administrative Faculty and
Jurisdiction, with all your Clan, continues without the least recess or
interruption; neither is it in the power of any Prince, according to the common
Dispensations of Royal Will and Pleasure, to alter the meanest Officer amongst
you: What induced the Crown of England to those Acts of Grace at first, I shall
not take upon me to offer at; I will only tell you, that they are like the
Hanse-Towns of the Empire, and if they had the same strength, as may be guessed
from what happened of late years, would be as unmanageable; for if the Crown
had as many independent Regalities, except for a little Homage when they list,
it would be then counted natural to preserve themselves by a common League in
their Immunities, to which Corporations would in no mean methods contribute:
But since the providence of the Crown has provided better for our Peace, it is
the most prudent for them all to mind their Trade, the thing for which they
were first imbodied, and leave the conduct of State Affairs to them, whom God
and the Law has entrusted to that Noble end.

Now to induce all you little Commonwealths thus to your duty, I shall press an
argument from Gratitude: You may remember, that by the Act of Regulation, which
was binding even to your Immortal Power, the Commissioners which were of the
Kings nomination, had power to put out sans number or reason, the respective
members that constituted a Corporation, and no penalty upon their not putting
others into their places, what would have followed upon the disfranchisement of
all the members, which was absolutely in the Commissioners power? even a
dissolution of that Body, and by consequence a forfeiture of all their Lands to
the Crown; I do not see what could have hindered such a design, had it not
fallen out under a Prince who is above all the temptations of tricks: Then the
Loyal City of Coventry had lost nigh 3000 per annum, which had been but just
for their abetting the late Rebellion; as likewise the good Towns of Leicester,
Nottingham, Northampton, and Gloucester, etc. might have been reckoned with for
their especial zeal in the precious Cause; and which had been more
considerable, the superintendency of public affairs had been put into the
Justices of the Peace, which are all alterable, as it is fit all other offices
to be at pleasure; and truly if such a thing had happened, you would have
fallen unpitied, for your ways are not like others, your Dispensations savor
too much of Partiality, none can have common right amongst you, especially in
your remote and poorer Corporations, where a Sack of Malt, or a Bushel of
Wheat, shall throw a Mist before the Magistracy; and if any of you get a trust,
you decide the controversy, if any happen, as Philip of Macedon did that
betwixt two petty Princes, who determined all for himself: to adjust this, I Will
tell your worship a story, the great Devil had been out about in the world upon
the affairs of his calling, and as he thought, had made one sure and
considerable set; so he returned home, and met a little Mephostophilus of the
black Society going out, and told him he might stay a little at such a place,
for there lay an Usurer irrecoverably sick, that could not escape his clutches
for he was endowed with all the villainies of a miserable Carl, as Whore and
Bawd both, take unreasonable brokage for his own money, never mist taking all
extremities upon forfeitures, without respect either to Age or Sex, never paid
any poor man any due, though never so dearly earned, etc. In fine, he had the
Conscience of a Pawn-broker, or a Catchpole Sergeant: The little Devil was much
pleased at the prospect of his easy employ, but he found at his return the
account wrong stated, and mist of his prize accordingly; which the great Devil
enquiring about the circumstances of at his return, with no small wonder was
answered, that a Divine had been with him, some hours before he died, and had
overruled him to give all his Estate to charitable uses, and so he was slipped
up to Heaven. who has he made Trustee? said the great Devil; a Mayor, and
twelve Aldermen, says the little one: well enough, quoth the great one, we'll
have all them. Though this be but a Story, yet there is a Moral in the tail of
it, for I could give several instances where Corporations have performed their
trusts at such a rate, as will entitle them to a journey into those Low
Countries; and to say truth, the Fox-furr'd Magistracy do not generally
distinguish betwixt (...) and (...), right and rightly, so much talked on by
Tully, or Seneca; but by whether, or both, or neither, is not much material to
you or me, and are commonly very tender of doing right against a Member of
their own, which they call a standing by, or adjusting their Liberties.

But now your worship may say this is a Satyr upon Corporations, and therefore,
when I addressed to you for Patronage, I took a wrong sow by the ear. I must and
will submit all things to your better judgment, but give me leave to add
something, that may not be unuseful in the circumstance of present affairs,
from the male administration inseparably annexed to Bodies Politic, (where as
the Bishop of Quinque Ecclesiae complains deservedly of the packt Council of
Trent, votes are numbered and not weighed) and very unlikely to be otherwise. I
am afraid the East India and African Companies practice does not at all make
against what I shall offer, whose methods so are uneasy to those unfortunate
men, that have any concern amongst them without great purses, that the greatest
Extortioner or flee*Flint in nature, would singly be ashamed on, yet in the
crowd every thing passes for Justice.

Now least your worship should have your Spouses longing to know what I would
be at, I tell you that all Societies of men incorporated together, though by
the strictest ties of religion, and Justice are to be postponed to the
Government of a single person: you will say then how shall we be safe in our
concerns, if one man be the sole Judge of good and evil? I grant, where a
Despotical power is exercised, as it is almost in all Monarchies but here, the
Subject is entirely in the Princes power, but that being a thing so extravagant
and contrary to the Law, it were impious to fear it, considering the benignity
of our Prince: But what I say now is by way of comparison, that a Despotical
Government, nay, and under the greatest Tyrant in nature, is to be preferred
before any sort of incorporated power; for the Tyrant may reform as Manasses
did; however he must die, and his Successor may make amends for his
extravagancies: The wicked Achaz was succeeded by the good Hezekiah; whereas an
incorporated power, called by what name you will, never did amend, and which is
the insufferable plague of it, is immortal.

If now the greatest Tyranny of a Single Person be to be preferred before the
government of many, how religiously in common prudence and justice to our
selves ought we to acquiesce under our present condition, the happiness of
which I shall neither trouble you nor my self to enlarge upon.

You may say now all this is foreign to the matter in hand; if so* I cannot
much deny it, but only I being the first that made this kind of address to your
Worship, I do the boldlier take upon me the part of a Libertine, in the way of
it, as being unwilling to tie my self up to any form soever, we must now say
somewhat of the discourse, pretended to be answered, viz. The Dialogue betwixt
Cit and Bumkin, it has a great vogue Weekly Packet Vol. 2. number. 39. page 312.
in the World, for an Author of no mean account, gives this indelible character,
Those that will bestow twelve pence on two Books brimful of sense, good nature,
and discretion, let them purchase both first and second Part of those learned
discourses Cit and Bumpkin. But now Authors vary, whether this great craracter
was figurative or no, to incline to the affirmative, there is an Advertisement
subjoyned, how a Gentleman may live by his fingers ends, scribble threadbare
extravagancies two and forty times over, and each time answer them himself, and
so (for want of another Adversary) reply, rejoyn, surrejoyn all alone toties
quoties as his pinching necessities shall require, written originally in that
Babylonish language by Quevedo's Ghost, translated by Don Splutterado Knight of
the craving Fob.

But it is now fit that I should give your worship a reason of my undertaking;
the chief thing induced me to it, was the just disdain I had, that such a Pigmy
should attacque so boldly, and by so opprobrious names, such considerable
orders of men as he brings under that name, of which there is some account
given in the following Colloquy. Now if his friends object, that the language
is too tart upon him, let them consider his own methods of using others, but he
may be more excusable for it than his Opponent, considering the Academy of
Newgate, which though, as be says, is famous for breeding politic men, yet for
polite and soft language it,s not inferior to the Nunnery of Billings-gate.

You may object Sir, if you please too, why no sooner? when some Authors write
Books as fast as Jugers spue Ribands: but you may see by that your Worships
Orator does not write for daily bread, whatever others do.

I should not have said much more in this case, but that there is lately
printed an abusive Paper, called, Popery in Masquerade, in Skeldry; which by
the Authors favor, I think a great friend to the Author of Cit and Bumpkin, by
his listing Dick and Tom, the pretended answer to that Discourse, amongst those
Pamphlets he calls seditious; and therefore I must animadvert a little upon the
thing it self, as likewise upon that method: As to the thing or print it self,
it is sufficiently libellous and scandalous, for it is not so much a dumb
narrative of what is past, as a Scheme of what he would intimate is at present
designed: That it is not a narrative of what is past I offer this, the things
are so mistimed, for he displays all the Rabble of Sects, upon a consult
jointly petitioning, and J. Presbyter Chairman; now he that knows any thing,
must know (and that Author is old enough for a personal knowledge in that Case)
that those Sects of Muggletonians, Quakers, especially J. Naylor (who suffered
his punishment by order of a number of men called a Parliament in the
Protectorate of Oliver) were not so much as heard of, when John the Presbyter
was Chairman; nay the Independents themselves were not looked upon as
considerable at that time, though afterward they supplanted their elder Brother,
and at such a rate that the time wherein he lays his hopeful harmony for
petitions, the Presbyterians had as little power perhaps as they have now: But
to make your Worship the better able to understand my observations upon his
Plate, I must give you a short description of it, first he sets the
Presbyterian in a chair in a ridiculous dress, assisted by all the rabble of
Sects, as Adamites, Ranters, and what not, as Counselors, then he brings the
petitioners, which are only Swash and the Elders maid, the Colchester Quaker
and the Mare petitioning against Bishops, Service Book, Popish Lords and evil
Counselors, and thanks given them by the Presbyterians, which by the way is a
great want of Charity in him, for though those of kind petitions was only the
result of minds that desired nothing but matter for quarrel, yet none of the
four are like our articles of faith necessary to salvation, and might if the
Government had thought fit, have been altered at pleasure, without breach,
either of Gods Law or man's, therefore t ose Petitioners ought not in common
good manners, tho, they deserved a very severe reprimam, to be so ranked; for
those kind of Best alitie were never charged, which the well natured Author
would intimate ought to be upon the decryed Party.

But observe it all along, he is a Gentleman of singular manners as well as
discretion, to bring in the Colchester Bridegroom petitioning against Popish
Lords, when there is now an Act of State to that purpose, viz. to take away all
Legislative power from them, as if that solemn Act which has been graciously
granted at the petition of three Estates, was to be run into ridicule by every
Buffoon at pleasure, but, I suppose, he stands Candidate to succeed his friend
B. H. in his late Eminency.

But now to go on with the description, he makes all these petitions to be
addressed to the Presbyter, and thanks returned to the Petitioners. On the
right hand aloft he sets a Cabal of Raskals, as it were in a consult, opposite
on the left hand he sets little Alderman Isaac Pennington, and the Pope, under
them the Capital letters of Solemn League and Covenant, under that, according
to his usual scurrilous way, a piece of Holy Writ, Jer. 60. 5. which he
scoffingly would seem to apply to that wicked Combination or Covenant. On the
right hand below a company of ill looks Raskals with banners, having Alderman
Gourney, Strafford, and Bishop Laud chained amongst 'em, Magna Charta, Bible,
and Councils, etc. underfoot, under all the head of the late King of blessed
memory. On the left, opposite to it, a great eared Knave spewing of Canons and
Common Prayer, etc. his head supported by a plump Harlot. Nigh a little Table
in the middle of all a little Rascally fellow for Secretary beset with pot and
pipe, and Monkey by him as Assistant, with a great many other gimcracks not
worth mentioning, but I only observe that the excise is by its Companions as
the Directory Ordinance ranked amongst those wicked grievances. I wonder why it
should for sure the Animal does not think, that ever that duty will be taken
^way. Under all a great deal of Poetry both good bad and indifferent in the
kind. There are only two verses, that I remark upon, as now very well timed and
tinctured with Jesuits loyalty, he makes a Company of Fellows say thus, Our
design's this, to change the Government,
Set up our selves and do it by Parliament.
A very excellent argument for the sitting of that Court but suitable enough I
suppose, to his design, but he might do well to discover such a contrivement if
he know it for else misprison of Treason must be his lot; if he know nothing,
but only out of his singular good nature and piety guesses at things, there is
a piece of Salust very applicable.

Est locus in carcere quod Tullianum appellatur.

From what has now been offered, or from their own better understandings, none
will, I think, suppose, that this piece of painting is any thing historical,
but rather a project now pretendedly in agitation.

As now I have said somewhat of his witty and elaborate piece, so I Will say a
little of that way of libelling, it is a libel as much as writing, and as much
punishable, but yet, I think, a man may safely put a case of that nature, as
thus, Admit a Painter draw Oliver newly established in the Protectorate,
environed with all his Myrmidons, all public officers and foreign Ministers
addressing to him, the area of the Cut bestrowed with all the remarques of a
ruined State, as a Crown and Scepter reversed, the Magna Charta, the holy
Bible, Acts of Parlia, all thrown about a great Church orethrown, the 3
Estates, the loyal Gentry and Nobility looking through prison grates, etc. and
at the lower end of all a little dapper fellow with a Chamlet Cloak over his
shoulder to cover a base Viol, making his honors like a mannerly Schoolboy,
and telling one of the Pages of honor, that he desires to make an humble
oblation of Music to congratulate his serene Highness's assumption of the
Government, as well as to cheer and refresh his mighty spirits, as an argument
that he had quit that unfortunate side, as might appear by a label out of his
mouth, some unlucky body would guess a certain Gentleman that lives in the high
way to the Paddington Tree, to be meant by it: Admit again a Painter to draw a
pretty well timbred Gentleman set in his scribbling laboratory in a thinking
posture, and a doughty man of war flourishing an ireful sapling over his manly
shoulders, which put him into such a posture, as Aeneas was in when he was
ready to be piss himself in the storm,

Duplex tendens ad sydera Palmas Talia voce refert. Which may be Englished,
thus.

He lifting up his mutton fists on high,
Strike not he said before you tell us why,
De mortuis nil nisi bonum, says the angry man of war, for this little Author
had been bespattering the great Coke for which he was with such indignation
rebuked. To go on with this Skeldry, admit a Painter should draw a grave
antiquated Sq; about the great clymacterick running away with a young Lass in
the lawful way of marriage, Paraph. of Phaed. to Hippol. by the Club.
with her Purse inside outward as an emblem of wealth, and the old Gentleman
poetizing concerning himself, as might appear by the ingenuity of the
delineatour at this rate, Love-pangs in youth with Art we did remove,
But now in riper years with rage we love.
And to say truth, the Gentleman had in his youthful days as many remedies
against banging himself for love, as Lukeners lane, the Old Cherry-Garden, or
Madam Bear her Damsels (a Lady as famous in her Generation for those
intrigues, as either Mother Gifford or Betty Buley of late and happy memory)
could afford. I say, and it like your worship, some would say it was knavishly
meant.

But lest you or some wiser Reader should object at the impropriety of making a
Piper sometimes talk like a Scholar, it cannot be worse than to make a Bumpkin
a Politician, a Canting Knave, and yet so ignorant in Religion as to talk of
the Ten Tables. But when all is done our Lucian will call me a Libeller, as he
does every body, that is not exact according to his own model, and I believe
would not forbear a man that should write against the vanity of spending night
after night at Langtrilow, and losing twenty pound at a time to a Company of
Sophistresses, for want of an Assistant to convey the beloved Pam.

But the Reader may say this is severe upon some Body, but when that somebodies
methods are considered, it may not be deemed improper, according to an old
piece of Badge footed Poetry in Manuscript, in answer to an abusive Scot;
Skeleton Laureate After this rate Defends with his pen All Englishmen From
vile Dundass That Scottish Ass. Dundass so drowzy, So scab'd and lowzy. Thou
say in thy rayles We Englishmen have tails, Behind in my hose I have a rose
For thy Scottish nose.


And so I kiss your Worships hands, and remain

Your most humble Servant, E. P.

A DIALOGUE BETWIXT Captain Crackbrain, and Tom the Cheshire Piper, IN ANSWER
TO CIT and BUMPKIN.
At a Side-board of a Coffee-House.
Capt. ON my Soul, that is Tom the Piper that sits so gravely there: He is a
notable Knave, I Will acost him, pretend acquaintance, and get something out of
him; How do thou Tom? I think there is no body left in the House but us two,
if thou will I Will sit down by ye.


Tom. You are welcome, but I declare against all things that are not of English
Manufacture, let us have a Mug of Ale, and I Will join with you.


Capt. A match.


Tom. Sir, may I beg the favor of your Name?


Capt. My name is Crackbrain.


Tom. A very good Family; of the North or the West?


Capt. I Am of the Crackbrains of the North, where my Family has flourished some
hundreds of years: But lets talk now of other matters, and because I hear you
to be Book learned, I Will ask you what you think of the Dialogue 'twixt Cit and
Bumpkin.


Tom. I think it a very Scoffing Scurrilous Pamphlet, and that the Author is
within the equity of the Pillory; for he without any due regard to good manners
or truth, bespatters many of the Nobility, the most eminent Gentry, and
Citizens, with the basest and meanest practices of Forgery imaginable: For can
any thing be more vile or any thing more malicious, than to do as Bumpkin
charged Page 3.
himself withal, namely to fill up Sheets with Smiths and Walkers, etc. to amuse
the Nation with numbers, as if they meant something further?


Capt. I must take upon me the Defense, and therefore I believe the Author was
in the right, as to the charge.


Tom. Ibid.
Ay, and for Women to underwrite for their Husbands in the West Indies too.


Capt. I must and will undertake his Defense, because of my Alliance with him.


Tom. I thought so, for I Will be hanged if he be not of the Noble House of the
Crackbrains too. But hark you Captain, make good the Defense of that, Et eris
mihi magnus Apollo.


Capt. I Will say this, that there is nothing in that Paper that is either
disloyal or Popish.


Tom. Not in point blank terms, but without much difficulty reducible to either
of those heads.


Capt. What the Pox, you do not take the Author for a Papist or a Plotter?


Tom. He is one of the Multi though.


Capt. What Is that?


Tom. Salust telling the opinion of the People about Cataline 's Plot, says,
Multi ob stultitiam non putabant, multi ob ignorantiam non videbant, multi ob
pravitatem non credebant, and non credendo conjurationem adjuvabant: Which I
have got turned thus into Meeter:

Some were such Sots they did not think,
Some men so silly as to wink,
Some lewder Knave believed it not,
By which they did help on the Plot.

Crack. I must confess, that is a very apposite Application; but do you think
then, that Author to be a Papist?


Tom. No, on my Conscience, but a Protestant Gentleman, because he somewhere
says so, but he might as well have said Protestantish, as he scurrilously
says in another place; but however he is in his Religion, I am sure he is a
Papist in Faction, as many others are.


Crack. On my Conscience you might as well have charged Mr. -- so.


Tom. None will be so impudent sure, as to fix any such imputation upon such a
Pillar of the Church, such a Steeple of Truth as he is known to be! but yet if
a man consider his further discovery of the Plot, dedicated to Dr. Titus Oats,
his Passion for him, if he be a Protestant, will be very sedate, for what
Jesuit could lessen the Doctor's testimony, or Narrative of the Plot, more than
he has done, by saying, I believe the Plot, and as much of it as every good
Subject ought to believe, or as any man in his right Wits can believe, nay,
I Will so absolutely believe it, that in my Conscience, you your self, Doctor, do
not believe more of it than I do, and then very wittily, according to his
facetious way of scoffing, compares the whole thing to the raining of buttered
Turnips? he might have said Cods heads, it would have made up the simile every
whit as well; might not any dying Priest have said the same, and have salved
all by Equivocation, though he believed not a word of the Doctor's Depositions?
as, I suppose, Mr. -- does not: Well, in fine, Captain, had that discourse been
put into Meeter, it would have been the subject of many witty Ballads.


Capt. I vow Tom, you are very rude with a Gentleman, that bears so
considerable a figure in the Government, as it is known he does: I profess you
deserve to be severely punished.


Tom. No, no, he did, he may say fuimus Troes, he was some Body, when he had
the Superintendency of your little Books and Ballads which brought in many a
halfcrown; before he came to that Preferment, he may remember he was as
mutinous in print as any Body, because he could get nothing; then the
Government lay under a maladministration, when the Advocate General which
should have tried him for his Loyalty, which he can never be sufficiently
commended for, came to be Chancellor of Norwich, he was about that time very
pert with the King too, for giving greater gifts to a Lord, that had been of
the other side, than suitable to his great mind; so to quiet him, it was
allowed him to write things like the Old Diurnals, twice a week, which he did
for about six years, with no small Satisfaction to himself, till at last, he
stuffed his Papers with such little things, as where Rowland Pipin lived, and how
Goodman Shuffe was choked with eating a two penny Custard for a Wager, etc.
That it was not decent to the grandieur of the Nation, to have such a public
Notary, and so the Gazette way of writing yet continued, was taken up.


Capt. This is Passion, but after all, prithee Tom tell me your Opinion
concerning Dr. Oats his Depositions, for I Am sure you are a man of Observation.


Tom. I have read them, and I have read some other things, and have read him
too by some small Conversation, the Measures I took from thence is, that I do
take the Doctors Narrative to be the real Truth which time will at last bring
forth, though many are a little impatient about it, for he has not Compass
enough to invent such a lie, and so circumstantiated, for I assure you lie is
no Sophister, witness his indiscretions to the Episcopal Clergy, and his slight
speaking of them, which must be imputed to his Education, being bred a
Fanatic, then turned Papist, now that is laid aside, he may be the same again,
so I conclude him governed by Truth then, because now governed by a thing like
Conscience, but had he been a man of those Intrigues, florid Parts, as the
learned Author of Cit and Bumpkin, so well able to invent and polish a Tale,
with profane swearing and other proper Circumstances, as he has shown himself
all along to be in that Discourse, I should have no more believed the Plot from
the Doctors single Testimony, than I believe the method of getting hands have
been as he would insinuate.


Capt. Truly you must give him a grain of Allowance, for he was in Newgate
prison before the Kings Return, and now begins to be uneasy by loss of his
Place, by the Freedom of Trade, which has been costly enough to some, and some
other things in the World that are uneasy to him, which makes him very
passionate at any thing like Fanaticism, which he takes every thing to be that
does absolutely quadrate with his own Capricio. I must speak Truth though I be
his Cousin.


Tom. You put me in mind of a Story when Bishop Bonner came out of the
Marshalsea, to exercise his Episcopal Office in Queen Mary's time, he behaved
himself very extravagantly to some Gentlemen, that came to wait on him in his
Visitation, which when one of his Servants would have excused by his late
coming out of Prison, a Gentleman replied, he is lately come out of the
Marshalsea, and now he is fit to go to Bethlehem, but there is a Friend of mine
one J. Neuton, that lives on Clerken-well-green, that cures all mad People,
that are not moped, as he says in his printed Paper, if he would repair
thither, he might be accommodated, and this poor Nation at quiet, for his
Distemper is far from any thing like mopishness, being so Mercurial a Gentleman
as he is known to be, and therefore, as my Author says, very curable.


Capt. There is no dealing with you, you are so bitter upon my Cousin, we'll
call our old cause over again, I Am ready to do as I said, defend that Dialogue.


Tom. So you say; but hark you, Captain, you may be a man of sense for all
that, do you not think it a very flagitious thing for a little unknown Fellow,
to comprehend all the States, Orders, and Divisions of men, both Lords,
Citizens, and Commons of England under the opprobrious names of Cit and
Bumpkin? names so reproachful, that the meanest Spirit in England would make a
repartee with a Cudgel in Answer to either of them.


Capt. He meant only the seditious part of them, I suppose, that is, them that
were for petitioning, which was pursued with great Zeal by all sort of
Phanaticks.


Tom. From whence you most logically conclude, it was a seditious contrivance.


Cap. Yes, marry do I.


Tom. Not so fast, good Captain, there is no Law against it, and where no Law,
no Transgression, yet that shameless Author would insinuate a disposition of
Rebellion from it: Otherwise he would not treat the Petitioners at that
scurrilous rate as he does all along, and truly, Captain, (for I do not love to
swear nor talk profanely, as that Author makes his Cit and Bumpkin do very
often,) had not his Majesty declared his dislike against it, as not suitable to
his Royal Will and Pleasure, which modest men out of good manners would not
oppose, the Petition had been subscribed, as generally as ever any was; for
notwithstanding all his malicious charges against it, it was not malum in se,
not ill in it self, but as it was circumstanced with the Kings Will to the
contrary.


Capt. But what say you to all the Phanaticks so cordially joining in it, may
not that beget a suspicion justly, that there was something intended that might
be malum in se, ill in it self?


Tom. Not at all, does not the Scripture tell you that the Pharisees were great
Sophisticators of the old Law, confounding it by unwritten Traditions? yet they
are not blamed, neither is the Doctrine of the Resurrection disparaged, for
their stout assertion of it.


Capt. You say well, then I see that a Phanatick may sometimes be in the right,
as well as the wicked Pharisees, or the Papists.


Tom. Who doubts it?


Cap. I perceive you are, though not for the defense of Petitioning, yet for
the defense of the subject matter of it, what say you to the twitting the King
with his Coronation Oath, that Delinquents may be brought to punishment, and
then the Parliament was to sit as long as they pleased?


Tom. I believe it an unjust charge, as to the main; for though possibly some
might be so indiscreet as to name that Oath, not with that due respects to his
Majesty, yet I Am confident none was ever so impudent as to demand, in terms,
the bringing Delinquents to Punishment, being that was so notorious a 1641
term, as must displease all men that are not of those Principles; but possibly
there might be something of trying the Lords in the Tower, which might give the
Protestantish Author occasion of that flourish, as if their Case was parallel
to those worthy Lords and Gentlemen, then called Delinquents, than which
nothing can be more vilely insinuated; but as to his last charge, that the
Parliament was to sit as long as they pleased, I Am sure it is so notoriously
false, as nothing but a man of a bold front could have said it, I wish he had
been in Scotland, and a Subject to their Laws when he said it.


Capt. Prithee why so?


Tom. They have a Law there, as I have been informed, called the Statute of
Leasing, that if any man by prepense false suggestion or insinuation accuse a
Lord, so as he may be capitally questioned, it is capital in the Accuser; if
that Law was on force here, my little Fellow would be collered; for can any
thing be more malicious, than to accuse a Body of men of attempting a thing
which cannot be acted without the greatest Treason imaginable, as that of
perpetuating a Parliament, for that is the English of sitting as long as they
please, meant by the ingenious Author?


Capt. He but tells you, that a Country Justice said so somewhere upon the
Bench, and so they are not his words.


Tom. A Writer of Dramatique or Dialogue is to answer always for what he makes
the Persons speak, which might be the occasion of that Statute for the
punishment of profane Swearing by Players of Interludes, which our Author is
not free from, it may be that quality made him nameless, for fear some
cross-grained Cur of the Bench should have levied the twelve pence's upon him.
But this must be wholly an Artifice to blacken the Petition, for no Justice in
the Country, nor Westminster neither, though many of them are far from
Conjurers, could ever be so fond to assert a thing so wholly and in every
parcel an untruth: but there may be strange Children now, as there were in
David's time, whose mouth speaks vanity, from whom the Prophet prayed
deliverance, Psalm. 144. v. 11.


Cap. Why, you are a strange man to expect literal truths from a man that
writes in my Friends mystical way.


Tom. Hark you, Captain, if your Friend in his mystical way had abused me in
particular, as he has almost the whole Nation in general, I would in downright
terms have broken his Head, whenever I had met him, and in the mean time,
have cudgelled you, noble Captain, till you had discovered his name, though I
be but a Piper, Call me Bumpkin? I would have him know, and you too, that I Am
the 22d. Piper of my Family, licensed by the Heirs of Dutton, now Lord Gerard,
a faculty saved to that Family by two Acts of Parliament; so we are no Rogues,
like your South Country Fiddlers, Captain.


Cap. You are very hot, cooler language would do as well, for hot words do no
business.


Tom. Well, well; but what say you to that detracting passage, that it would be
never the worse Page 6.
if they, viz. the men of Estates, were out of favor at Court; for an honest
revenge, ye know, goes a great way with a tender Conscience.


Capt. Very well.


Tom. How can any thing be more base than this? to desire that the men of
Estates should be out of Favor at Court, because it would prompt them to
revenge, as he very Christianly insinuates, the consequence of which must be a
War, as he must hope; but I wonder he should, when he is a man of known modesty
before an Enemy, if he be the man I guess* but he is a public spirited man,
and so hopes a War as the only expedient to set aside all Petitioning for the
Future: for to say truth, there will be nothing left upon such success as he
proposes to petition for; but if there be no better conduct than his, there may
be a mistake in measures: our last War was occasioned from such rascally
Politiques, to press both sides to extremities, and foment all differences into
the bargain too, as I have been told; but I hope to see a thousand such
rascally Pickthanks hanged, before any thing of that happen.


Cap. But is not my Cousin very witty, when he says it is a blessing to have
neither Friend nor Money, and yet to design to be taken prisoner, as the way to
both, and makes it out very prettily?


Tom. Yes faith he is; but why the pox does he not Page 7.
pursue his own methods to Preferment, take a Gaol? for on my Conscience, he
cannot crack of either; for how he should have Friends that has abused the
whole Nation I see not, neither how he should abound in Money; for Lands he has
none I believe.


Capt. Then you think Tom a Gaol is the fittest place for my Cousin?


Tom. Ay truly do I.


Capt. But do you not like his brave Description of the benefits of a Prison,
and the Rogueries of those that ply there to that purpose?


Tom. Truly like the rest; for from the converse of Newgate-birds, he concludes
all the intrigues of the World to be managed at the same Religious Rule, and
then makes his Cit. an Officer of Address, as one may call him; but he keeps
his Office no where that I can find out but in your Cousin Crackbrain's Noddle.


Capt. But what think you of the discovery of a new Plot, in case the Petition
had gone on; of five Petitions more, if the Parliament had met? one against the
Lords in the Tower, another for the sitting of the Parliament, till they had
gone through with what they had to do, a third for taking away Bishops Votes, a
fourth for the remove of Evil Counselors, a fifth for putting the Militia into
safe hands.


Tom. Your Cousin might do well to produce the Draught of such Petitions, or at
least, name somebody besides his Bumpkin that had seen some such thing,
otherways he is to be taken for a Makebate and a Liar; and truly we have
reason to acquiesce under the Government of our Gracious Prince that cannot be
provoked by such sycophantly Knaves to do any thing but what becomes him: But
your Cousin shows himself a good man upon all occasions, by ranging all those
Petitions together, as if to Petition for the Trial of the Lords, was equally
criminal with the rest, can any thing more reflect upon the Honor of the King,
Parliament, and whole Nation, than to insinuate, which must be a necessary
consequence of so marshalling the Petitions, that a Petition against the Lords,
impeached by Parliament for High Treason, when a Court is in being that can
only take Cognizance of their Affairs, is to be ranked amongst Misdemeanors of
the highest Nature; if this do not proceed from a Design, which I think is not
very Protestantish, of running the Plot into Sham, I am mistaken.


Capt. But hark you, Minstrel, does not my Cousin go on bravely, when he tells
us what dangerous Page 10.
Rogues the Citizens are, and what designs they have still on foot, to distract,
if not subvert the Government, by contriving new Methods of petitioning, and
telling us, that those Heads will find Hands if there should be occasion? On my
Conscience he is a notable man.


Tom. So he is, and a bold one too, I think, to asperse by intimation so
considerable a body of Men, as the City of London, with contrivances against
the Government, only to show his wit, without the least ground imaginable as I
can see: I tell you, if it was in France, as fond as he is of that Government,
they would anger him, for he would without doubt be put to the question, that a
discovery might be made of such grand Designs in agitation; and if it proved
all a Staff of his own, as I dare swear this is, then I believe he would be
broke upon the Wheel, for endeavoring to bring the King into a jealousy of
his good City of Paris.


Capt. But is not my Cousin an excellent Casuist, by running his divisions upon
Conscience?


Tom. Yes, in his scoffing way; but I must tell both him and you, in answer to
his frequent running that expression, Of the People of the Lord into ridicule;
though I am as far from believing that those pretenders are such, yet God has
a People that he will vindicate one day to the Confusion of Faces of all them
that sit in the Seat of the scornful.


Capt. But has he not mauld the Predestinarians with their Doctrine of
necessity?


Tom. He is too shallow for that; he has a little droll'd upon the consequence
of the Opinion: but I tell you, Capt. what I heard a Blacksmith over a Pot of
Ale say the other day, that every futurity, or thing to come, was certain in it
self, whether it should happen or not, and that cannot be denied, Captain.


Capt. It cannot.


Tom. If so, what room then for free Agency, when it is impossible to remove a
certainty: But as I heard a Divine say once, no created understanding can
comprehend the difference betwixt Gods certain foresight and predestinating, so
I leave it; and I Am sure he would not have meddled with it, but that he could
fix something of reproach upon the party, from the consequences of it, meeting
with some bad practices of hypocritical men; but yet as generally as it is now
decryed, it has been otherways; for they that know any thing, know that most
of the Bishops, and generally the Inferior Clergy were of that Opinion, and
yet very holy and pious men in their Generations, for all his scoffs that he
fixes upon that opinion by inference; for none was ever yet so impudent to
assert in terms what he makes his Cit to do, and truly I do believe he is of
the Cit's Opinion, that a thing may be sin in one which is not in another; for
lying, though Page 13.
it be a sin in most men, is not so in him, as he thinks, he otherways would not
have so much used it.


Capt. How came you, Tom Piper, to be such a distinguisher? I did not expect it
from you.


Tom. My Mother was a Parsons Daughter, had little to her Portion, but a few
Books, and Sermon Notes of her Fathers, which I used to read at spare times to
the Neighborhood, and so became thus skilful.


Capt. Well, what think you of his clawing the Rogues off for their old
Rebellion, is it not manly and brave?


Tom. It is a thing that has been said a thousand times when it was so; but now
it looks like breaking the Act of Oblivion, a thing that his Majesty, to his
Immortal Honor holds sacred; such a little Rat as he, methinks, should not be
nibling, when the Lion is unconcerned.


Capt. Page 16.
Cit and Bumkin drunk, and why may not we within then? two Pots, and shut the
door after you. But what think thou Tom, to page 26. is it not an excellent
facetious discourse, displaying Villalany in its proper colors?


Tom. It is rather a teaching people how to be Villains; like your fashionable
Plays, teach more sins than they reprove.


Capt. My Cousin cannot, I see, get your good word, but I Will make you Friends.


Tom. As how?


Capt. You Will Pipe at his Wifes next Churching, and then I Am sure the half
Guinney and the Frumenty will please you.


Tom. Let it alone till then; but in the mean time I Will give a short account of
my Sentiments of those ten Pages.


Capt. Let Us have it then.


Tom. He begins with comparing Presbyterians and Jesuits, a thing now that is
trite and threadbare; there is a Book called Lysimachus Nicanor that has done
it more to the purpose, writ near forty years agone, but yet in his rails upon
the later, he speaks Ironically of the Plot (when he calls the Jesuits the
Heads of it upon the King, etc.) as a man must needs conclude that reads the
whole discourse, especially if that Author had any intelligence or
correspondence with the Author of the Further Discovery dedicated to Dr. Titus
Oats; and that flourish might have been as decently saved; besides his Pen too
much resembles a Cleaver, cuts only one way, as a man may easily observe by his
constant pinching upon that party for the 1641. business, a thing that none of
them has the face now publicly to justify, and his passing by the Rebellion
of Ireland, accompanied with the murder of nigh a million of Protestants,
without the least Reflection, though that Villainy be yet justified, or at least
not owned to be so by that Party, as it was at first abetted by the Pope; and
then after all, as if he would make himself completely wicked, he scandalizes
the Protestant Religion, which the late King of blessed Memory owned that he
fought for, as may be seen yet by his Declarations, and the Inscription upon
his Coyns, stamped at the beginning of the late Rebellion; for by that is meant,
as he makes his Citizen say, the Religion of the Dissenters from the Church; a
distinction that the late blessed Martyr would not have thanked him for.


Capt. I perceive you are very poynant upon my Friend still; but go on.


Tom. Then he goes on with teaching a method of Villainy, which he would call
discovering, to inflame the Nation, and widen the Breaches betwixt the King and
his People; for why else should he, amongst other things, lay such a stress
upon the Kings being one of the three Estates, and make such damned inferences,
a thing decried by all sober men, because declared otherwise in the Preambles
of several Acts of Parliament? and yet the good King in a Message to the two
Houses owned three Estates, when the Bishops were by Act removed, of which by
consequence he must be one, but that may be looked upon, considering the
novelty of that disposition, to be a lapse in the Secretary, and so no weight
to be laid upon it. I refer you to the Declaration bearing date from York, June
13. 1642. Then he falls upon the light and foolish antic Gestures of the
Conventiclers, with their fond Metaphors not worth answering, because none so
foolish as to adjust them; then he goes on, as if the Plot was only a Blind to
enrage People, and that there was a real Design to destroy the Hierarchy, and
all the Sons of the Church, by the name of the Papists in Masquerade, and get
all the places of profit to themselves.


Capt. Is not that very well hinted?


Tom. What are you a hinter and a holder-forth? so it is well hinted of buzzing
into the peoples Ears to dispose them to Rebellion, of the Emperor of
Morocco's landing upon Salisbury-Plain 35000 light Horsemen, and a great many
other Fopperies, not worth taking notice on.


Capt. To say truth, there are a great many little things in it, but there must
be something to fill up, or else it would not come to account, it would not
advance from the Stationer any thing considerable.


Tom. But he should have studied propriety of things, to have made 'em pass the
better: Is it not, think you, a well laid thing, to make his Bumkin whom he
represents, a cunning, projecting, canting Knave? to bring in a story by the
Head and shoulders of Moses, and the ten Tables, and correcting himself with a
thundering Oath, one that he afterward makes justifying the three Estates, and
other intrigues of Politiques? it might have passed, had he laid the Scene
amongst his Friends in Flanders; and then saying, that he had read in a Book
that the Bishops in H. Eighth's time made the ten Commandments, and make
foolish inferences from thence too: The whole thing is a lie, for no man ever
yet read any such thing in a Book, but in his scurrilous Pamphlet; the nearest
to it is, what Bishop Spotswood reports of the Priests in Scotland about that
time, That they would have made the common people believe, the more to incense
them against Patrick Hamilton, and the Gospellers of that Age, that Martin
Luther and his Accomplices made the New Testament, or at least St. Paul's
Epistles, but touch not mine anointed: I hope the ingenious Author is too wise
to make reflections of that nature.

But I perceive you care not what reflections you make upon my friend.


Tom. Your friend is unknown to me, he should have set his name, and then it
may be he had been safer, but I suppose his modesty would not permit it.


Capt. Well, is this all you have to say*


Tom. There needs not, I think, but one word more, at last he falls foul by his
Cit upon Le Strange, whom he calls Dog in a doublet or worse, but after all he
ends in a panegyric of his wsedome.


To 'em Make a noise Tom, as out of a Closet. Capt. I do not like this
eves-dropping, yet I hope, I have said nothing, that I need care who hears:
however Tom the Pudding-pie-man, is a good honest fellow, I have wasted some
pence with him.


Make a noise Tom. Come Gentlemen you have been in eager discourse, but I did
hear the subject matter of it very well.


Tom. I was only making some passionate observations upon a Book twice or
thrice printed, called Cit and Bumkin, which he undertook wholly, and in every
part to defend.


Make a noise Tom. What you Captain Crackfart turned Advocate? must Cicero pro
Milone be reacted by you with a horse pox to your Captainship? How long is it
since I relieved you, and a thin starved thing yclipped your Boy, with ten penny
worth of Pudding pies, when you and he had lived three days upon stewed
fiddlestrings? I tell thee Tom Piper, how this fellow came by the doughty name
of Captain, he was a foot Soldier in Olivers time, and upon a march stole a
live Pike in an Inn, out of a Pale, and put it into his Breeches, because he
saw his Comrade had done the like to a Barbel, but presently his manful roars
made a discovery, so he was Cashiered, pretended it was for his Loyalty, and
from that time dubbed himself Captain: But as to the discourse, I tell thee Old
Soldier* that if he, or thou, or any body that wears a head, God bless the
King, should have called, or shall call me by the contemptible name of Cit
(though I be but free of the Porters Company) I would and will, if ever it be
any man's ill luck so to do, all to be pudding-pie his Calves head: What Cit?


Capt. How I am now like to be worried betwixt these two learned men? Tom Piper
and Make a noise Tom the Pudding Wright: Well, well, but though you quarrel, my
friend, for his names of Cit and Bumkin, yet Mr Truman speaks very heavenly by
the same Authors directions: speak against that if you dare, the best of you.


Make a noise T. Mr. Truman speaks truly of the Papists, but not all that a
true Son of the Church might have said, he says in answer to the Charge, that
the Papists Loyalty was in their own defense, being in a manner necessitated to
that side, that it was better, if so, than fighting against the King, and
further that no man drew his sword in the opposite cause, but known
Separatists, and that not one Separatist struck in the Kings quarrel, he might
have added, if he had though fit, that after the King was outed, not one Papist
ever entered into a Plot for his Restitution, but the whole truth was not his
business, whereas the Schismatics, as he boldly enough calls some sort of men,
asserted the Kings Cause in the lowest Ebb: and that so bravely both by outward
force, and other less visible endeavors, that the Kings Restitution must be
ascribed to them, as to the second cause, which made some amends for their
former devitation, I tell thee Crackbrain, had the King had no better friends
than the Papists, he had never seen the English shore again.


Capt. But have you read on?


Make a noise T. Yes, and find the business about the three Estates repeated
over again to no purpose, wherein the learned Author has with great reputation
to himself proved the Snow white.


Cap. But what think you of his bringing in Le strange's Epistle to the History
of the Plot: is not that a heeler?


Make a noise T. Like the rest, for I have not much to say about that
Gentleman, either pro or con, for they say he is a very pretty man at small
matters, but those two Authors do most harmoniously agree in driving on, and
fixing a worse Plot upon the Non Conformists, which they both are careful to
improve, which is by their favor a setting up of the worship of false Gods, to
lessen, if not to destroy the worship of the true one; so whilst they would
alarm the Nation with this Chymera of a Plot to be found no where, but in their
learned Brains, the true Plot will weather off, or which is worse, go on.


Cap. I think you are as hard to please as Tom Piper, I had thought you had
revered Mr. Strange at another rate, than to speak so indifferently of him.


Make a noise T. Indifferently do you call it? I wonder that I, or any other
good Subject should do so, especially when it is considered who licensed Humane
Reason, that Book, that deserved to be burnt by the common Hangman, as a great
Lord said some bodies else did.


Cap. But did not he say then in excuse that he would license an answer to it?


Make a noise T. It may be so, but that resolves into this, that he would
license any thing for the Fees of it.


Capt. I Will tell him what you say, and then in faith he will maul you in a Ballad,
with nows the time, as well as he has done somebody else.


Tom Piper. Pray Gentlemen not so fast, fair and softly goes far on a day.


Capt. But do you hear Make a noise Tom, how do you like Mr. Trumans
description of the duty of Subjects, and Kings?


Make a noise T. I shall tell you my mind as to that too, for I have read the
Book o'r; and we Pie-men are old Dog at Politiques in this communicative age:
Well, now as to that, by multitude of questions, he perplexes the Cause, for if
he laid down for his position this truth, That in no Cases whatsoever it can
be lawful for a Subject to arm against his Prince, there had been then no Room
for a shift, but he makes his Cit ask a knavish question, What if a King will
transgress all the Laws of God and man? may not the People resume their trust?
The answer is in the negative, but a man might have shaped another answer as
pertinent.


Capt. As how?


Make a noise T. When God gives over Kings to be wholly led by their sensual
appetites, and to lay aside all manner of Justice, he often suffers the People
to be so too, for the world is rather governed by example than Precept. There
are many sad examples of that kind, as of Don Pedro the cruel of Castile
stabbed to death by his Bastard Brother. Winceslaus King of Bohemia, once
imprisoned, and when he had by miracle recovered his Estate, grew so
barbarously cruel to all ranks of men, that upon Citizens of Prague rose as one
man against him, upon which news, being in the Castle, he fell into a fit of an
Apoplexy, and died suddenly. Christiern the second of Denmark, who was deposed
by his Uncle Frederick. And of later years Sultan Ibrahim the Great Turk, who
was for his outrageous lusts and other extravagancies, deposed and strangled in
the Seragilo. There is a living example of that kind, Sebastian of Portugal,
set aside and imprisoned by his Brother, who now injoys as the reward of his
fact both his Brothers wife and Kingdom, and yet not so much as a Sword, or Pen
managed in his behalf; by these examples, though it cannot be denied, but it is
the Subjects duty to suffer patiently, and like the Theban Legion, suffer
themselves to be cut in pieces, rather than to resist, as Mr. Truman well
observed; yet nature in those Cases is often so strong, that there is no
trusting to it.


Tom. I perceive then, that your opinion is, that it is safer for Princes to
keep within due moderation, as to their administration, than to do otherwise,
notwithstanding they have so much right on their sides, even as to this world;
for if a Nation should lie under such unhappy circumstances, as to have the
Prince and People at difference, the Divines of the Popular, as well as the
other, would from Texts of Scripture, whether misapplied or no, not material,
offer Pillows to both parties, as is well observed in an excellent Passage out
of Denhams Sophy, Page 44.

-- poor Princes! how are they misled?
Whilst they whose sacred Office is to bring*
Kings to obey their gods, and men their King,
By these mysterious links to fix and tie
Them to the footsteps of the Deity:
Even by these men, Religion that should be
The Curb, is made the Spur to Tyrany:
They with their double Key of Conscience bind
The Subjects and leave Kings unconfined,
While their poor Vassals sacrifice their bloods
TO ambition, and to avarice their Goods?
Blind to devotion, they themselves esteem,
Made for themselves, and all the world for them,
Whilst Heaven's great Law, given for guide, appears
Just or unjust, but as it wai^s on theirs*
Used but to give the Echo to their words,
Power to their Wills, and Edges to their Swords,
To varnish all their Errors, and secure
The ills they act, and all the world endure*
Thus by their Arts, Kings awe the World, whilst they
Religion, as their Mistress seem^^ obey,
Yet as their Slave command her, whilst they seem
To rise to Heaven, they make Heaven stoop to them:
Nor is this all, where feigned devotion bends
The highest things to serve the basest ends.
For if the many headed Beast has broke,
Or shaken from his neck the Royal Yoke,
With popular rage Religion does con^pire,
Flows into that, and swells the Torrent higher.
Then Powers first Pedigree from force derives,
And calls to mind the old Prerogatives
Of free born man, and with a saucy eye,
Searches the heart and soul of Majesty,
Then to a strict and censure brings
The actions, errors, and the end of Kings,
Treads on Authority, and sacred Laws,
Yet all for God and his pretended cause;
Acting such things for him, which he in them,
And which themselves in others would condemn.
Thus now engaged, nor safely can retire,
Nor safely stand, but blindly bold aspire,
Forcing their hopes, even through despair to climb
To new attempts, disdan the present time:
Grow from disdain to threats, from threats to arms,
Whilst they, though Sons of peace, still sound the alarm,
Thus whether Kings or People seek extremes,
Still Conscience and Religion are their Theames:
And whatsoever change the State invades,
The Pulpit either forces or persuades.
Others may give the fuel or the fire,
But they the blast, which makes the flame flame higher.

Make a noise T. I perceive by this your Poets are an extraordinary sort of
men, for as I have been told, that was written before the late Wars, and I see
by this that there will never want upon the same unlucky occasion high Boys on
both sides, but thou have a plaguey memory to remember all this stuff, I wonder
how thou do it, I can hardly remember the Lords Prayer.


Tom. Nature always supplies Fools and blind men with a special gift that way.


Capt. You may think there may be no harm in this Poetry, but I assure you, if
my Cousin comes to know of it: he will make you prove where you had it.


Make a noise T. That Is as easily done Captain Crackbrains, as to prove your
ingenious Cousin to be a Pensioner to somebody, that he does not think fit to
own.


Capt. You mean the Lords in the Tower I warrant you if you durst speak.


Tom. What if one did? you are never the better, it is no Libel, neither will an
Action on the Case lie for abusing Captain Crackbrains Cousin nameless: But
faith, if you will Captain, we will call for the other friendly pot* three double
Mugs of Ale within there, now lets talk in cooler terms.


Make a noise T. I am for peace, but yet in utrumque paratus.


Capt. Where got you all this Latin? I did not expect it, neither with going
to Sermons, nor crying Make a noise Tom.


Make a noise T. They are the remains of my schooling.


Capt. You are then I believe a man of Intrigue, some Jesuit in disguise, pray
give me your opinion, what is the best way to grow rich; for I am of the opinion
of that Author, that cried, O Cives, Cives, quaerenda pecunia primum,

Virtus post nummos.

My Masters and Friends, let us first grow rich,
Then virtue 'll come, or vice, no matter which.

Tom. A very learned Colloquy amongst us three Vertuosi.


Make a noise T. If by riches you mean preferment, I Will tell you mine opinion,
and illustrate it by some Examples: first I do not like the Cits way of
Imprisonment in order to it, for that meets with so many difficulties, as are
not easily to be o'rcome.


Capt. You tell me which is not the way, pray tell me which is, for without
better directions, I Will never come to my Journies end.


Make a noise T. There is a way which has thriven well with a namesake of mine,
and many others, namely to abette the Republican interest, incumber the
Prerogative with Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and Property, so that it
shall be a mere empty name, but be sure you be a parlish Pratlebasket upon that
Subject, then you will be taken off, as my Namesake is, by which he has got to be
either the third, fourth, or fifth part of a great Officer of State.


Tom. I cannot find out the interest of taking Men off, that is of hiring men
to personate an honest man, for to be sure upon the first occasion they will come
to themselves, act the Knaves part again, for they are so still in their hearts.


Make a noise T. You say well, but its often the luck of those Sophisters to be
served so.


Cap. But may not an unwearied writing Books, in defense of the truth, do
something considerable in the case, as it is the circumstance of my Cousin?


Make a noise T. But little; for his way of writing is looked upon by sober
men, more to gratify his Passion upon a Party, and his itch of scribbling,
which is demonstrable enough by his Translations, than out of any noble end to
his Prince, and so he is his own rewarder, by eating the daily dumplings it
affords him.


Cap. You may run down my Cousin, in your Ale, at what rate you please here;
but I say, and say again, that the Phanaticks are more dangerous Enemies than
the Papists, both to the Kings Royal Person and Government.


Tom. I say, and say again, in answer to you, Captain Crackbrains, if there be
one Phanatick in England, that is not Bedlam mad, that wishes any ill to the
Kings Person, though I doubt many may be too saucy upon the Administration: and
on the contrary, if there be ten Papists (I Will go to Abraham's precise number)
that wishes prosperity to either, but in some equivocal meaning, I Will never
pipe more; and so Captain Crackbrains, because you are a man of Quality, pay
the reckoning.


Make a noise T. A match, and then I break up this famous Colloquy.


Tom. But I Will tell you a piece of news before we part: my Friend writes one of
the weekly Books, and to be sure if he hear of our Discourse, he will claw you
off in his next.


Make a noise T. Which of them, the Popish Domestic, called the true one, or
the Fanatique, ycliped the Protestant?


Cap. Neither, but the Loyal one.


Tom. That Is like a Chimney Sweeper, when I lived in Delamere Forest, that
cried all white for the King; for it is a great Argument of Loyalty, to
insinuate to His Majesty, that his People has some ill contrivements against
him, by which he designs to put him upon his constant Guard, which can be no
easy posture to any Monarch; But I suppose his Method is after the rate of
Poor Robin, all the News he blesses us with, is of his own happy contrivance,
in which he has an extraordinary faculty.


Make a noise T. I protest, Tom, you are a notable Fellow, I did not expect any
thing of this from you.


Tom. I have a way for it, for when I exercise my Calling to please Gentlemen,
we sometimes divert our selves with drinking, and then, on course, State
matters, or Religion, are the subject of Discourse, and I having a parlish
memory, bring all away; for I have a double Title to it, according to the late
observation.


Make a noise T. As how?


Tom. Faith I am like the once Mayor of Ripon, Bizond in Eyesight, and Simple
of Understanding.


Make a noise T. I Will but ask you one Question, What is the reason that a
strange Woman in Scripture Language should signify an Harlot, and a Strange
Man in Statutable English, to use the Cits Metaphor, should not signify the A
North Country word for Fellow.
Marrow to it?


Tom. Though it do not so fully, yet it does something of that nature by
implication, for no man deservedly enjoyes that Character, that can boast of
much reputation to himself: But to what purpose this impertinent Sally? let us
part, for we shall run from one thing to another, till we be by some Adam
Over-doe sent to Durance. Your Servant, Captain Crackbrains.


Capt. Your Servant, Sir.


Make a noise T. Your Servant, Gentlemen.


FINIS.

