Imprimatur,

Julij 23. 1685. H. Maurice, Rmo in Christo Patri Do. Guilo. Apo. Cant. a
Sacris Dom.

A SERMON Preached July, 5th. on the Occasion OF THE Late Rebellion.

By JOHN PETTER, M. A.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Walsal, at the Heart and Bible, near the Royal
Exchange in Cornbil. 1685.

JOH. XXI. 22. -- If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?
Follow you me. -- (...).
OUR Savior says unto St. Peter in the nineteenth verse of this Chapter,
Follow you me; (i. e.) to Death: But he being backward and neglectful of that
which he was called to, and too much pragmatically inquisitive into St. John's
business; seeing him, said, Lord, what shall this man do? verse. 20. What shall
he do for thy Name? What shall his Fate be? Whether shall he, because he loves
thee much, glorify thee likewise by Death, as well as I? Or whether shall he
be free from the Punishment of Martyrdom, and I only follow thee? All which was
a great Curiosity in St. Peter, however it came to pass; whether out of that
great love he bore to St. John his Colleague, or for that he desired a
Companion in his Sufferings: Solamen miseris, etc.

But upon what score soever it was, we have Christ's Reprehension of it
subjoyned in the words of my Text, If I will that he tarry till I come, etc. As
if he should have said; Be not you so inquisitive about him, nor so backward in
your self: Take heed, that while you cast your Eye upon him, you neglect not
that which is enjoined you, I will that you follow me.

The Words are partly CORRECTIVE, and partly DIRECTIVE.

1. CORRECTIVE of St. Peter's Curiosity with a severe Check; quickly taking up
his (...); What shall this man do? with a (...); What Is that to thee? 2.
DIRECTIVE of his own future Course of Life, suddenly putting him upon what was
best for him to do, with a (...), Follow you me.
In the former, the Reprehensory Part, we have,

1. Christ's Hypothesis, or Supposition concerning John's tarrying; If I will
that he tarry till I come. 2. The Reprehension it self; wherein our Savior
answers Peter's What with a What Is that to thee?
(1.) Christ's Hypothesis, or Supposition concerning John's tarrying; If I will
that he tarry till I come.

It would be needless at present to give you the various Readings of these
words; for Christ seems chiefly to check St. Peter's Curiosity; and so all of
them may fall into one sense: The Result of the business is then in these two
words, Tarrying, and till I come.

Tarrying here by St. Chrysostom is read according to the word, ( i. e.) If I
will that he tarry here, and be not sent abroad into the World, as the rest.

Others say, this tarrying is, not dying; but then the difficulty lies in till
I come.

Some understand it of the end of the World, but then St. John must be now
alive.

Others understand Christ's Metaphorical Coming, ( viz.) by his Power and
Virtue, as he did by Titus and Vespatian to destroy Jerusalem.

But if we will search the Scriptures, they will clear us in this point; for
there we shall find a threefold Coming of Christ, ad, in, contra homines; the
first is past, the last is yet to come, the second is his coming in the
Promulgation of his Gospel; and that St. John lived to see.

In Mat. 16. 28. we have the parallel of this place; Verily there be some
standing here, that shall not taste of death until they see the Son of Man
coming in his Kingdom: Which tastiing of death corresponds with tarrying (in
the Text) the Son of Man's Coming. Till I come, and the Kingdom of God, what is
it, but the full Manifestation of the Gospel, to the Conversion of the World?
which how largely it was spread abroad, St. John tarryed to see, even in the
days of Trajan the Emperor.

From the words of the Hypothesis thus explained, I pass to the second part,
the Correction, What Is that to thee? Ad te, quid ad te? so the Syriack doubles
it with an emphatical Check, to denote to us, that this Sin, wherever it is
found, deserves a Check, and a severe one too.

You may therefore learn from hence, that if any Privilege, Benefit or Honor
be granted to another man, which is denied to you, not to think much, or be
continually murmuring at it, and saying, Quid autem hic? For if Christ spared
not St. Peter, who had at that time (as many write) undertaken the care of the
whole Church; how much more severely shall he reprove you with a What Is that to
thee? Follow you me, do you your own duty diligently in that Station wherein
God has placed you; (...)

But this is a Vice which may justly be taxed in these our times: And more
especially in those who busy themselves in public matters, above their reach;
such Busybodies as keep not themselves within the limits of their own
callings and Professions; who are never well but when they are taxing or
finding fault with something either in Church or State; who can teach their
Princes how to Govern, their Ministers how to Preach, what Laws are fit for the
Kingdom, what Order for the Church: Ne suitor ultra crepidam. Every man must
keep within the bounds and limits of his own calling: The Lawyer must not
demurr on dubia Evangelica, nor the Artizan and illiterate day Labourer hold
himself sufficient to be a Master Builder in Christ's Church: Men of every
Profession must not take upon them, to have skill in expounding Scripture. It Is
well provided by our Laws; that Divines and Ecclesiastical Persons may not take
Farms, follow any Mechanic Trades, buy nor sell for return in Markets: And
shall Farmers, Mechanics, Men of all Professions, and men of no Professions,
turn Divines? No. Every one is to act that part which God has allotted him:
The Tailor must not leap from the Shop-board to the Pulpit, nor the Cobbler from
the Stall to the Throne. God has made Kings to Govern, and Subjects to Obey:
It Is not therefore for Subjects to call in Question, or be censuring the
Actions of their Prince. Rex sub nullo nisi sub Deo; To be accountable to none
but God, is the Royal Prerogative of Princes: For who shall say unto the King,
What do thou? It Is not for every Tradesman to be meddling with State Affairs:
It Is not for every Mechanic, every pitiful inferior fellow, that is placed at
the lower end of the World, and does not know how the upper Springs of the
Government are moved, to be tampering with them, and putting of them out of
place.

These things are above their reach, they belong not unto them. Every man is
not cut out for every Employment; and yet it is a common Folly, for most men to
think themselves fitter for the business of others than their own. Oh what an
excellent Preacher could I make, says the Mechanic! How admirably well could
I perform the Office of a Magistrate or Prince, says the inferior Tradesman!
And how forward are too many (whose business it is not) to censure
State-Councels, and Judiciary proceedings? Every man is an Absalom, to say to
every man, Your Cause is good, but the King has appointed none to hear it; 2 Samuel 15. 3. And say our seditious Absoloms, verse. 4. O that I were made Judge
in the Land, that every man might come unto me, and I would do him Justice: But
if you who never made it your business, think your selves fit enough to
undertake the Employment of others; may not they think themselves as well
qualified for, and by the same Right and Justice attempt to discharge your
Office, or any other persons which they most fancy.

And how natural it is for such pragmatical Examples as these to have so ill
Effects upon others, was wittily represented in the sharp Reproof of an
imprudent Action of King Lewis XI. of France, who having appointed a certain
Bishop to take the general Muster of Soldiers at Paris, and Chabannes one of
his Noblemen, taking this thing in ill part, desired of the King to give him
the Authority of censuring the said Bishops Clergymen; to which the King
replying, That it was not fit to put ones Sickle into another man's Corn: Yes,
says the other, since the Bishop has made our Harvest his own, why may not we
also as well make his ours? So that nothing will ensue from hence, but great
disorder and lamentable confusion; for whilst all men will be every thing, no
man at last will be any thing he should be. But what is the Reason that so many
of late have thus run out, and forgot themselves? Why, to be reputed a man of
Intriegue, a person well versed in the Mysteries of State, to be admired and
cried up for a politic and shrewd Common-wealths-man, are tickling pieces of
Honor, and the Temptations which have of late betrayed so many thus to run out
beyond their bounds, to the disturbance of the public Peace, and in the end
will prove to the utter Ruin and Confusion of themselves and others; and then
Experience will convince them of their extreme folly, and show them that these
Edge-tools are not to be meddled with by every Stripling and upstart Statesman.

If things be ordered thus or thus in Church or State, by the wisdom of your
Governors, What Is that to you? Follow you Christ, by acquitting your selves
conscionably, and like Christians, in the diligent Discharge of those several
Duties required of you in your particular Spheres and Stations in which it has
pleased God to place you. Tantumne abs re tua otii sit tibi, aliena ut cures?
Study to be quiet, meddling with your own business, These. 4. 11.

But whoever they be that thus run out beyond their own bounds, and exercise
themselves in such kind of Practices as these; they themselves shall find in
the end, that they have labored without thanks, lived without love, and many
of them will dye, as shamefully and untimely, so without Tears, without Pity;
save that some may say, 'twas pity they died no sooner.

Turn therefore this Curiosity the right way; Traduce hanc curiositatem ad
curam salutis tuae; Change Peter's What, What shall this man do? into Paul's
What, Acts 9. 6. Lord, what will you have me to do? And then you shall hear our
Savior answering, and directing you in the last part of my Text, Follow you me.

Which words lay before us, not only Peter's Duty, but every ones; Quod Petro
dicitur, omnibus dicitur, Follow you me: Here Is a Precept to follow a
President; Plus docemur exemplis, quam preceptis; longum per precepta, etc. But
where both meet together to direct us, there we are unadvised not to follow:
The Command must be obeyed, it is from Christ himself; the Pattern cannot be
denied, it is Christ himself set forth as a Pattern for us to follow.

Great Examples are of vast importance, inviting the Attendance, and awakening
natural Conscience and Ingenuity to attempt things that may excel. It was not
therefore without good reason advised in Seneca, that every man should propound
to himself the Example of a wife and virtuous Personage, as CATO, SOCRATES or
BRUTUS; and by a fiction of Imagination to suppose him present as a Witness,
and really to take his Life as a direction of all their Actions. But the best
and most excellent of the old Lawgivers and Philosophers among the Greeks, had
an allay of Viciousness, and could not be exemplary all over; and the best
among the Christians, in the greatest flame of their shining Piety, have fallen
short something of the Commandment: We may find among them. Examples, one
eminent for this Virtue, another for another, but none for all, excepting the
Man Christ Jesus. The Italians got up all the excellent Pictures in the World,
that out of them all they might make up one Masterpiece, or most excellent
Picture. And we read of a Painter, that wont to one Virgin for an Eye, to
another for a Lip, to a third for a Forehead, to a fourth for a Chin, to make
exquisite the Face of his Goddess. We need not go to one Saint for this Virtue,
to another for that, for perfection; take Christ, and take all: He intended
himself an Example of Piety, and led so holy a Life in all the Instances of it,
with this design, that he might shine to all the Generations and Ages of the
world to come, and become an Example and guiding Star to us in our Journey.

And he therefore in all the Actions of his Life (in which he propounds himself
imitable) did so converse with men, that men after that Example might for ever
converse with him. Christ has suffered for us (says St. Peter, 1 Ep. c. 2.
ver. 21.) leaving an Example to us, that we might follow his steps. And the
Author to the Hebrews, chap. 12. v. 2. commands us to look unto Jesus, the
Author and finisher of our Faith. Look upon him, and so eye him that you may
follow him; so follow him that you may live like him, that you may say, Sic
oculos, sic ille-manus* sic ora forebat.

When your Eyes are haughty with Ambition, did He carry his Eyes so? No: Like
as a Lamb before that bloody Wolf Pilate, his Look was meek and lowly, tho
lovely. When thou cursest him that angers thee, Did he carry his Mouth so? No.
Father, forgive them. When thou art provoked with Words, and returnest Blows;
Did he carry his Hands so? No. Being stricken he struck not again. Summa
Religionis est imitari quem colis: Nothing is more Honorable than to be like
God. The Heathen Worshippers of false Deities grew vicious upon this Stock, and
acted many things contrary to their best Reason, only to be like them.
Adulterio delectatur Quis? Jovem respicit. But you have here not only the
Command but the Example of Christ, to imitate him in a Life of Piety and
Obedience, of Justice and Temperance, of Charity and Devotion; such a Life
without which Humane Society cannot be preserved. And therefore, Si
precipientem sequi non vis, sequere precedentem, says Lactantius. If you will
not follow him in his Word commanding, yet follow him in his work directing.

But some things there be which our Savior did, that you must not attempt to
follow him in: Your Imitation has a Limitation: For there are special Works
which he reserves to himself, and wherein he did never command nor commend
Man's following him, but rather strikes it down as Presumption.

1. You must not follow him in the Works of his Power: If Nebuchadnezzar aspire
to this, he shall be sent to eat grass with the Beasts of the Field.

2. You must not follow him in the Works of his Wisdom: If Adam contend for
this, he shall be sent forth of Paradise to till the Earth.

3. You must not follow him in the Works of his Miracles: If Simon Magus will
be mounted up like God, and fly in the Air, he shall be hurled down, and break
his Neck.

4. You must not follow him in the Works of his Majesty: If Lucifer will aspire
to be like God in this, he shall be thrown out of Heaven, and damned in Hell.
And therefore, whereas our Savior says, Learn of me; St. Augustine says, What
to do? not to create the World, not to walk on the Water, not to raise the
dead: You must follow him, non in quantum filius Dei, sed in quantum filius
hominis. Neither in them must you expect to take such large Steps as our
Savior did, but you must step so far as you can, and walk so fast as you may.
Follow you must carefully and cheerfully, though non passibus aequis: Though you
cannot reach Christ's mark, yet if there be a willing mind, it is accepted
according to what a man has, and not according to what he has not.

I shall instance in one pathway or two wherein you must follow him, and so
conclude.

1. You must follow him in the way of Piety and Holiness; of which that he was
a most eminent Example, no Christian will deny.

2. You must follow him in the pathway of LOYALTY and Obedience, which is a
very necessary one to be insisted on, and more especially at this juncture of
time; and without following of him in this, your following of him in any other
will avail you nothing. For our Savior having showed himself a most eminent
Example of Piety and the Fear of God, is also a most perfect pattern of
Loyalty, and Obedience to the King. And as you have his Pattern, so his Precept
too; for he commands us to give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's: And to
show us, that Religion and Loyalty go hand in hand, in the same Sentence and
breath enjoins us to give to God the things that are God's; which does declare,
that there is such a necessary Connection betwixt the true Fear of God and
Honor of the King; that whoever he be that says he fears God, and at the same
time disobeys the King; we may say of him as St. John does in another case, He
is a Liar, and the truth is not in him, nor the fear of God.

What therefore may we think of that Arch-Rebel who has put out his Traitorous
Declaration, to excite his Majesty's Subjects to rise in Rebellion against him;
who has set up his Standard in the West against his lawful Prince, and has
placed God and Religion in the Front of his Traitorous Designs. Why? He draws
God himself to his horrid Conspiracies, and makes a mock of him and his
Religion too: For RELIGION and REBELLION are as opposite as white and black;
and a Disloyal Christian is as great a Contradiction as a just Robber, or
innocent Murderer. But HE, with those that side with him, or any way
countenance his rebellious Undertakings, or wish well to his Traitorous
Proceedings; nay those that do not act against him as vigorously as they can,
but stand neuter, watching which side will prevail, determining to close and
comply with that, making sure to save one, and sleep in a whole skin; they who
under pretense of Authority can tune their tongues to any thing, but Authority
discountenancing them, can forbear, and times turning head again can do as they
did; they who are such Time-servers, that Proteus-like can change themselves
into any form or fashion, who are such lukewarm Converts, as for a while (to
secure their Interest and the main Stake) put on an outside color of Loyalty,
but upon the least prospect of advantage reassume their beloved Principles of
Sedition and Rebellion; they who are such Pharisaical Loyallists, to fear the
King (as the Indians Worship the Devil) to prevent his hurting of them, and not
out of any right or sincerity of their Duty; they who upon any pretense do take
up Arms against their lawful Prince; nay, they that do not rather fall a
Sacrifice to the fury of such a wicked Rebel, than forfeit their Loyalty by
complying with him in his wicked designs, they are so far from following
Christ, they are so far from transcribing that Copy which he has set them in
this particular, that they bring an eternal Scandal and indelible Reproach on
that Religion of which he was the Author, and whose Doctrine countenances
nothing that is so manifestly inconsistent with Allegiance to our Prince, the
Peace of Societies and Civil Government: Is this the way to take off that
Reproach which those Sons of Belial have brought on this our Nation, by
shedding the Innocent Blood of King Charles the First (who will ever be
remembered for his eminent Virtues and Sufferings, by all Religious and Loyal
People that fear God, and honor the King) by endeavoring to embrue their
Hands in the Blood of his Son: But how can we expect that he to whom his Father
might have said, (...), should give the Brother of that Blessed Prince occasion
to say less than Cujus presidio tutus etiam adversus hosts esse debueram,
illius infidiis circumventus, tutior ab hostibus quam ab illo sum.

But these are not the measures of Allegiance and Obedience chalked out to them
in the Example of their blessed Savior: For he was not one of a Factious
spirit, no raiser of Sedition, no Encourager of Tumults and Rebellion. He never
plotted or designed any thing against the Life or Dignity of his lawful
Governor. He never entered into any Combination, Association or secret Consult
about raising of Men or Money to set on foot or carry on a Rebellion: He never
Libelled his Prince, nor stirred up the People against his Person or
Government; but plainly condemns all kind of Resistance of Lawful Authority by
force or violence, in reproving St. Peter's drawing of the Sword against those
who acted by it. He has secured the Right and Interest of Princes, the Liberty
of Subjects, and Peace of Societies, in not allowing Subjects Right or Liberty
on any pretense whatever to take up Arms against the lawful Powers. And from
his words to St. Peter, Put up thy Sword into its sheath, etc. you may
sufficiently learn his mind and will concerning the Resistance of them. For if
ever there was or can be any case wherein Resistance of lawful Authority by
force is justifyable, it must had been in this: And yet then our Savior
disallows of drawing the Sword against or without lawful Authority: When the
greatest Innocence was assaulted, their Lives and Estates in great danger, and
the very Foundations of Religion struck at: And thought it more for the safety
of every Subject, that the Sovereign Power should be invested with an absolute,
unaccountable and irresistible Authority, subordinate to none but God himself.

Tho this Authority should degenerate into Tyranny, yet it must by no means be
resisted by his followers; which plainly appears by his behavior toward those
Tyrants that reigned in the World in his time, most infamous for their Cruelty
and Oppression: For tho some might be in danger when it thus happened into ill
hands, yet more would be in danger, and in far greater danger too, when it
might be resisted: And therefore our Savior allows not of a Princes
Maladministration of Affairs, failures enough to forfeit his Commission, and
supersede his Authority. But by his Precept commands us, and by his Example
shows. us that we ought (when the Precepts of the Gospel will not allow us to
pay an active Obedience) with all Christian humility, to submit to the severest
Penalties, in the Ordinances of our lawful Sovereign.

The Primitive Christians and Martyrs by a passive Valor and Courage, showed
their Love and Constancy to their Savior and his Religion, by suffering gladly
the spoiling of their Goods, and rejoicing in the midst of scorching Flames:
Not by fighting for it, or making it a pretense to rebel, tho they wanted not
force sufficient to have opposed the Heathen Emperors; yet they willingly
submitted to the unjust Sentence of their Governors, following the example of
their Blessed Lord and Savior: One would therefore think that those many
excellent discourses, which have of late been made to press this duty of
Loyalty and Obedience, might have been unnecessary, at least sufficient to have
attained their designed ends: Since it is not to an Heathen Emperor or Tyrant;
but to a Prince well furnished with all Wisdom, that is most fit for so great a
King, to one who esteems our welfare his happiness; and makes it his daily care
and study: Ne bona caduca sint, ne mala rediviva: That those good things which
we enjoy by him, may never depart from us; that those Evils which we suffered
before him, may never return unto us: To one who has most graciously engaged
to defend and protect that Religion which the Royal Martyr his Father of ever
Blessed memory has sealed with his Blood.

It Is our Duty therefore (without any causeless fears or jealousies in our
selves, or stirring up any in the People) to rest quiet and peaceable in this
assurance, and to do our part, in following Christ in this pathway of Loyalty
and Obedience, and thereby make his Reign safe, easy and prosperous, and
himself a glorious Prince; and we may rest assured, that he will not be wanting
in any thing on his part, that may make us lead under him a quiet and peaceable
Life, in all Godliness and Honesty, and thereby become an Happy People.

In vain are we called Christians, if we follow not the Example of Christ the
Father of the Institution: Dictum Malachiae Abbat apud S. Bern.

To conclude therefore: Follow Christ, by despising all those gilded Vanities
that he despised, by fearing none of those Sadnesses and hard Usages which he
suffered, by practicing all those Doctrines that he taught: So then you shall
at last be added to that glorious Company of Apostles and Martyrs which are
gone before you, and together with them, follow Him into Eternal Glory:

To whom, with the Father and the Blessed Spirit, be ascribed by us and the
whole Church, as is most due, the Kingdom, the Power and Glory, for Ever and
Ever. AMEN.
FINIS.

