THE PETITION OF Diverse Eminent Citizens of LONDON, presented to the LORD MAYOR
and Court of ALDERMEN the 28th of April, 1681.
To the Right Honorable Sir Patient Ward Lord Mayor of the City of London, and
to the Right Worshipful the Aldermen his Brethren. The humble Petition of us
whose Names are hereunto subscribed, Citizens of the said City. Humbly shows,
THat the Designs of the Popish and Jesuitical Party, for subverting and
destroying the Protestant Religion and the established Government of this
Kingdom, have for some years past been carried on in an extraordinary way,
encouraged by the hopes the Papists (as your Petitioners believe) had of a
Popish Successor, Witness the burning of this City, with intention of a
Massacre at the same time, their many and frequent attempts of firing other
parts of the City, and other places in the Kingdom; and to such a height did
those hopes transport the agents of that party, that they took upon them to
hold Correspondencies with foreign Princes, to influence His Majesty's Councils
to dissolve the then Parliament, and to frame a Declaration to have been
published in His Majesty's name on that Occasion; and at last to contrive that
Devilish and horrid Plot for assassinating His Majesty's Royal Person, putting
the Papists in arms, bringing in foreign forces both into England and Ireland,
to establish their Religion, and destroy the Protestants. What endeavors have
been by them set on foot to prevent the Discovery and fuller Detection of their
Villainies, the Murder of Sir Edmond Godfrey, the attempt on Justice Arnold, the
means used to take off and discourage the King's Evidence, the suborning
Persons to swear falsely, and the setting up several Sham-plots contrived by
themselves to be charged by false Witnesses on His Majesty's Protestant
Subjects, are evident and apparent to all the World.

That by reason hereof such have been, and still are the fears and distractions
in the minds of People, that many have withdrawn from the City, others declined
their Trades and all true Protestants been in continual fears and anxieties of
mind, whereby great expense and charge in keeping and maintaining continual
Guards, has been necessitated, and yet most people live under daily
apprehensions, doubting every night what may be their condition before Morning.

That on His Majesty's summoning a Parliament to meet the 6th of March, 1678.
It was hoped that effectual course would have been taken to detect and bring
the Conspirators to condign punishment, and by Laws to have secured the
Protestant Religion against their attempts. (It being impossible, as your
Petitioners humbly conceive, that the same can any way be done, but by
authority of Parliament.) And those hopes were the more raised from His
Majesty's most gracious Declaration of the 21 April 1679. on the change of his
Privy Council, that he was resolved in all weighty and important Affairs (next
to the Advice of his great Council in Parliament, which he would very often
consult with) to be ^^vised by that Privy Council; but that Parliament was
prorogued the 27. May 1679 and afterward many of that Privy Council were
changed, and then followed a Dissolution of the Parliament. A new Parliament
was called to meet in October 1679. but kept off by many Prorogations till
October 1680.

And before any thing could be perfected for the security of Religion, the same
was dissolved, and another summoned to meet at Oxford, which was also
dissolved, and nothing done; thereby the Protestant Religion, and the Lives and
Liberties of His Majestios Protestant Subjects exposed to the uttermost hazard,
in case His Majesty, whom God long preserve, should depart this Life before a
due provision by Law could be made.

And Your Petitioners having heard that some persons of this City as well in
the Names of many other Citizens and Inhabitants of this City, as in their own
Names, have gone about to procure hands to a Petition to Your Lordship, and
this Honorable Court, insinuating (as Your Petioners are informed) That His
Majesty's expression in His Late Declaration touching the two Last Parliaments
of His Resolution to have frequent Parliaments, etc. was a full Security
against all the fears of Popery, and the Designs and Conspiracies of Papists
(which there is cause to believe) are yet carrying on as much as ever against
His Majesty's Royal Person, the Protestant Religion, and the Government of this
Kingdom.

Your Petitioners, though they hope their fellow Citizens who have signed the
said Petition* may be good Protestants, and mean well to their Religion and
City, yet knowing how cunning and subtle the Papists and Jesuitical Party are
by false Aspersions and Suggestions, and Secret Insinuations, to raise and
^oment Divisions amongst Protestants, to set them one against another, and make
them Instruments of their own Ruin; and fearing lest something of this kind
may have given Rise to the said Petition, They have thought themselves bound by
their Allegiance to His Majesty, and the Duty that lies upon them in ref^rence
to the Religion they profess, which they desire may be transmitted to their
Posterity, To make this Address to Your Lordship and this Honourab^e Court, and
humbly to declare,

That as matters stand at present, considering the Bloody and Wicked Designs of
Papists, their indefatigable and unwearied Endeavors animated (as is humbly
conceived) by their hopes that the Successor to the Crown will be of their
Religion, and justify whatever they shall do to introduce it; They humbly
conceive that it is not a Declaration to have frequent Parliaments, that can
contribute any thing to the Safety and Preservation of His Majesty's Royal
Person (whom God long preserve) the Security of the Protestant Religion, and
the Lives and Liberties, and composing the minds of those that profess it; But
it must be the Sitting of a Parliament, so as fully To examine the Plot, to
prosecute the Conspirators, and to provide suitable Laws against the seared
Evils; And without which nothing can be effectual; His Majesty in Parliament
giving Life to those Laws by His Royal Assent; And therefore

Your Petitioners humbly pray, That a Common Council may he called, and that
upon Consideration of the whole matter, such humble Address may be made to His
most Gracious Majesty, as the necessity of the Case shall be found to require.

Presented Thursday April 28. 1681. And Your Petitioners as in duty bound shall
ever pray, etc.
London, Printed for B.A. And Published by Richard Janaway, in Queens-Head
Alley in Pater-Nosier-Row. 1681.


