A SERMON Preached before Their Majesty's, K. William and Q. Mary's FORCES, AT
GANT in FLANDERS, The Sunday before they marched into the Camp, 1694.

By JOHN PETTER, M. A. Chaplain to Her Majesty's Regiment of Horse, commanded
by the Honorable Brigadier Lumley.

Published at their Request.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Edw. Evets, at the Green-Dragon in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1694.

Imprimatur,

Humph. Hody, Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino Domino Johanni Div.
Provid. Archiep. Cant. a Sacris Dom.
May 28. 1694.
To the Officers, and Soldiers of Their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary's
English Forces of the Garrison of Gant in Flanders.
Gentlemen,
HAD I designed to have published this Sermon, or could I have foreseen I
should have been requested to do it by you, it might have appeared more
correct, but you know my attendance on the Public Service of the Church twice
a Day, together with the many other necessary Duties of so great a Garrison,
left me but a very little time to provide for this which came so quick about;
the constant performance of it being made necessary oftentimes each Week by the
many subtle Contrivances, and cunning Devices of the Romish Priests to corrupt
and debauch your Principles of Religion, and Allegiance; and amongst many
others their great Diligence they employed this way to seduce you from your
bounden Duties to God, and Their Majesty's; these, with the great sincerity of
my intentions of doing my utmost to promote God's Glory, the good of the
Church, and Their Majesty's interest among you, I hope may apologize for those
Defects which shall be obvious to you in the reading, that might perhaps escape
you in the hearing: Now God grant that these, with all my other well designed,
though mean Performances among you, may produce their intended and much wished
for Effects. Though the Scandal that the extravagant Looseness and Liberties of
of some among you has brought upon so honorable and noble a Profession be
very great, and much to be lamented; yet I must do you so much justice as to
own to the World, that I have ever found among many of you, a great readiness
to encourage the meanest Endeavors tending to the Promotion of any of the
aforementioned ends, viz. God's Glory, the good of the Church, and Their
Majesty's interest; of which amongst many others, your earnest Requests for the
printing of this following Discourse, are a sufficient Instance, and my
Compliance with them the greatest I can give of my being what you shall find me
on all Occasions,

Gentlemen, From Gant, May the 30. N. S. 1694. Your most obedient, and very
humble Servant, John Petter.

1 SAMUEL IV. part of verse. 9. -- Quit your selves like men. --
GOD Almighty, when his people went out to battle, orders the Priest should
approach, and say unto them, Let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not
tremble, neither be ye terrified because of them, Deuteronomy. 20. 2. and such forms
of speech as this we find frequently used in Scripture at the opening of their
Campagnes, or before they entered upon any Action, to excite and stir up, to
animate and encourage both Officers and Soldiers, to behave themselves manfully
and with undaunted resolution.

Gentlemen, the time of your marching now drawing near, and this being the last
day of your meeting together in this place, I have in compliance with so
ancient and so good a custom, chosen to address my self to you in these words,
Quit your selves like men: and in handling of them I shall do these four
things.

First, Show you what it is to Quit your selves like men.

Secondly, The best and surest way to do so.

Thirdly, The great reasons you have to do it at this present Counjuncture.

Fourthly and lastly, make one Inference from the whole; and conclude with an
Exhortation to you, and with my hearty Prayers to the God of all Power, to
protect your Persons, and bless your Arms with good success this ensuing
Campaign.

I shall show, First, What it is to Quit your selves like men; Estote viri, so
it is usually translated; and both this, and the Hebrew word, in their several
Languages, signify not any mean, or ordinary person, but a Man of Worth and
Valor; so says David to Abner, 1 Samuel 25. 16. Art not thou a man, a valiant
man, a worthy person; there is none like thee. But the words import more, and
are more properly rendered by others, Estote in viros, a known Hebraism, as, Ero
tibi in Deum, I will be unto thee for a God, that is, truly and effectually, to
all intents and purposes; so here, be ye for Men, stand not for Ciphers; fill
not up only the places of Officers and Soldiers, but be what you appear to be
indeed. Now there are some that are the peculiar virtues of every rank and
condition of Men, and those in Soldiers are these three: 1. Courage: 2.
Orderliness. 3. Fidelity.

And to Quit your selves like men in this station, is, to perform all these
Virtues that are peculiar to that rank in which you are placed: So that you
must be courageous, orderly, and faithful to your Trust, to Quit your selves
like men.

First, You must be courageous, and that consists in these three things:

1st. Suffering cheerfully any Hardships. 2ly. Receiving boldly the Assaults of
your Enemies. 3ly. Fighting bravely whenever you are commanded to it.
1st. Gentlemen, you must suffer cheerfully any Hardships. You must be willing,
so often as occasion requires it, to feed low, and lie hard, to endure heat,
and cold, hunger, thirst, and nakedness, to submit to any terms, to be fed and
clothed, and every thing as your General pleases; to the most distant place,
or through the foulest ways, or in the sharpest weather, you ought cheerfully
(if your Commander give the Word) to march; you ought not to be discouraged, or
affrighted with these, or any other hardships; but contentedly to live (if
occasion requires it) upon any the least thing, nay, on nothing sometimes but a
bare promise, and never to mutiny for want of present Pay. And thus you ought
willingly and cheerfully to undergo these glorious Toils and Fatigues of War,
to endure a hard March in the day, and sleep upon a harder Pillow at night: You
must be content to sleep with the noise of Drums and Trumpets in your Ears, and
to be awakened with Alarms, to run on upon Spears points, and charge at the
mouths of Cannons whilst they are roaring out destruction; and thus you must
follow Victory through heat and cold, hunger and thirst, sweat and blood, and
seize, and pluck it from the arms of these hazards and difficulties wherewith
it is compassed and surrounded; and this is to Quit your selves like men in this
respect, if you are thus courageous in bearing these hardships and difficulties
of War. You must also Quit your selves like men by being courageous,

2ly. In receiving boldly the Assaults, and bearing the impressions of your
Enemies. You must not be daunted (let the difference in number be never so
great) with the approach of them; but (like David toward Goliath) run half way
to meet them, no touch of evil must make you shrink, no appearance of danger
make you give ground; but you must receive and bear all with an invincible
courage, and not like those delicate Youths in the History, who were no sooner
touched in their tender faces by their Enemies weapons, but they threw down
their own, and ran away; nor like the Children of Ephraim, Psalm. 78. 9. who
being harnessed, and carrying Bows, turned their backs in the day of battle,
but like that Order of Ancient Knights in France, a part of whose military Oath
it was, that they should never turn their Backs upon their Enemies. The
Lacaedemonian women were wont to charge their Sons when they went out to
battle, Ut, aut vivi cum armis in conspectum earum venirent, aut mortui in
armis referrentur, that they should either return with their Arms, or die in
them. Even the tender Mothers among the Romans, would not lament their Sons
that fell in battle, but rejoiced when their Wounds were in their fore-parts,
and not in their backs, and you (Gentlemen) in thus receiving the Assaults, and
bearing the impressions of your Enemies, must quit your selves like Men in this
respect too. You must farther* quit your selves like Men by showing your
Courage,

3dly, In fighting bravely, whenever you are commanded to it: You must be as
ready to be active as passive, to give as to receive Blows; and outface the
King of Terrors, and charge through all his Horrors with an undaunted
Resolution; you must mock at Fear, like the warlike Horse in Job, and stand at
the Mouths of breaches in the midst of Thunder and Lightning; you must laugh at
the impotent Threatenings of Danger, and bravely defy it, to do its worst. In
these lies the Gallantry, and Courage of a Soldier, in bearing Hardships,
enduring Blows, and hewing down his Enemies, and all these are implied in
quitting your selves like Men.

Secondly, A second thing implied in quitting your selves like Men, is to be
orderly; you must walk orderly,

1st. In respect to your Lives and Manners, by abstaining from those many
outrageous and unjust Practices, from that loose and dissolute way of living,
which have brought upon your Profession (though in it self most honorable) so
great Dishonor, and occasioned it by so many to be evilspoken of in the World.

2dly, You must walk orderly in respect to your Superiors, and always have a
mighty regard to the Word of Command; you must keep your Ranks and Files; for
if a Soldier forsakes his place, and breaks Discipline, he casts his Division,
it may be the whole Company into confusion, and makes an easier Entrance for
the Enemy. Nihil magis in acie custodiendum est, quam ut omnes Milites ordinem
incedendi servent, periculum enim ab hostibus semper gravissimum sustinet
divisus, and inordinatus exercitus: Veget. de re milit. Mannius Curious, when
Consul, was wont to say, Non opus est reipublico milite, qui parere non potest.
The Commonwealth had no need of that Soldier, who knew not how to obey Orders.
When the Holy Ghost would describe an Army that should be invincible, and bear
all before them, he says, that they should march every one in his way, and none
should break their Ranks, Joel 2. 7. You Gentlemen are an Army, but you are
only so, while due Order and Discipline is maintained, and every Officer and
Soldier keeps his own place and station; but when these are neglected, and
trampled under foot, you are quite another thing, you may be a Multitude or
Rout, but you will hardly bear the Name of an Army, without this Order, all
things would run into present confusion: It Is not in your choice to stand where
you will, and do what you list in this Army, but you must every one of you
faithfully discharge that Duty, and diligently manage that particular place
which is committed to your Trust; You must at all times with cheerfulness obey
the Orders of your Superiors. When you are commanded to march on, you must not
(though the Danger be never so great) endeavor to retreat, when to wheel to
the right you must not (upon any considerations) endeavor to do it to the
left. As one once complained, Ordo Militum nunc est ordinem non tenere, as if
the Excellency of a Soldier consisted in contradicting and thwarting the
Commands of his superior Officers; and this is the 2d thing implied in
quitting your selves like Men, to be orderly.

3dly. The 3d thing implied in quitting your selves like Men, is to be
faithful to your Trust (that is) not to betray it for any temptation of
interest or advantage, nor to be so mercenary to engage on any side for pay,
without regard to what is right, or wrong. This the Romans took such care of,
that they listed none into their Service, but they obliged them to take an Oath
to that purpose, which they called by the great and venerable Name of
Sacramentum; a thing so solemn with them, that the Christians have chose to
borrow that Word, to express their entrance into Covenant with God by: we do at
this Day follow their Example, and strictly to observe your Oath, is to be
faithful to your Trust; I think it therefore not amiss to repeat it to you at
this present.

I swear to be true to our Sovereign Lord, and Lady, King William, and Queen
Mary, and to serve them honestly, and faithfully, in the Defense of their
Persons, Crown, and Dignity, against all their Enemies, and Opposers
whatsoever; and to observe, and obey Their Majesty's Orders, and the Orders of
the Generals, and Officers set over me by Their Majesty's: So help me God.

Having sufficiently insisted on the first thing which I proposed, and shown
you what it is to quit your selves like Men, I proceed now to the second, which
is the best and surest way to do so.

2dly, The best and surest way to do so, is to be religious; to be courageous,
orderly, and faithful, is to quit your selves like Men; and these, I believe,
are qualifications which you wish to be in all that are under your Command;
because without these the Service that the Public, or your selves can expect,
must be but very small: It is not difficult to guess at the many sad
Consequences of being at the Head of a Body of cowardly, disorderly, and
unfaithful Wretches; therefore if I can make it appear, that Religion will
effect these three things, and make you, 1st. More courageous, 2dly. More
orderly, 3dly. More faithful to your Trust; I doubt not but 'twill abundantly
convince you, that the best way to be good Soldiers, is to be good Men, and
that the only, and surest way to quit your selves like Men, is to fear God,
and keep his Commandments.

1st, Therefore I shall show you, that being religious will make you the more
courageous, without which, such Gentlemen as you are useless in the World: You
heard in the beginning of this Discourse, that God Almighty when his People
went out to Battle, ordered the Priest should approach, and say to them, Let
not your hearts faint, fear not, etc. Deuteronomy. 20. 2. Now after that, the Officer
was to say again to them, What Man is there that is fearful, and
faint-hearted? let him go, and return to his House, verse. 8. It is not to be
denied but that some Men, who are very bad, are very stout, daily experience
evinceth this; there is a sort of Audacity, and Foolhardiness, which is a
resemblance of true Valor, and which the worst of Men are capable of, but this
is a brutish sort of Bravery, like the Valor of an Horse, that runs into
Battle without fear or consideration. But alas! such an irrational Valor,
which you owe merely to your constitution, will last no longer than your
inconsideration: For when the impetus is once over, and you come soberly to
debate your present Affairs, and to take a true Prospect of your future State,
your Spirits will then flag, and your stoutness become as nothing. For who can
imagine, that you will in cool Thoughts, with any Courage venture your Lives,
when your Consciences tell you, you are in no measure prepared for Death? But
he who has well-grounded hopes of a better Life, how undauntedly, when he is
lawfully called to it, will he hazard this? This is that to which the Apostle
attributes the Heroic performances of those religious Champions of old,
Gideon, Baruch, Samson, Jeptha, David, etc. Hebr. 11. it was through faith they
subdued Kingdoms, waxed valiant in fight, and put to flight the Armies of the
Aliens. A firm belief in God will make a Man valiant in the midst of the
greatest Dangers, but Vice and Irreligion makes men Sneaks, and Cowards, and a
Wing of Miscreants have just reason to flee, when Death is coming out of a
Cannon's Mouth, the Muzzle of a Gun, or upon the Point of a Sword, because the
formidable Appearance of Hell is coming too, and then the Hearts of irreligious
Men will recoil, and evil Consciences will be apt to make them run into Pits,
or Woods, or into any Corners on this side the Territories of the damned. Take
this, Gentlemen, for a general Rule, that none shall undertake an Enterprise
with so much Readiness, or engage with so much Fortitude, or maintain his
Ground with so much Constancy, or defy the roarings of the Field with such a
fixed Resolution, as the Man who is girt about with Integrity, and to whom a
good Conscience is a Coat of Mail. For as a Pagan Philosopher said, He that
loves God receives Death willingly, and is not cowed at its Approaches, but
keeps his Station, and his Post with a steeled Courage; So that you see, this
is one good influence Religion has upon Gentlemen of your profession, it makes
them the more courageous.

2dly, It will make them more orderly too. The dissoluteness, and rudeness of
Armies is so common and notorious, that they are often dreadful to their own
side, almost as much as to their Enemies. The sharpest Punishments that were
ever yet inflicted for any Crime have not been able to terrify so, but that in
such a Body, there are still many, who will venture to commit the same. But
though all the Care, and Severity of Discipline is not able to prevent Disorder
in any kind, yet this will. The good Man has a Rule within him, more exact,
and strict than any martial Law, that whereas others by their violent Outrages,
and domineering Debaucheries, enrage the People, and bring their Profession
into disrepute, he will demean himself so, as to be able to make St. Paul's
Appeal wheresoever he has had his quarters; Ye are Witnesses, and God also,
how holily, and justly, and unblameably we behaved our selves among you. Whence
come the wrongs, and wastings, the swaggerings, and insolences, the
extravagancies, and immoralities complained of in all Ages among the Soldiery?
Come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your Members, from the want
of Religion, and the Fear of God? This would lay the Ax to the Root of such
flagitious Enormities, restrain your Passions, bridle your Appetites, and make
you so sober, so civil, and so orderly, that your company would be as much
desired in all places, as now (I am sorry to say it) it is with too much reason
dreaded: and this is another good effect Religion has on a Soldier, it makes
him more orderly.

3ly. The third influence Religion has upon a Soldier is, It will make him
more faithful to his trust, which he is obliged to be (as you have heard) by
the Oath he takes when he is first listed. But what are Oaths, and where are
the force of them, if men have no real sense of Religion? like Samson's Withs,
they may pretend to be bound with them, but when they think fit they will as
easily snap them in sunder. Eusebius tells us of the Father of Constantine,
that once it came into his mind to give out, that all that served him in any
Office, should sacrifice to Idols, or else quit their places, when the time
came that they had all given in their determinations; quite contrary to their
expectations, those that chose rather to lay down their employments, than to
wound their consciences, he kept in, or advanced to higher trust, those that to
comply with his humor, and, as they thought, their own interest, were ready to
turn Idolaters, he dismissed, (...), etc. For how (says he) should I imagine,
but that upon occasion these men will be treacherous to me, that make no more
of being so to their God? But the fear of him is the best security for any
man's Fidelity, if it be so that he truly and indeed fears God, upon this
account he will fear to be false to Men; and this is the third influence
Religion has upon a Soldier, it makes him more faithful to his trust. So that
since Religion will make you more courageous, orderly and faithful to your
trust, it is evident that to fear God, and keep his Commandments is the best and
surest way to quit your selves like men; which was the second thing I proposed
to speak to.

Now, Gentlemen, before I speak to the third thing, I shall beg your patience
whilst I make one Observation, and reflect a little upon your general and
great neglect of this main point, hoping thereby to bring Religion into greater
esteem among you, and to prevail with you, to be more careful for the future
of this one thing necessary, it being (as you have heard) the surest way to
gain that noble Character (which is, or ought to be the desire and ambition of
you all) of quitting your selves like men. There is generally so much
licentiousness and wickedness among the Soldiery, that the Poet has
scandalized the whole Tribe upon that account, Nulla fides, pietasque viris qui
castra sequuntur. These (says he) are a sort of people that have no manner of
religion or honesty at all in them. A great deal of pity it should be so at any
time; it is sad, and may prove dangerous to have the Sword in such mad Men's
hands: But I think the Poet was much to blame, to condemn all for the sake of
some: For though it be so among too many, yet it is not so universally true, but
(that God be thanked) there be some exceptions: and many (to your great honor,
Gentlemen, be it spoken) that are employed in this present Service. Why should
Religion be thought inconsistent with your Profession? whatever liberties too
many of it give themselves, it has been as famous for Men eminently pious as
any whatsoever: The first Man that we read professing Christ after his
Crucifixion was a Soldier; in that hour of darkness, when his Followers fled,
his Disciples fainted, and the Rabble derided him, a Soldier and his Company
owned him; Matt. 27. 54. The Centurion, and they that were with him feared
greatly, and said, Truly this was the Son of God. Nazianzen in his time had a
Caesarius, Saint Basil a Gordius; and a Learned Writer, speaking of the Noble
Army of Martyrs, says, Pars melior ex militibus, The greater part of them were
Soldiers. The Character which S. Luke gives of Cornelius the Centurion is, That
he was a devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, which gave
much alms to the people, and prayed to God always, Acts 10. 2. I have instanced
in this last, as a Pattern worthy your imitation, and with a desire that you
would compare the practice of this noble Roman with that of many of our present
Army, and see what you can find, that can at all patronize that impious liberty
and profaneness that is by so many recommended as reputable and ingenious, and
is every day so much exemplified to us in common practice, that one would think
it were entailed upon your Prefession. The Centurion here mentioned was a
devout Man, and zealous for Religion, one who endeavored to promote it, by
keeping up (all ways possible) its honor and reputation in the world: Many
among our Centurions make a mock of it, saying in their heart, there is no God,
they sit down in the seat of the Scorner; and though they cannot argue, yet
resolve to laugh all Piety out of countenance. Every the dullest Creature, that
can but revile his Religion, make a profane Paraphrase upon the Holy Writ,
vent an impious Jest, ridicule any thing that is Sacred, and stoutly disclaim
his Maker, is immediately proclaimed a Wit, not considering that this is direct
Blasphemy. It Is said farther of this Centurion, that he feared God; they cannot
in the least pretend to this part of the Centurion's character, who upon every
impertinent occasion, take his most sacred Name into their profane Mouths, and
call upon him to witness to every trifle, sometimes to a lie. Sure, Gentlemen,
you cannot pretend to the fear of God, who call upon him almost every moment to
damn your selves, your dearest friends or acquaintance for every frivolous
disappointment, nay often for nothing; whose mouths are full of bitterness and
cursing, who challenge to your selves the liberty of your tongues, saying in
the words of the Psalmist, We are they that ought to speak, Who is Lord over
us? Psalm. 12. 4. Nay, there are some among you (I think my self obliged in duty
to take notice of it) who are so far from fearing God, that you seem to be
perfectly of the temper of the unjust Judge mentioned in Saint Luke, who
neither feared God, nor regarded man. If it were not so, though the fear of God
could not restrain you, yet otherwise in respect of Men, you would sometimes
abstain from all sorts of impious, lewd, profane and atheistical discourse,
and at least comply with the rules of civility, though you will not with those
of piety. For your unsavory breath (supposing no God to be offended with it)
you cannot but imagine to be nauseous to all those who believe there is one, to
all those who have any Zeal for their Faith, you cannot think any discourse
more intolerable, or more disobliging. Those who do acknowledge a divine Power,
cannot be supposed with ease and satisfaction to sit by, and hear God*
ridiculed and blasphemed; you cannot but think this to be a very unpleasant
entertainment for any who believe a Deity; more especially for those who are
more than ordinarily concerned for his honor. The next part of this
Centurion's character is, That he was one that feared God with all his house.
Now if we compare the practice of some among you with this part of his
character, it will be but too visible, that you come far short of it. I need
not descend to particulars, for they are too evident; the many Oaths and
Curses, with the abundance of other unsavory discourse that does flow, almost
every minute, from the mouths of the meanest and least servant that does attend
the Camp, sufficiently proclaim the neglect of you their Masters; who too many
of you, by your own example, and the countenance and encouragement you give to
the vicious courses of those about you, seem to have taken up a resolution
contrary to that of Joshua's, and in your hearts to say, As for me and my
house, we will neither of us serve the Lord.

Another thing that is added in commendation of this Centurion is, That he gave
much alms to the people, his devotion and the fear of God are accompanied with
Works of Charity. How backward are many of you to relieve those, who by the
fate of War, or any other misfortunes, are reduced to necessity and want; he
was of a tender and compassionate nature; you may see here the mildness and
sweetness of his temper, by his being kind and merciful; fruits of the spirit
highly requisite to preserve those of your profession from transgressions of a
crying nature, which too many of you, Gentlemen, make light of, violence,
cruelty, wasting, plundering, etc. But he in whose heart God had put it, to
give that which was his own to others, when their necessities required it,
could not but abhor to take and detein that which was not his own from others;
no, he walks according to the Baptist's rule of doing violence to no man, and
being content with his own wages. But instead of walking according to this
example, and relieving to the utmost of your ablity the people, and assisting
those that are under your command, how many of you take all occasions, to
squeez and oppress the former, and to do all the injustice you are able to the
latter; and, like miscreant Achans, make it your business by these indirect
ways to enrich your selves, not fearing the Curse of God on such ill-gotten
treasure?

The last thing that is said in praise of this Centurion is, That he prayed to
God always, that is, every day, at the set and appointed times, when he was not
hindered by other lawful occasions. In an undertaking attended with so many and
so great difficulties and dangers as yours is, he knew it would be impossible
for him to succeed without imploring the divine aid and assistance; therefore
he omitted no opportunity of representing his needs, knowing that he might have
them supplied only for asking. But how many among you, Gentlemen, rather choose
to quit your hopes of protection and good success in this world and happiness
in the next, than to buy it at the cheapest rate of humble Prayer? How many
among you do neglect, disuse and contemn so easy a duty, the constant and due
performance of which is attended with so many and so great blessings? What
blessed opportunities are put into your hands? What an happiness (by the pious
care of our most religious and gracious King and Queen) do you enjoy, of having
liberberty (even in these Popish Countries) of addressing your selves to God in
public twice a day, in a most incomparable and a well advised form, and in a
language understood by the meanest of the people? A blessing denied to all that
are round about you. And you, Gentlemen, who neglect to give your constant
attendance on this duty, your circumstances requiring it in a more especial
manner, as I showed you at large the last Lord'sday; what do you but in effect
declare to the World, that you look no higher than your selves, your own
Strength and Valor, your own Skill and Conduct, and that you do repose all
your confidence in the Arm of Flesh, or that you think protection, and good
success Blessings hardly worth your asking, or else with those profane
Wretches in the Psalmist, that you care not for God, neither is God in all your
thoughts.

Now, Gentlemen, it may perhaps be thought by some among you, that these
reproaches are too severe, but the Pulpit is to be pardoned plainness, because
the Grave deals roundly, and therefore I hope you will bear with them;
especially considering of what importance to the Public such a Body of Men as
you are, who are of so great use in the World, that every Nation and People,
have with one consent justly accounted you worthy of all Esteem and Honor; so
that if the light that is in you should be darkness, by reason of the
consequence of it, how great might that darkness prove? Sir Walter Raleigh,
discoursing whether the Greeks, or Romans, were the better Soldiers, very
fairly concludes, that the English were better than both; nor is this the
particular judgment of a Countryman of your own, but you have a general Renown
in all the Nations that are round about you, and the Character which he long
since gave of our Countrymen, has by the opinion of the greatest Generals the
World ever bred, together with the many Noble exploits you have achieved since
in the presence of many Nations been sufficiently confirmed; if to this, you
would add that of the Centurion, to be devout Men, fearing God, etc. then you
would be perfect, and lacking nothing, and thereby free your profession from
that ill opinion which the great looseness, and horrid profaneness of some
among you has brought upon it; and thus removing these unhappy occasions of
your dis-esteem, all Nations round about you would record you for the Worthies
of the Earth, and you would abroad, as well as at home be thought worthy of
double Honor; you would then be an Honor, as well as a Defense to your
Country, Their Majesty's and the whole Kingdom would prize and esteem you, and
God would bless you, bless you with Honor, Victory, and good Success in this
World; and when you have thus fought a good fight, and finished your course,
and kept the Faith, henoeforth there would be laid up for you a Crown of
Righteousness in the World to come; thus having so well grounded hopes of a
better life, what can be a surer way to make you quit your selves like Men,
than in exposing this? (when there is so just an occasion for it) which brings
me to show you,

Thirdly, The great reasons you have to do it at this present Conjunction;
which I don't doubt will appear to be very great, and I hope powerful too, if
you consider these four things:

1. The Excellency of that Government, those Laws and Liberties you have to
defend. 2. The Church and Faith you contend for. 3. The Defenders of the Faith
you have to serve. 4. The Enemy you are to oppose: Consider, Gentlemen,
1st. That Government, those Laws and Liberties you have to defend; and you
will find them such, that if any where upon the Face of the Earth, you must
confess, that there is the easy Yoke, and light Burden: How secure do they
render to you all your civil Rights? Your Liberties are such, that while our
Sovereign Lord and Lady sit upon Their Throne in the brightness of Imperial
Majesty, the meanest Subject may as truly sit under his Vine, and Fig Tree, and
enjoy his own with security, peace and plenty: You your selves, Gentlemen, who
have seen the sad and doleful Circumstances of poor Peasants in these
Countries, know full well, that God has not dealt so with other Nations: You
may all of you gratefully sing as the Prophet David did, Psalm. 16. 6. The lines
are fallen to us in pleasant places, and we have through the Divine Providence,
a goodly Heritage: Yours is one of the fortunate Islands; the Government is of
that rare balance, and temperament, that you cannot but have a deep sense of
the many Blessings you all enjoy under it of those woeful Miseries and
Distractions you were all exposed to, by the Violences offered to it in the
late Reign: This is well worthy your highest Valor, well worthy your truest
Fidelity; all your welfare is apparently bound up in the welfare of this
Government; and that Government that preserves you, that it may so do, must be
inviolably preserved by you, and certainly it is a great debt, and duty which
you all owe to it, it is yours, as well as Their Majesty's Safety; it is a
concern so essential, that what the Roman Orator says of Government, in
general, may as truly be said of that of their present Majesty's, That neither
Family, or City, neither People, nor Country, could any longer subsist without
it: He therefore that faithfully stands by it, shows himself a Friend to his
own, and Country's safety, as well as a true and faithful Subject to Their
Majesty's; I do not doubt therefore, but that as good Christians, and true
Englishmen, you will put on a generous largeness of Spirit, and with your lives
stand firmly by it, and whilst it is highly prized by all Strangers, that you of
the same Nation will not contemn, neglect, or abuse it, but quit your selves
like Men, in maintaining, defending, and securing of it.

2dly. The second consideration to move you to quit your selves like Men, is
the Church, and Faith you contend for: A Church that owns the venerable
Antiquities of purer Times, and rejects the absurd Encroachments, and
Corruptions of later Ages; many of which in these Countries are daily visible
to your Eyes, though of some they seem to me to be ashamed, by their abstaining
from the Use of them, in those Garrisons where the Protestants are quartered,
during the time of their abode there: All the Doctrines of your Church are
ancient, holy, just, and good, such as were taught by our Savior Himself, when
here on Earth practiced by his Apostles, delivered from them to the primitive
Christians, and so derived down to you. They are all of them most agreeable to
the highest reason, in their consequences tending most directly, to the
promoting of Piety, and true Morality, the peace of Societies, and the good of
every particular Person; they are so clearly subservient to all good Ends, that
if your design by Religion be, (what it ought to be) nakedly to save your
Souls, you may then in communion with the Church of England pass surely and
safely to Heaven: God has not dealt so with other Nations; neither have they
such comfortable freedom in his ways: You see, Gentlemen, in what blind
ignorance they here keep their People, by the forbidding them under the most
severe Penalties the use of the Holy Bible, or the reading any Protestant
Books, or conferring with any Person upon any point of Religion, or the doing
any one thing that may tend by the opening of the Eyes of the Blind, to the
discovery of these Cheats; which Commands if any of them should chance to
transgress, it must be inserted into the Catalogue at their next confession,
and they, poor Souls, before they can be absolved, and readmitted to their
half communion must undergo what penance the Confessor shall think fit, who
for such heinous Crimes as these always enjoins to be more severe, than for
Theft, Whoredom, or Murder, etc. You see what intolerable Burdens they lay
upon them, how many ridiculous and foolish Ceremonies, barbarous and
uncommanded Penances they enjoin them, and none of them tending in the least to
benefit the Souls of the ignorant performers, but all of them insignificant to
any other ends and purposes, but that of maintaining the Power, and increasing
the Wealth of their Church. The Church you contend for enjoins nothing but what
tends to the promoting of true Piety, she has crowded in among her Doctrins,
no Pardons, nor Indulgences, no Pilgrimages to the shrines of pretended Saints,
nor vain Oblations to enrich her Coffers; she has thrust in no Invocation of
Saints, nor Prayers for the Dead; no pompous Processions nor sacred Relics to
fill the pockets of her Priests; she has squeezed in no Infallibility, nor
Probability, no Enthusiastical pretenses to immediate Revelation, nor pretended
Miracles to impose upon her People: You see therefore, Gentlemen, how much it is
your interest, as well as your duty, if you sincerely love God and your own
Souls, or have any real desire of your own, or others welfare, faithfully to
adhere to that Church you have the happiness to be Members of, and to quit your
selves like Men, by vigorously maintaining and defending it against all
Opposers whatsoever, and this is the second consideration to move you to quit
your selves like Men, the Church and Faith you contend for: Now I proceed to
the*

3d Consideration, which is the Defenders of the Faith you have to serve, and
they are a King and Queen, professing the same Faith with your selves, and
worshipping God in the same manner: An happiness, and blessing long wished for
in our Kingdoms, and I pray God long to continue it to us. Besides how tender
are they of all your welfare, how careful of your Liberties and Properties!
how great encouragement do they give to Piety, Sobriety, Justice, and Charity,
and every thing that is praiseworthy, both by their Precept and Example? Can
you wish for, can you conceive any Princes more gracious, than those whom God
has set over you, and hitherto miraculously preserved, for the public good
and benefit of your Kingdom? Their only aim and study is to make you a great
and an happy People; for the effecting of which, it is plain, they spare
themselves no pains, no care, nor trouble: For this end to how many great, and
inexpressible Hardships and Dangers has His Majesty willingly, and cheerfully
exposed His Sacred Person, and with the same willingness and cheerfulness, does
still continue to expose it, both by Sea, and Land? He, like the Noble Caesar,
in all his Commands in the Field, was never heard to say, Ite milites, sed:
venite; not go, but follow me; as if he scorned in all his on*sets to be any
thing else but still a Leader: He has always taught you, Gentlemen, by that
which is the strongest Authority, his own forwardness and example, and he seems
to be one that the supreme God has taken particular care of, by Death's coming
often so very near him, yet passing him by, and shunning him when it has swept
away almost all about him. I need not tell you the many narrow Escapes he
lately had, nor how often he has been miraculously and particularly defended
in the midst of the greatest Dangers; but besides these open Dangers, how many
secret Snares of Death, that have been villanously contrived, and cunningly
laid for him, has he escaped? Yet he still goes on with his usual cheerfulness
and bravery, to expose himself to these open and secret Dangers, for the good
and safety of your Church and Kingdom. What Honor and Success may you not yet
hope to gain, when so many thousand Men of Valor are headed and led on by so
experienced and so brave a General? whose Security and Safety is to you all an
high Concern. He has, Gentlemen, laid on you all the obligations you can wish
or desire to Quit your selves like men. Besides, It Is your interest so to do,
for it is endeavoring to preserve the Ship wherein you are all embarked. If
you would strengthen the house, you must not weaken him that bears up the
pillars of it, Ps. 75. 3. Your firmness and steadiness to him is, at second
hand, but a kindness to the Breath of your own Nostrils. Thus whilst your
Royal Master, by his great Courage and good Conduct, endeavors all he can
here; and your Royal Mistress, by her most prudent and discreet management of
Affairs in England in his absence, does her utmost to make you a great and an
happy People: What can you, Gentlemen, do less than to love and revere them,
to obey them readily and cheerfully, to think your selves only capable of being
made great and happy by making them greater and happier? Every Soul of you to
be subject to them, so as strictly to observe all their Orders and Commands for
Love of them, more than for Fear of punishment, to be silent from all manner of
murmurings and mutinies, loud only in their Applauses and Thanks to Almighty
God for the felicities of their Reign. On which account, happy we their
Subjects, the most fortunate and happy People in all the World: And this is the
third Consideration to move you to Quit your selves like men, The most gracious
King and Queen you serve.

The fourth and last Consideration to move you to Quit your selves like men in
this present Conjuncture is, The Enemy you do oppose, viz. the King of France:
All his methods and ways of proceeding do sufficiently evidence to the World,
that he makes the Maxims of the common Enemy of Christendom the Rule and
Measure of all his Actions, and that absolute Power at home, with universal
Empire abroad is his aim as well as the Turk's; and seeing that by these
principles (which it is plain he has taken up) all the duties of Christianity
are laid in the dirt, it were difficult to determine, should absolute Conquest
(which God forbid) attend his Arms, whether under French or Turk Christendom
would obtain the fairest quarter. All that the Turks have done in Christendom
since the time of Francis the First to this day, they owe to the Alliances of
France with the Ottoman Court, and to the Diversion which the French have given
in their favor. This present King has learnt from Francis the First the most
unchristian methods of making League with the Turks, by calling in (to his
eternal shame) their assistance, to carry on his revengefull and ambitious
designs, to the hazard of all Christendom. He, under a show of assisting weak
Princes, has taken occasion to share with them in their Principalities, and by
these unjust means, has vastly increased his own power. He has observed no rule
of justice in making War, nor had any regard to it in observing Peace, when
made. The War in these Countries is a sufficient confirmation of both. 1. That
grand Treaty between France and Spain, called The Pyrenaean Treaty. 2. That of
Aix-la-Chapelle, unto which all the Princes of Christendom were invited, to
take care of the common Security. 3. The Treaty at Breda. I have not time now
to relate these at large, and how ill they have observed them; together with
their Treaties with Holland. And 'twould be too tedious to repeat all that may
give you proof of their goodwill and faithfulness to your own Country, as well
as to all other Nations that have had any dealings with them: But these you may
see at your leisure in the Collection of Treaties made by them with all the
Princes and Potentates of Europe. I shall only remark at present, that the
first of these Treaties was made upon a most solemn occasion, that of Marriage,
confirmed by an Oath, with the most Sacred Mysteries of their Religion at the
high Altar; and yet was so palpably broken (as you may see, if you will take
but the pains to peruse the Treaty) that it is not to be paralleled by any
instance or example in all the World besides. He has been the common Enemy of
every State, destroying the Peace of the Government every where, sowing of
Factions in all Princes Courts, in their Councils, their Armies, or among such
of their Subjects as were inclinable to be factious; or else he has jumbled
one Prince against another by turns: And more than all this, He, Gentlemen,
hates you and your Religion: He has been often heard to speak these words, That
his Grandfather loved the Protestants, his Father feared them, and he himself
hated them; which any one that considers the Ruins of their demolished
Churches, and the hard and miserable Conditions (too large to be here recited)
under which they are and have been oppressed in every point in that Kingdom,
will easily believe. And now, because many of the Romish Party, both by their
words and actions, seem to wish well to his Proceedings, I think it not a miss
to remark here, how their Religion is like to fare if he gains his Point; and
this they may easily ghess, by his dealings with them in Catalonia, Alsatia,
these and diverse other Roman Catholic Countries, where all of them exclaim
against his arbitrary and unjust ways of proceeding; How do they know how far
Reasons of State may drive him? How can they tell what Alterations they may (as
they have ever done) oblige him to make? It behooves the Popish-party therefore
to look to it; they may (if they please) hope the best, but you, and all the
rest of the Protestant-party in Germany and other parts, will be sure to be
equal Sufferers with those of his own Country, as fast as he can reach you,
and then he will deal with you as he has done with them, in the Concerns of
your Religion, as well as of your Estates; the former will be sure to go down,
and your constant profession of it esteemed so great a crime, that you will be
thought altogether unfit to be trusted any longer with the latter. The Papists
too have just reason to believe that their Religion shall receive considerable
Alterations, especially in secular Advantages of Wealth and Power, and that
they themselves shall fare but very indifferently in respect to their temporal
Concerns too, if they but consider his arbitrary way of proceeding in France
and all his conquered Countries. Therefore it concerns both Papist and
Protestant to adventure their distinct Power and Interest in one common bottom,
and resolution to oppose him, and to hinder the obstinate pursuit of his
Project of Universal Monarchy. It Is certainly the true Interest of all to
oppose his Designs, since no oppression is like his. And since you have heard
that the Faith of Treaties confirmed in the most solemn and sacred manner, the
Good of Religion, the Ties of Blood and Amity, cannot hold him; you may
doubtless believe it a very good reason at this Juncture, to endeavor to
secure your selves and all Europe from the sad Effects of his most unjust
Courses, by Quitting your selves like men; and this is one great reason you
have to do so, and the last which I proposed to speak to, viz. the
Consideration of the Enemy you are to oppose. Not one of these forementioned
Considerations, but would afford matter enough to fill whole Volumes; but
considering I am confined to so short a time, I could say no more, but only
give you these Items; and hoping they may put you upon reflecting on many more
Particulars, and be sufficient to obtain the designed End, I shall proceed to
the fourth and last thing, which is,

Fourthly, To make one Inference from the whole, and to conclude with an
Exhortation to you, and my hearty Prayers to the God of all Power, to protect
your Persons, and bless your Arms with good Success this ensuing Compagne. You
are Gentlemen in whom their Majesty's and their Kingdoms repose great Trust and
Confidence, and on whom your own whole Nation, as well as others, have at this
time fixed their Eyes, observing your Motions, which way you will lead others,
whether to the Right or Left: Your Care therefore, Gentlemen, ought to be the
greater in the prudent government of your selves both as to your words and
actions, that you give not the least encouragement to those who are ready to
take fire from any little spark. But whilst the unjustly discontented and
unreasonably Factious are plotting against the present Government, and forming
Designs against their Majesty's most Sacred Persons; It well becomes you,
Gentlemen, in your stations, to show greater Zeal than ordinary for both, by
liking whatever their Majesty's may judge reasonable for them to do in their
public Affairs, by discouraging all those who approve or disapprove of things
according as they themselves are pleased, or provided for, or as they are
influenced by some malecontented or factious Leaders, by disallowing,
disapproving and discouraging of that licentious Liberty that some take of
misrepresenting, arguing and arbitrating the great Affairs of State, of
censuring, arraigning and condemning what and whom they please, by
discountenancing all petulant Speeches or Discourses that may cause Discontents
or Divisions of Mind, which would much better become the mouths of your common
Enemies, than those who profess themselves to be true Englishmen and faithful
Subjects of the King and Queen's: And no doubt but all Discontents would then
be laid aside, and Divisions, and Factions, soon dwindle into nothing, when
others have a precedent so good and powerful as yours to influence their
practice, when they behold you a constant instance of this Truth, that the
poison of faction, and sedition, cannot infect all sorts of Men: You therefore,
Gentlemen, having such Laws and Liberties to defend, such a Church and Faith to
contend for, such a gracious King and Queen to serve, such an Enemy to oppose,
what can be a more Noble Cause wherein to employ your Arms? What Cause can be
more worthy of your Swords? In what Conjuncture can you more justly, or with
cruer praise, quit your selves like Men? And since the only way to do so is to
be Religious, what remains but that you abstain from all those Vices which so
usually attend the Camp, and perform all good and virtuous Actions so often as
you have occasion, and opportunity; making the Precepts of your Religion the
rule and standard of all your Thoughts, Words and Actions; and thus perfecting
Holiness in the fear of God, if it be your hap to fall in the Day of Battle,
you will not fail to be raised from that Bed of Honor, to a Crown of Glory,
which will sufficiently convince you that your labor has not been in vain in
the Lord: Now may His Majesty this Summer become the happy Instrument to
recover the Rights of the oppressed States, and Princes, of setting Bounds to
the French Ambition, to preserve our Nation against the threatened Dangers, and
to redeem Europe from that Yoke which they are framing, and devising to put
about her Neck, and to restore to us all, a Glorious, Christian, and an
honorable Peace; may he then thus laden with Honor, Victory, and good Success
return in safety to his own People, and there together with Her Majesty enjoy
the blessed Fruits of his own Labor, by possessing his Throne in peace for
many, many Years; and may they never want such Subjects as you are, of so much
Skill and Courage, of such Loyalty and Fidelity, to defend Their Royal Persons,
and Government, against foreign Invasions, and intestine Factions and
Rebellions; and may you, Gentlemen, all live to receive the just Rewards of
those many Hardships, and Hazards to which you have so freely, cheerfully and
bravely exposed your selves for Their Majesty's, and their Kingdoms; and then,
though the Terror of your Arms may be necessary for the Defense of Their
Majesty's, and the Security of your Country; yet may they never after this
Campaign have any more occasion to try your great Skill, and invinsible
Courage; and I don't doubt, though you are all Men of War, yet as Christians
you are such lovers of Peace, that you will heartily say, Amen to it: I shall
therefore dismiss you with the Words of the Psalmist; wherever you go,
whatever Action you are commanded on, The Lord prosper you, and cover your
heads in the day of battle.

I wish you all good Luck in the Name of the LORD.
FINIS.

