THE CONSTITUTION OF Parliaments IN ENGLAND, Deduced from the time of King
Edward the Second, Illustrated by King Charles the Second In His Parliament
Summoned the 18 of February 1660/1. And Dissolved the 24 of January 1678/9.
with an Appendix of its Sessions.

Observed by Sr. John Pettus of Suffolk, Knight.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Tho. Basset, at the
George in Fleetstreet, 1680.

The Epistle To the Generous READER.
HAving the Honor of Consanguinity to some of the House of Lords, and free
access to most of the Rest who make up the Harmony of that Noble Judicature, I
thought it not convenient (as well to prevent exceptions as dissatisfactions)
to dedicate this to any one of their particular Lordships, well knowing that to
offer any addition to their Universal Intuitions had been needless.

But I devote it in General to such whose Youth, or diversions (by other
Employments) have made them unknowing, or less knowing in this Subject, which I
have brancht out into 16 parts, whereof 12 consist of Precognita or things fit
to be known or done after Summons and before the sitting of any Parliament, the
13.14. and 15. are of matters to be known or done only during the sitting of a
Parliament, the 16th. has a relation, and is a Supplement of such matters as
could not well be Inserted to the foregoing 15 Parts.

It Is true, this subject of Parliaments has been treated on by many Learned
writers, but because none of them have proceeded in such a due Series as they
might have done (for they were more for the Modus tenendi, than Inchoandi) I
have partly from them, and partly from my own observations (having been a
member of the House of Commons about 12 years, and thereby had intercourse with
the House of Lords) and partly by the help of some worthy Friends) digested
this Constitution into as clear a Method as my lesser abilities could perform.

First I show the Gradations and Progresses to a Parliament, from the Fountain.
viz. the Kings Warrant to the Lord Chancellor Impowering him to Summon it in
Generals by Writs.

Next I show his Lordships Warrant to the Clerks of the Pettibag, for framing
(according to former Precedents) Writs of Summons in Particulars.

Thirdly, I show that these Clerks did Anciently and do still use a Method
therein, which Method (being fairly ingrost on one large Parchment) is called a
Parliament Pawn.

I do not find that any writers before me have made any mention of these Pawns
(nor do I put any weight on them, but in their Method whereby they are
composed) because I find that the Clerks not conferring with the Heralds have
committed many mistakes in Christian and Surnames, in Titles and Orthography.

However the Method therein has continued for many Ages, as will be shown, and
though I have tried many ways to frame this Treatise, yet none pleased me so
well as the Method used in the framing of a Pawn, which I have herein pursued.

The Writs which are contained and Methodiz'd in all Pawns have two
Appellations viz. Exemplars and Consimilars, and from those do arise the Method
of this Treatise. But as the Pawn does only recite one Writ of one sort, (as an
Example for Consimilar Writs of the same sort to be issued, yet are not therein
mentioned;) So I by that Method do take occasion only to Treat of the Exemplars
(except in some few places (for to Treat of all the Consimilars had been too
great a task) by which means I have here only five Writs, which gives me
opportunity to treat of the Blood Royal, of the Lords Spiritual, of the State
Officers, of the Lords Temporal, and of the most Eminent Togati as the
Assistants in that noble House, the other seven concerning the House of Commons
I shall treat of in a distinct Part.

And though my design is wholly to treat of what concerns that noble House in
this part, yet I could not avoid the Intermixtures of some necessary hints of
what properly concerns the House of Commons, which I intend (afvente Deo) to
publish by it self.

It was scarce possible that a Subject, which spreads it self into such
varieties, should be so collected as not to have Omissions, some of which were
purposely done, First, that I might not injure the Reader nor my Method by two
long diversions, and yet satisfy him in conclusion. 2ly. I have been as careful
as I could to prevent mistakes, but some will be, yet those which are necessary
to be corrected ( viz. my own oversights, or the Printers) I have added them to
the end of this Epistle, but as for the Printers Omissions of Marginal
Authorities, and distinctions of Sections, and observations (which were in my
Copy) and for his not putting some words into Italick Letters, and for want of
Comma's, Points etc. the Ingenious Reader, may Easily pardon them.

I have so ordered this Impression, that you have a System or the Contents of
an Introduction and of 20 subsequent Chapters, Sections and Observations which
I thought fit to exhibit, that those who have not the Leisure to read all the
Chapters, may turn to such parts as most suit with their Genius.

I begin the proper matter of this Treatise with the Kings Warrant in Feb.
1660/1 for Summoning that Parliament, and I shall End all with His Proclamation
for its Dissolution in 1678/9.

In these discourses I take the liberty to look back into former Ages, but not
forward beyond the Dissolution of that Parliament; Only as an Appendix, I shall
speak of some things that are to be done with Records, Leidger Books etc. and
Allowances to Knights, Citizens and Burgesses after any one Parliament is ended.

Corrigenda.
Page 20 l. 25 d. are, read, or, P. 79 l. 23 after Seal, read till of Late
years, P. 100 l. 17 r. Hertford. P. 124 l. 16. r. forgeting the Title of Knight
P. 129 fill up the blanck thus.

L. 15 Ric. 3 11 38 0 38 L. 16 Hen. 7 10 42 1 29 L. 17 Hen. 8 37 45 1 36 dele.
28 44

P. 137 d. son, r. Heir to Blanch the Wife of John P. 139 l. 6 d. and 6. P. 383
l. 7 read by this.

The Reader may also take notice that after the Contents, there are
observations Printed, concerning the Names and Titles of our English Kings,
especially of the Name Carolus or Charles, with some Prophetic Interpretations
of it, which should have been placed next the 14 Page of this Treatise, but
being omitted by an Accident he is desired to read them after that Page, if he
please.

THE CONTENTS of this TREATIS.
The Introduction.
Showing the Original of Councils, and the several Names of Councils in other
Nations and in this Kingdom, How and when the Name of Parliament began; Of its
Etymology and Definition; That a Parliament is the Abstract, yet includes the
whole Constitution and Fabric of the Government of this Kingdom; That it
Consists of a King and three Estates, and of three assisting Interests to those
three Estates.

The rest is divided into twenty Chapters with several Sections and
Observations in them, as follows.

CHAP. I.
SECT. I. The form of the Kings Warrant for Summoning this Parliament.

SECT. II. Observations on the Names and Progresses of the Names of our English
Kings, more Especially and Prophetically of the Names of Carolus or Charles, as
also of variations of the words in the Titles of several Kings of England, fixed
in this Warrant.

SECT. III. Observations and proceedings on this Warrant, showing the Kings
Prerogative in Summoning Parliaments: Of the difference between Warrants, and
Writs, in signing and Sealing in Generals, and particulars. The variation of
the form of Warrants Advised by the Kings Privy Council: How that Council
differs from the Great Council of Parliament, The Warrant is first issued to
the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper: The Lord Chancellors Warrant to the Clerks
of the Pettybag: Of the first Digest of Writs kept there, called the Parliament
Pawn: How these Pawns were Anciently used.

CHAP. II.
A Transcript of the Pawn for this Parliament began the Eight of May 1661.
Divided into twelve Paragraphs, whereof the five first, concern only the House
of Lords, the seven other the House of Commons.

Observations on this Pawn.

The reasons of placing figures on the Margent of the Pawn, The Reason of the
different Dates of Writs in the Pawn: Why some of the Writs are abbreviated in
the Pawn: Of General Writs (viz.) Original, and Judicial, and of Parlimentary
Writs, (viz.) Brevia Clausa and Patentia, Exemplars, and Consimilars: The
difference of the Lords Writs and Commons Writs: The agreement of Writs in the
Pawn. Derivative Writs (not in the Pawn) are Equivalent to those in the Pawn:
Of Exemplar and Consimilar Writs (viz.) both in the Lords and Commons Houses.
The method proposed for treating of these Writs.

CHAP. III.
Of the Act of Precedencies divided into observations: That the Act of
Precedence is concerned in the Lords House only: The nature of the Act: The
Title of the High Court of Parliament used in that Act: The Siting and calling
over the Lords different from the method in the Act, Why some Titles are named
in the 4th. Paragraph of the Act omitted in the 8th. Of the Woolsacks in the
Lords House Of the four degrees of State Officers which are placed by this Act.
How the Pawn, and Acts do disagree therein: Of such as sit in the Lords House,
yet not mentioned in the Act, but in the Pawn, Of former Proceedings in the
House of Lords omitted in this Act.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Degrees concerned in the Act of Precedence.

SECT. I. Of the Kings Privy Counselors. Of the word Council applied to
individual Persons and to an Assembly, Of the Kings Privy Council, Of several
other of the Kings Councils, Of the Kings Great Council or Parliament, Of the
Number and Quality of the Persons constituting the Privy Council, Of the
Antiquity of Councils, Of the Nature and condition of Counselors in our
Councils, Elected for merit, Of lesser Councils and Parliaments in this
Kingdom, Of the Privy Council and Parliament how sometimes mixed.

SECT. II. Of the Princes of the Blood. Of the seven degrees of the Blood
Royal, whose places are appointed by the Act of Precedence, That any of the
seven are Prior to all other degrees of Nobility, That in their absence the
Archbishop has precedence.

SECT. III. Of the Kings Vicegerent. Declaring the Kings Supremacy in the
Church of England, The great power granted to the Vicegerent, in Church
affairs, None made since the 31 of H. the 8th. but supplied by Bishops.

SECT. IV. Of Bishops. The Antiquity, of Bishops, The meaning of the Word, Of
their Jurisdictions, Of the Convocation Houses where they sit, as Bishops, and
in Parliament upon a Baronial account, How placed, Called Lords Spiritual,
Anciently they did manage the Chief Offices of the Kingdom, Of their Privilege
in the Lords House.

SECT. V. Of the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper, Referred to Chap. the 8th.

SECT. VI. Of the Lord Treasurer Referred to Chap. the 9th.

SECT. VII. Of the Lord President of the Kings Council.

Of it is Antiquity, Discontinuance, and Supply, Of other Lords Presidents.

SECT. VIII. Of the Lord Privy Seal It Is Antiquity and several Titles, How
granted, Considered as Master of Requests, Of his Seals, and other Seals, Of
his Clerks concerned in the Summons of Parliaments, Of his Antiquity in Sitting
in the Lords House, Formerly supplied by Ecclesiastics, now by Temporal Lords,
These three last mentioned Great Officers are thus Placed whether they be
Nobles or not.

SECT. IX. Of the Lord Great Chamberlain. Raised by Merit, Had lands given to
hold in Grand Sergiantry consisting of great, Immunities, The Antiquity of the
Title Conferred on some Noble Person whereby he sat in Parliament, Made
Hereditary his Employments in Accommadations for Parliaments.

SECT. X. Of the High Constable. His Antiquity since the 12 of Hen. 8. granted
but pro hac vice at Coronations etc. Their Power formidable to former Kings,
Devolved into Lord Marshal, Of other Constables of lesser Qualities but still
of gaeat use, Of such of the Higher sort as were formerly Summoned to
Parliaments.

SECT. XI. Of the Earl Marshal. Of his Power and Jurisdiction, Of the Original
of the Title, Of the Courts and Offices under him, especially the Court of
Chivalry, and Heralds, A description of them, Of their Employments relating to
Parliaments, Of the Earl Marshals Summons to Parliaments, and how it became
Hereditary.

SECT. XII. Of the Lord Admiral of England. How the Title sprung, Of his Power
and Jurisdiction, guided by the Civil Laws (not repugnant to the Common) Always
placed in the hands of some of the Chief of the Nobility, Had anciently their
Sumons to Parliaments, and so continue.

SECT. XIII. Of the Lord Steward. Of the Orthography of the Name and Antiquity
of the Office, Of several Offices under that Title, and particularly of the
Title of this Office, and of his Ancient and Present Summons to Parliaments,
and of his Uses there.

SECT. XIV. Of the Lord Chamberlain of the Kings House. Of his Authority and
usefulness before in Parliaments, Of Ancient Presidents of Summoning him to
Parliaments.

SECT. XV. Of the Principal Secretary of State. When the Act of Precedence was
made he was the 12th. Officer of State (a Number of Esteem) the difference of
his Writ, when his Summons are single, without annexing some Noble Degree to it.

CHAP. V.
SECT. I. Of the Decrees of Nobles. From whence the word Nobility is derived,
Divided into Majores and Minores, The Majores into 5 degrees, the Minores into
three, the Majores makes the Lords House, the Minores the Commons House.

SECT. II. Of Dukes. Duke from the Latin word Duco and Dux, Anciently Earls
were Prior to Dukes in England, How Dukes got the Priority: Of the several
Titles attributed to Dukes; Duke and Earl promiscuously used, And of the name
Grace applied to Dukes in England: Dukes were in England before they were
formally Created; The time when Created, Of two sorts of Dukes how
distinguished, (A Duke as General) is not provided for in the Act of Precedence
as other degrees of official honors are.

SECT. III. Of Marquesses. When begun in the Empire, and in France, When in
England: the reason of placing him between Duke and Earl: From whence the Title
is supposed to come, Noble Actions caused Noble Titles, and by some Hereditary.

SECT. IV. Of Earls. Of the word Comes or Count signifying Earl, 6. sorts of
Counts (according to Seldom) 22. sorts (according to Cassiadore) 3. sorts in
England, Of the incongruity of the words Comes and Earl; and from whence the
word Earl is derived, when first given in England Titutarly, and upon what
occasion; when by Creation, Of the Tachygraphy of the word Earl, Of the Ancient
Titular and Created Earls little difference, Of Local and Personal Earls here
in England.

SECT. V. Of Viscounts. Sometimes considered as Equal, sometimes of a lesier
degree then an Earl, Two sorts in England, why the Hereditary Viscount
interposed to Earl and Baron, Of the first Created Viscount in England, of the
Parliamentary dignity of the one, and Official Dignity of the other.

SECT. VI. Of a Baron. Of the word Baron, the Baronial Tenures were the
foundation of the Superior Tenures and Degrees, Of Contributions to the King
from Barons Spiritual: Barons how Exempted from Contributions, Of several other
sorts of Barons, The advantages of Created Barons.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Writ to Princes of the Blood Royal.

Of the Writ to Edward Earl of Chester Eldest Son to King Edward the 2d. Anno
15. Ed. 2. And the Writ to James Duke of York 13. Car. 2. Compared,
Observations on both Writs, A Recital or Numeration of the Exemplars of Earls,
Princes, and Dukes of the Blood from Edward the 2d. to this Parliament 1661.
Observations on the Title of York, the Consimilar to the Duke of York,
Observations on the Consimilars.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Writ to the Archbishop and Bishops with Observations.

Reasons for incerting this Exemplar in this Place, showing that the Idolatrous
Jews brought in Paganism into Britain, managed by Druids and Bards, after by
Arch-Flamins, and Flamins (which were Pagan Priests) Afterward Christ Himself
or his Apostles, or Disciples, or some of them brought in Christianity into
Britain: Bishops had Eleven several Titles (according to several Regions) given
to the first managers of Christian Religion: All included in the Word Bishop as
Inspector or Father: Of the Antiquity of the word Bishop, Aristobulus the first
Bishop of Britain, who were his Successors, Of King Lucius his message to Pope
Eleutherius and the Popes answer about the first ordering of Christian affairs
in Britain: Of Linus the first Bishop of Rome and his Successors till the time
of Lucius and Eleutherius (all subsequent to Aristobulus) The Amity between the
Bishop of Britain, and the Bishop of Rome, (in that time without any discord
about Supremacy) Afterward the Bishop of Rome assumed the Title of Pope, and
also a Supremacy to Britain, and planted their Dependents there; some small
Endeavors to oppose it, but Fruitless: Of several Laws made to lessen the
Power and Revenue of the Pope in Britain; (from the 9th. of Hen. the 3. to the
5th. of Hen. the 5th.) Of other ways used by Hen. the 8th. from the 9th. of
his Reign, till his death in support of his Supremacy, What Countermines were
used by the Pope, Historical passages from Hen. the 8ths. Death to the
dissolution of this Parliament Anno 1678. against and for the Papal Interest,
Of the the Titles of Defensor Fidei and Supremum Caput, how Used, disused and
altered from the 12. of Hen. the 8th. to the 13. Car. 2d. Of Writs to Bishops
before and in Edward the 2ds. time (having both the same and a greater
Extention of Power, than what is given in the Writs to the Lords Temporal) and
so to the 31. and 36. of Hen. the 8th. and the 13. of Car. the 2d. how they
continued, and altered some Observations on the old Writs, Of the first Writ in
the first Pawn of the 21. Pawns now remaining in the Pettibag, Observations on
that Pawn: Of the 2d. Pawn there, Of the 3d. Pawn there, Of the Pawn of this
Parliament begun the 8th. of May 1661. wherein Bishops were Omitted (though
entered in all former Pawns) and the reasons of that Omission, Of their Writ of
Restitution in the same year Aug. 1661. and where Recorded, Of their Consimilar
Writs, Fifteen Observations on their Writs and Temporal Employments.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Writ to the Lord Chancellor.

Of the Original of the Office of Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper and of the
Description of them, Anciently distinct but now United: Of their different
Seals, Of their eminent Employments, Seats, and Stations in the Lords Houss:
Of his single Writ of Summons as Assistant and of his other Writ (if otherwise
dignified) The Office anciently disposed of to Ecclessiasticks and of later
years wholly to Laics, Of some difference between the Warrant and Writ to Sr.
Edw. Hide, The form of the Writ, Observations on this Writ and the nature of
the Office.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Writ to the Earl of Southampton, Lord Treasurer of England and to the
Nobles not of the Blood.

Of the form of the Writ to the Lords Temporal, Observations upon it, that the
Degrees of Nobles (viz.) Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons) and
Titles of the Officers of State are still intermixed in the Writs with some of
those five Degrees, Which of these Degrees are usually made Exemplars, Of the
Antiquity of the method used herein, Of their Consimilars, Observations
concerning the various applications of the Titles, Chevaleer, Dominus, Miles,
Eques Auratus, and Bannerettus.

CHAP. X.
Of Patents, of Creation enabling the Lords Patentees to sit in Parliament.

The difference between Writs and Patents and advantages of Patents, what the
word signifies, Patents of 3. sorts viz. of Confirming, Reviving and Creating,
(that is, given where none was before,) The form of those 3. sort of Patents,
Their ellegant preambles, The Patents consisting of 4. parts, Of the distinct
form of the Patents to Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons,
impowring them to sit in Parliaments, Of the Confies of Ancient Patents, Of
Creation money, Of the difference in the former and late value of moneys.

CHAP. XI.
Of Lords and Peers.

Of the words Dominus and Pares, or Lords and Peers, what the words signify,
When Peers used in France, and of their number there: when in England and of
their number there, Of the words Praelates, Magnates and Proceres how to be
appy'd, Who properly called Peers, how placed in the Lords House, the words
Generally applied and promiscuously used, the number, increase or decrease
according to the pleasure of the King, a Corrollary on the Subject.

CHAP. XII.
Of Proxies in the Lords House.

Of the word Procurator, Proxy and Proctor considered as distinct appellation,
Proxy only proper in the Lords House, Licenced by the King, and to whom, and
sometimes denied, A Proxies double vote, when Proxy made, sometimes before,
and sometimes in time of Parliament, and how many allowed, the Ancient way to
be Licenced upon any petition to the King, Of the License where to be entered,
Of Tacit Licenses, Of the form of Licenses at this day for a Lord Spiritual, as
also for a Lord Temporal, how to be returned, Of the Titles which entitle
Proxors and Proxes to be such, The difference of Proxe Writs, before the siting
of a Parliament and after Prorogations, How long they continue, Of their places
in the Lords House.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Assistants in the Lords House.

The Assistants are generally professors of the Laws the virtues arising from
that Profession, it is the path to wisdom: How called Laws: The ancient way of
distributing them; The benefit of good Laws in any State, The Revenues, Honors,
Profits, Places, and other Rewards given to the Professors of them: Entitled
Justices and Judges etc. Divided into 3 Orbs or degrees; The several sorts of
Laws in which they are to be conversant, of the Titles of the chief professors,
1st. Of the Chief Justice of the Kings Bench with general observations on his
Writ of Summons to Parliaments, Of his Patent and Jurisdiction. 2ly. Of the
Master of the Rolls with observations on his Patent and Writ and Office: Of the
chief Justice of the Common Pleas with observations on his Patent, Writ, and
Jurisdiction, 4ly. Of the Lord chief Baron with observations on his Patent,
Writ, Jurisdiction, 5ly. Of the 3 other Justices of the Kings Bench, 6ly. Of
the 3 other Justices of the Common Pleas 7ly. Of the 3 other Barons of the
Exchequer with observations on their Writs, Patents, and Jurisdictions, 8ly. Of
the Kings Sergent at Law with observations on their Writs, Patents, and
Employments, 9ly. Of the Kings Attorney General of his Writ, Patent, and
Employment, 10ly. Of the Kings Solicitor General, of his Writ Patent, and
Employment, 11ly. Of the Kings Principal Secretaries of State, of their Writ,
Signet, Precedencies Employments, and Influence.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Accidental Writs of Summons.

Of Ancient Writs to Justices of North Wales, Treasurers of Wales, Archdeacons
Eschetors etc. and of late to several Officers of the Kings Court: and to the
Lord Chief Justice to supply the Lord Chancellors, or Lord Keepers place in
case of sickness etc.

CHAP. XV.
Of Returns of Writs.

Of the manner of returning all the forementioned Writs, different from the
return of Writs concerning the House of Commons.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Masters of Chancery.

That they sit in the Lords House without Writ or Summons; How they were
Employed anciently, and how in latter times: of the word Magister, and how
applied.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Clerks of the Lords House.

Some by Patent sit there, but none by Writ, others neither by Patent or Writ,
but ex Officio; Of the several sorts of Clerks Employed in the House of Lords
and in Trials of Peers etc.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Gentleman Usher of the Black-Rod.

When and how Instituted, and how Employed:

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Kings Sergeant at Arms.

Of their Antiquity, how different from Sergeant at Law, or other Sergeants of
their Number and nature of their Employments both in time of Parliament and out
of it.

CHAP. XX.
A Corollary to this first part of the Constitution of Parliaments.

Showing what is intended to be spoken of in the following parts of this
Treatize.

Observations on the Names and Titles of our English Kings.
THe Learned Mr. Seldom having bestowed an Excellent Addition to Libraries, by
his book of the Titles of Honor, and Sr. Edward Cook thinking it a necessary
part of his Institutes, for a Student to be well versed in the several Titles
of our Kings, and knowing that the substance flowing from those Titles are the
chief Subjects which are handled in Parliaments, I think fit to give a light
touch (by way of Preface) to the several words of the Title in the Kings
Warrant, as also in the Title of his Latin Writs, which are mentioned so often
in the following discourses. viz.

Charles the Second by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. Carolus Secundus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae,
Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Defensor Fidei, etc. First, It may be
observed that all our Kings before, and since the coming in of the Normans,
have been Ushered into that Regal Dignity by their Christian Names, whereof
from that time we have Ten several Appellations. viz.

One Stephen, 1 John, 1 Mary, 1 Elizabeth, 1 James. 2 Williams, 3 Richards, 6
Edwards, 8 Henrys, 2 Charles, but of all these Ten Names Charles must have the
Honor of Priority given to it.

To prove this, I shall trace their Progresses through Empires, Kingdoms,
Principalities, and States, under Secular Governors, (not meddling with
Ecclesiastical) and Carolus, or Charles, Concerning which, I shall not go so
far back as Charellus Prince of Lacedemon, but since Christianity was first,
Charles
I find that the Name Charles or Carolus (for they are agreed to be the same)
had its first splendour from Charles Surnamed Martill (a French King) in Anno
714. (who was the first that had the Title of Most Christian King and from whom
came Caroloman and Charlemain in Anno 778) and after viz. in Anno 800 the Name
of Charles went into the Empire, and in Anno 1119 into Flanders, In Anno 1150
into Swethland, In Anno 1263 into Naples and Sicily, In Anno 1310 into Hungary,
In Anno 1346 into Bohemia, In Anno 1601 into Scotland, (King Charles the first
being there Born,) And in Anno 1625 into England, (the same Charles being then
King) so as our Present King Charles the 2d Immediate Heir to Charles the 1st.
is the Second King of that Name in England, and Scotland, and that Name of
Charles is the first of any of the aforesaid Ten Names affixt to any Diadem in
Europe.

Edwardus or Edward, Edward
began but in the time of Edward the Elder, who was the 24th. King of the Saxon
Race and 25th. Monarch of England, And he in Anno 901 gave the first reputation
to it, In Anno 1332 it went into Scotland, And in Anno 1334 Carried into France
by our Edward the third (who laid Claim to that Crown) And in Anno 1433 it went
into Portugal, continuing still in England (with some interpositions of other
Names) till Queen Mary came to the Crown in Anno 1553.

Henricus or Henry began in the Empire of the East, Henry
Anno 919, and in Anno 1101 came into England, from thence Anno 1192 it went
into Bohemia, thence Anno 1206 to the Emperor then at Constantinople in
Greece, In Anno 1214 to the Kingdoms of Leo, and Castile, In Anno 1271 to the
Kingdom of Navarr, In Anno 1422 carried into France by our Henry the 6th. (who
was then Crowned in Paris King of France) And in Anno 1573 it went into Poland,
so as this Regal Name of Henry continued in England from Anno 1100 (with some
interpositions) till Edward the 6th. Anno 1546.

Stephanus or Stephen the 1st. that made his Name famous was Stephen a Martyr
for Christianity, Stepten
but it was not annexed to any Regal Title, till Anno 997 in Hungary, and thence
in Anno 1135 it came into England, (yet never fixed there, but on one King) And
in Anno 1576 it went into Poland.

Guilielmus or William began first as a Regal Title in Sicily and Naples,
William
Anno 1023 and thence, and in Anno 1066 it came into England, where it never
fixed but on two Kings.

Johannes or John, John
the first who made this Name famous was John the Baptist and John the
Evangelist, but it was not a Regal Title till Anno 1118 and then the Emperor
of the East assumed it, And in Anno 1199 it came into England, (determining in
one King) from thence in Anno 1222 it went to the Emperor at Adrianople, And
thence in Anno 1303 into Scotland, In Anno 1310 into Bohemia, In Auno 1350 into
France, In Anno 1379 Into Leon and Castile, In Anno 1383 into Arragon, In Anno
1387 into Portugal, In Anno 1405 into Flanders, In Anno 1418 to Navarr, In Anno
1478 to Denmark, and way, In Anno 1492 to Poland, And in Anno 1597 to Hungary.

Note, that there were 23 Popes of this Name John, and 10 Stephens, but I here
speak only of the Regal Names of Secular, not Ecclesiastic Princes, and it may
be observed, that none of the Popes have taken on them any of our 10 Regal
Names Except John and Stephen.

Richardus or Richard, Richard
was not a Regal Title till Anno 1189 and then it came first into England, and
continued (with some interpositions) till Anno 1485 when Hen. the 7th. came to
the Crown, nor was the Name of Richard either before or after those years, fixed
to any Regal Title in Europe, unless Ricarodos in Spanish do signify Richard
in English.

Jacobus or James, James
(not meddling with Jacob the father of the Twelve Patriarchs, or James the
Apostle but upon a Regal account it was not fixed to any King till Anno 1213,
then it began with the King of Arragon, Thence in Anno 1286 into Sicily, and
Naples, In Anno 1423 to Scotland, In Anno 1603 to England, given a Title to
that happy Union of England, and Scotland by King James.

Maria or Mary, Mary
had the suprem Honor to be Mother of our Savior but it was not annexed to any
other Regal Title, till Anno 1310 in Hungary, and from thence Anno 1476 to
Flanders, Then in Anno 1542 to Scotland, And in Anno 1553 to England.

Elizabetha or Elizabeth, Elizabeth
had the Honor to be Mother to John the Baptist, but was not annexed to any
Regal Title till Anno 1438 in Hungary and from thence Anno 1538 it came into
England.

Europe I shall pass to the next Epithet in the Kings Title, viz.

Secundus or Second, Second
and see when a Numeral Appellation was first made Titular to our Kings, and
here it may be observed that our Kings had Anciently Adjuncts to their
Christian Names; to distinguish them from others of the same Name, as Edward
the Elder, Edward the Confessor, in the Saxons time, and in the Normans,
William the Conqueror, and William Rufus and after him (other Titles
signifying their tempers) but not Numeral, till Henry (who was the 8th. of that
Regal Name in England) and he in the 10th. year of his Reign did first begin to
write himself Numerally Henricus Octavus: And after him Edward his Son did
write himself Edwardus Sextus, and ever since in our Histories and Records,
where there has been since William the first, two or more Kings of the same
Christian Names; the Numeral Appellation is added, and there upon our present
King Styles himself in all Writs and Warrants, as well Parliamentary as
otherwise, Carolus Secundus or Charles the Second.

Gratia Dei by the Grace of God; Grace of God.
Neither the Letters D. G. (denoting Dei Gratia) nor the words Dei Gratia (or
the Grace of God) were used as Adjuncts to our Kings Titles, till William Rufus
his time and after that, there were some intermixtures (as Sr. Edward Coke
says) but according to Mr. Speeds Medals and some others; the Letters D. G.
and the words Dei Gratia were first used by Edward the Confessor, King
and constantly after William Rufus by every succeeding King without omission;
British or Saxon Dialect (signifying the same with Rex) and is not used in any
Parliamentary Writs, nor in any Circumscription of our Coins, but Rex (being a
word as Ancient as the Latin Tongue is used in all our Writs, as well
Parliamentary as Judicial) and may be traced in our Coins from the beginning of
our Saxon Kings to the Danes with addition only of the Christian Name and then
also Canutus the first of the Danes here, Styled himself only Canutus Rex; and
others who succeeded him, and Edward the Confessor (the fourth Danish King) and
37 Monarchs of England sometimes wrote Edwardus Rex, sometimes Edwardus Anglorum
Rex, and sometimes Edwardus Anglorum Basilicus (according to the Greek word for
King) so as the word Rex did go along from the Britains to the Romans, Saxons,
and Danes: Herald the last of that Race, and those before him writing only Rex
with their Names, and so when the Normans Entered. William the first Styled
himself only Willielmus Rex, and so did the succeeding Kings seldom using the
word Basilicus till King James time.

England
but sometime our Kings wrote Rex Angliae, and some times Rex Anglorum (ever
from Edw. the Confessors time) Now what Anglia or England contains, every
Geographer tells us that it is surrounded by the sea Except toward Scotland,
and as to the diversity of Names several Chronologers tell us that it was
Anciently called Albion by the Greeks; Iniswen by the Welsh Poets, Insula
Caeruly and Insula Florum by other Poets, and Britannia by the Greeks and
Romans, Romania and Valentia only by the Romans Angleand, England and Britain
by the Saxons, but when the Saxon Heptarchy was United under King Egbert, he by
his Edict Anno 819 ordained it more solemnly to be called Britain (containing
England, Scotland, and Wales, yet notwithstanding this Edict, it was sometimes
called Albion, sometimes Britain, and sometimes England, and these various
Appellations were used (as appears by History) under Ten successive Kings after
that Edict, and then King Canutus the 10th. King from Egbert, and the first of
the Danish Race, fixed the Name of England and that Name has continued ever
since, according to the English dialect; and Anglia according to the Latin
(considered as disjoynted from Scotland, and Wales) but upon reduction of Wales
by Henry the 8th. and by the happy Union with Scotland by King James: the Kings
Title has been more general, viz. Rex Magnae Britanniae, comprehending
England, Scotland, and Wales, but not to be so understood in our Parliamentary
Writs for they are applicable only to England and Wales, and not to Scotland
though Scotland be mentioned in the Writs, and it may be observed that this
distinction of England and Scotland were united under the Name of Britain by
King Egbert Anno 819 but after that they were again disjoynted, and though both
did continue so disjoynted near 800 years yet now the Ancient Name of Britain
is restored (being bound by one Ocean and Governed by one King as it was 800
years before) and though it is now thus entire, yet England has a distinct
Parliament for its Laws, and Scotland a distinct Parliament for its Laws, and
both distinctly consisting of 3 Estates under one King, so as in all Writs for
Summoning an English Parliament, though Scotland be mentioned yet the operation
of the Writs can only be applied to England.

Scotland in the Title of our Parliament Writs, Scotland
did begin with King James who happily united both Kingdoms as I said under one
King, and so wrote himself Rex Angliae Scotiae etc. But they never send any
Representative to our Parliaments nor we to theirs yet the King of Scots before
the union had a Chair allotted for him in the House of Lords but never sat
there yet he was sometimes Summoned as Earl of Huntington and so by virtue of
that English Title might have sat there but not by his Regal Title until the
said union.

France by Normandy, France
Anjoy Poictors Tourny Main etc. yet the addition of King of France to the
Title of English Kings was not till Edward the 3ds. time, who had a Just Title
to it, and there upon did Quarter the Armies of France, But Hen. the 6th. was
actually Crowned King of France in Paris, and from these two, the Title and
right has continued ever since (though dispossessed) and as I shall show in the
second Part of this Treatise that Callis did send Burgesses to our English
Parliaments, for many years till it was Lost by Qu. Mary.

Ireland
The Title of Rex Hiberniae was as Ancient as our King Hen. the 2d. who created
his Son John the King thereof, yet for what reason of State (otherwise then
what I shall mention) in the 7th. Chapter) that Title of the King of Ireland
was never annexed to the regal Title of the Kings of England till the 33d. of
Hen. the 8th. and then to his other Titles he added Rex Hiberniae, before it
was only Dominus, and their Parliaments, are framed like our English
Parliaments, yet Subject to the Kings pleasure in confirming of their Laws here
in England, See more of this in Chap. 7th.

viz. Defender
Defender of the Faith, I shall speak more fully of it in the 7th. Chapter, Or
etc. id est other Titles which were formerly, and may still be added as you may
Read also in the 7th. Chapter, etc.
Section the 11 and 12.

words of the Kings Titles in his Warrants. and Writs: now in observance to Sr.
Edward Coke, I shall make a Summary of the particular Titles of our several
Kings, from William the first Inclusive to this time, showing what words were
added or withdrawn.

Normans entered, William the first styled himself sometimes Willielmus Rex, and
sometimes Rex Angliae and Anglorum, (as other former Kings) Omitting Dei Gratia
(as the Institutor says though I am not satisfied therein) and not adding
Primus.

William surnamed Rufus had the same Title, yet sometimes adding Dei Gratia,
not adding Secundus.

Henry styled himself Rex Anglorum, and sometimes Dei Gratia Rex, not adding
Primus.

Stephen did the like.

Henry did the like but Omitted Dei Gratia (as Sr. Edward Coke says) but in
the Coins which Mr. Speed Exhibits to us his style was Dei Gratia Rex Angliae
Dux Normaniae and Aquitaniae and Comes Andegaviae, not adding Secundus.

Richard not adding primus used the same sometimes Changing the Declension, and
the singular Number into the plural, viz. Dei Gratia, Rex Anglorum, Dux
Normanorum and Aquitaniarum and Comes Andegaviarum.

John used the same with Addition of Dominus Hiberniae. John


Henry styled himself like his Father King John, till the 44 of his Reign, and
then he left out Normaniae and Andegaviae, and writ only Dei Gratia, Rex
Angliae, and Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae, not adding tertius.

Edward the 1st. and Edward the 2d. styled themselves like Henry the 3d.

Edward used also the same style till the 13 of his Reign, Edward
France he left out the parts of it (before mentioned) and styled himself Dei
Gratia Rex Angliae, Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae, not adding Tertius.

Richard and Henry, Secundus or Quartus styled themselves like Edward the 3d.
from the 13 of his Reign.

Henry not adding Quintus used the same style till the 8th. of his Reign, and
then writ himself Dei Gratia Haeres and regens Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae.

Henry not adding Sextus being Crowned King of France in Paris wrote Dei Gratia
Rex Angliae, Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae.

Edward, Richard and Henry not adding Quartus Tertius vel Septimus, style
themselves Dei Gratia Rex Angliae Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae.

Henry writ also the same till the 10th. of his Reign as I said and then, and
not before, he added a Numeral word to his Title and so made it, Henricus
Octavus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae; Now as to the
Additional Titles to Henry the 8th. after his 10 years they Consisted of so
many varieties that I shall refer them to the 7th. Chapter of this Treatise
Section the 11) As also the Titles of Ed. the 6th. Q. Mary, Q. Elizabeth, K.
James, and K. Charles the first.

In which Chapter and Section I conclude with the Title of our present King
Charles the 2d. viz. Carolus Secundus Dei Gratia, Rex Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae, and Hiberniae, Fidei Defensor. viz. as in the Warrant.

And so having shown how the ten Names of our Kings from the Normans have been
dignified by Kings, Emperors etc. Especially the Name of Charles by its
Priority which is the more remarkable, because that by Transposition only of
its Letters it does Anagrammatise and render it

O CLARUS Anagram.

This Anagram may be applyd generally to all of that Royal Name, and it may be
one reason why so many Kings in Europe do at this day own that Name, and
possibly another reason of assuming it, may be to amuse the World about
Grebners Prophecy, viz. that Carolus E stirpe Caroli, Erit Carolo Magno Major,
but none can pretend to a greater interest in that Prophecy, then our present
King Charles the 2d. being so punctually and Signally ex stirpe Caroli.

How ever I am sure nothing can be more particularly Prognostical and
Applycable to any Regal Charles (then this following Anagram) to him being made
when he was born Prince of Wales, which I have ever since kept safe by me.

CHARLES PRINCE OF WALES. AL FRANCE CRIES O HELP US.

As to the uses which shall be made on these regal Names, their Progresses and
Anagrams (being not the proper Subject of this place) I shall refer them to my
Annotations and proceed to Observations on the Warrant of another Nature.

THE INTRODUCTION Showing how a Parliament CONSISTS.
Families increast into Villages, Towns, Cities, large Countries, Kingdoms, and
Empires, under one Father or Conductor, (for all other Governments are
collateral to Paternal and Monarchical) there was a necessity to Constitute a
Supreme Council of the chiefest and wisest men selected from the multitude, as
might keep such extended Dominions in a perfect Unity and Obedience to their
Original Father or Monarch.

The end of this Constitution was both for Conservation of the Original Family
or Potentate, who did thus Constitute them, or for his own ease in managing the
common interest of Safety and Plenty.

Councils might have the more solemn Effects and Veneration, several Nations in
imitation have since given distinct names to their Supreme Council erected, as
distinctions to those which were more Subordinate.

Thus the Jews (from whom we derive our most credible Memoires of Antiquity)
had their Supreme Council called the Sanhedrim, consisting of secular Persons,
viz. One Prince, (as their chief Head) besides Seventy others of mixed natures,
they had also another great Council altogether Ecclesiastical, called a
Synagogue, and other lesser, in the nature of our Convocations, and sometimes
all did meet at the great Sanhedrim, (which was only kept in Jerusalem) and
this was the Supreme Council, as may be seen in the 26th. chapter of Jeremiah, v.
8. who was condemned by the Ecclesiastical Consistory of Priests, and absolved
by the Temporal or great Sanhedrim of Princes, or chief Council, as may be more
fully seen in that Chapter and in the Jew's Antiquities.

And to pass the Ariopagus among the Athenians, we read that the Old Romans
also had their Great Council called a Senate, consisting of 300. Laics chosen
out of the Nobiles Majores and Minores, and their Consistoriani, where their
Senate did sit: and their Comites and Consistoriani (as Members thereof) did
somewhat resemble the Constitution of a Parliament: they had also a Pontifical
College consisting of Ecclesiastics; but the name of Senate at Rome, has
been long since drowned, since the fall of that old Roman Empire, for at Rome
the name of Senate is now altered into that of Consistory, (and in the vacancy
of the Pope, or See of new Rome, it is called a Conclave) and now the Empire of
Germany (which did arise from the ashes of the old Roman Empire) being shivered
into several Proprietors (lest it should grow again too great) was brought to a
Diet, for so the chief Council of that Empire is called.

Yet the old State of Venice still keeps the name of Senate for her great
Council, and the chief Council in France is called an Assembly of States.

England we have the name of our chief Council from Romans, Saxons, Normans,
and lastly from the French, for it has been called by those, Senatus, Curia
altissima, Michel Synoth, Assisa Generalis, and many more names, some of which
I think fit to render in English, viz. Senate, the great Synod (or meeting of
the King, and of the Wisemen) the highest Judicatory, the General Pleas, the
Great Court, the Common Council of the Kingdom, and the General Assize.

At last, in the time of Henry the Third, or Edward the Second, all these Names
were reduced to the word Parliament, which was then borrowed from the Language
and Name of the chief Councils in France (in many of which Provinces and
Parliaments our Kings had then a considerable interest.)

Original of this Name did begin with us in Henry the Third, or Edward the
Second's time, but Sir Edward Coke, in his Institutes, is pleased to cite one
Precedent before the Conquest: When (says he) the word Parliament was here
used, but it seems it did not continue a fixed name of Parliament from thence;
for at the great Council, held by Henry the First at Salisbury, consisting of
the three Estates, viz. Lords Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and Commons, it is
called by the Name of Council, and not Parliament, (as some other Writers have
mistaken,) However, it was not used again, till once in Henry the Third's time,
as some say; but we are certain, that it was used in the 15th of Edward the
Second, (as I shall show from safe Records) and after Edward the Third was
Crowned King of France, then, and ever since, this great Council of the whole
Kingdom has, without variation, gone by the Name of Parliament.

Institutor observes, That the French Parliaments were lesser Courts subject to
the Assembly of Estates, yet that Assembly of Estates was but originally a
grand Parliament, constituted of those lesser Estates or Parliaments, and those
did anciently consist of Lords Temporal, Commons, and Clergy, (for in that rank
they are cited by Comines, Comines, p. 226.
(an approved Author.) However, since the 15th of Edward the Second, we have
not altered its name, only a little in Orthography (which has made work for
that learned Institutor and other grave Writers on this Subject about its
Etymology) so by Example of those Worthies, I may venture to cull out one,
(intending to speak of the rest in my Annotations,) viz. Parliament, i. e. a
Parley of minds; and to this Etymology I may add this definition, That our
Parliament consists of a certain number of Men, of certain Degrees and
Qualities, Summoned by Writs from the King, to meet together in some place
appointed by those Writs, to parley or confer their minds to each other for the
good of the Public.

Definition will be more fully proved in this following Treatise; yet, before I
confirm it at large, I think fit to give a brief and intelligible Explanation
of it (in relation to a Parliament here in England.) To that end I shall first
set down the Nature of our Monarchical Government, and then we shall more
easily understand the Constitution of our Parliaments.

It is generally held, That the frame of this Monarchy consists of a King, and
of three Estates subordinate to him.

The first Estate, mentioned in all our Acts of Parliament, is Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical, governed by the Lords Spiritual; and this Estate has
Jurisdiction over the whole Kingdom, not only considering the effects upon our
Souls, but in its civil latitude and dimensions, as having an influence and
interest in every individual Man, Woman, and Child, and in most of the Products
of the Earth from their first Being to their Dissolution; and this in all the
fifty two Counties of England and Wales; but for the distinction of the Civil
and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, these are comprised into a lesser number, viz.
of twenty six, and are called Diocesses, as being given to them from God by the
hands of the King, to whom they acknowledge a subordination.

The second Estate (and so mentioned in our Laws) is the Lords Temporal, or
rather Militial, having the Lieutenancies of all the Counties of England and
Wales committed to their Trust, Care, and Charge; and to these belong the
managing of Embassies, Treaties of War or Peace, and all honorary Actions, both
Foreign and Domestic, as the King (who is the Fountain of Honor) does usually
confer upon them.

The third Estate is the Commons, (also mentioned in our Laws) and this also
subordinate to the King; and these consist of Gentry (Men of fixed and settled
Fortunes, designed for things of Gallantry and Hospitality) and of the
Yeomanry, comprised under several appellations, viz. Husbandmen, Artificers,
and Laborers, all driving on a Commutative Commerce, as well to supply
themselves as others with what the Land or Sea affords, either necessary,
convenient, ornamental, or superfluous.

Estates, but Assistances, and in truth they are the very Supporters of these
three Estates: viz.

The first, Religion, the second, Law, the third, Trade.

1. Religion is to be managed by the Clergy of several Degrees (as will be
shown) some neither Freeholders, nor Freemen) by their winning of men with a
persuasive or exemplary Power, into all Pious and Virtuous Actions, whereby the
Souls and Minds of Men may be united to Love and Obedience; and this is the
cement of Unity (to the three Estates.)

2. The Laws are managed by Lawyers of several degrees (some neither
Freeholders, nor Freemen) by instructing Magistrates in their compulsory Power,
when occasion requires, so as both the Laws of God and Man may be duly
observed, and that such whom the Clergy cannot invite to Piety, and Virtue, by
Precept, and Example, may be compelled to it by the Rigor of the Laws, and
this is the cement of Severity to the three Estates.

3. Trade is managed chiefly by Merchants, (some also neither Freeholders, nor
Freemen) these give life to Industry, whereby the Rich do help the Poor, and
the Poor the Rich, and thus Trade, Commerce, and Industry, are as necessary
Cements to the Three Estates, as either Religion or Law (respecting only what
morally concerns Justice and Obedience) and this is the Cement of Prosperity to
the whole Fabric.

So we see that as there are Three Essential Estates, so there are also Three
Essential Assistances or Supportations of those Estates, and without which
those Estates cannot well subsist.

Estates in general the King does abstract a Parliament. For when He gives
notice of his intentions to have one, he orders Writs to Archbishops and
Bishops, who are chiefly to manage the concerns of the Clergy.

At the same time He also orders Writs to such of the Nobility as He or His
Predecessors have either by Patent created to that employment, or otherwise
invested with some right thereunto, who are chiefly to manage the concerns of
the Nobility and Kingdom. At the same time He also orders Writs for Electing
such a number of Commons out of Counties, Shires, Cities, and Buroughs, as may
manage the concerns of the Commonalty, and yet these three Estates thus
distinctly Summoned, are so admirably intermixed in this Supreme Council or
Parliament, that these three Estates in that Council seem to have an
interchangable power and check on each other, in the more Safe and Wise
carrying on the Affairs of the whole Kingdom, considered either at Home or
Abroad.

Bishops have a certain number of Deans, Archdeacons, and Proctors, culled out
of Prebends, Parsons, Vicars, and the Clergy in general, as may be Assistants
to the Episcopal Interest.

The Nobility have a certain number of Lawyers, ( viz. Justices of the
Respective Benches and Courts of Judicature in Westminster Hall, (as will be
shown) culled out of the Profession of Lawyers, to be Assistants to them.

The Commons have the bulk of every County contracted into Two Knights, or one,
for each County, and of Two Merchants for each City, and of Two lesser Traders
for each Borough, and yet the Electors of them are not so confined to the
Persons Eligible, but that such as they hold fit to manage such Employment, are
capable to be Elected, though they be not Knights, Merchants, or Traders, yet
they are confined to a set number, (as I said) and of qualified Persons, as
well to preserve the Honor of it, as to prevent a surcharge of too great a
concourse to this Assembling of a Parliament.

By this easy demonstration it is evident that the Lords Spiritual (consisting
of Archbishops and Bishops, ( Successive but not Hereditary) do Sit in the
Lords House, and there Represent the whole Clergy of this Kingdom.

The Lords Temporal consisting of Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and
Barons, which Five Degrees by a Nobilitated Interest, Hereditary and
Successive, do Sit there also, Representing all the Nobility of those Degrees
in the Kingdom.

The Commons consisting of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, (by an Elective
Interest, neither Hereditary nor Successive) do Sit in the House of Commons,
Representing all the Commonalty of this Kingdom.

Over which Three Estates, the King for the time being ever was and still is
esteemed by an Hereditary and Successive Right, the Supreme, and in the Eye of
the Law, the Immortal Balance of these Three Essential yet Subordinate Parts,
Interests or Estates of this Kingdom; I say Immortal, because our Laws do say
that Rex nunquam moritur, and thereby gives him a clear distinction from the
Three Estates.

King, Lords, and Commons, because our Government seems to be framed of
Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy: To clear their Judgments, the Monarchy
stands single, but the Aristocracy is double, viz. An Aristocracy of the Lords
Spiritual, and an Aristocracy of the Lords Temporal, to which add the Democracy
of the Commons, and all is reconciled into Two Aristocratical Estates, and one
Democratical, and the Monarchical as Superintendent to those Three, and so this
Unity with the Triplicity, is the due constitution of our English Parliament,
and indeed of the Kingdom it self.

THE CONSTITUTION OF PARLIAMENTS.
CHAP. I.
The King's Warrant to the Lord Chancellor for Summoning the Parliament begun
the 8th of May, 1661.
CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To Our right Trusty and well beloved Counselor, Sir Edward Hide, Knight,
Chancellor of England, Greeting;
Whereas We by our Council for certain great and urgent Causes, concerning Us,
the good Estate and Commonwealth of this our Realm, and of the Church of
England, and for the good Order and Continuance of the same, have appointed and
ordained a Parliament to be holden at our City of Westminster the eighth day of
May next ensuing; In which Case diverse and sundry Writs are to be directed
forth under our Great Seal of England, as well for the Nobility of this our
Realm, as also for the Election of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the
several Counties, Cities, and Borough Towns of the same, to be present at the
said Parliament at the Day and Place aforesaid. Wherefore We Will and Command
you forthwith upon receipt hereof, and by Warrant of the same, to cause such,
and so many Writs to be made and sealed under our great Seal, for
accomplishment of the same, as in like Cases have been heretofore used and
accustomed. And this Bill signed with our Hand shall be as well to you as to
every Clerk or Clerks as shall make or pass the same, a sufficient Warrant in
that behalf.

Given at Our Palace at White Hall this Eighteenth Day of February, in the
Twelfth Year of Our Reign, and in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred
Sixty and One.
Observations and Proceedings on this Warrant.
King of England by his undoubted Prerogative has (and his Predecessors ever
had) in himself the Power of Summoning (as also to appoint the times of
beginning, continuing, discontinuing, or dissolving) of Parliaments.

Summoning (for I shall speak of the rest in order) or Uniting the chiefest
Parts of his Kingdom into a Parliament, (or Representation of the Kingdom in a
less Body than it self) is performed by the King's Warrant, in his Name, and by
his Authority only, as Supreme, not only of his Kingdom, but of its
Representation; and from this Warrant all Writs of Summons for a Parliament are
derived.

Warrant is in English, Signed by the King's own Hand, and Sealed with his
Privy Seal, or Signet; but the Writs are always in Latin (or anciently some few
in French) and are Sealed with the King's Great Seal in his Name, with a Test
of his Approbation (though not manually Signed or Sealed by him.)

Warrant is General, viz. for summoning the Nobility, as also for Elections of
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, but the Writs derived from those Warrants are
to particular persons, of particular degrees (as will be shown.)

Form of this Warrant is ancient, and has had little or no variation (except
in the leaving out of Abbots and Priors) ever since the 36 of Henry the 8th,
and except in leaving out Prelates and Bishops in this very Warrant, whereby
the Bishops had no particular Writs, before the sitting of this Parliament, but
within three Months after, for which Omission Reasons will be given in the 7th
Chapter.

Warrant was issued, the King (and so former Kings) did advise with their Privy
Council (which is manifested by the Words of the Warrant, viz. Whereas We, by
our Council) yet if these words had been omitted at any time, and not inserted
in the Warrant, the Warrant was held good and sufficient for due Summons.

Writ are always (Quia de advizamento and assensu Concilij nostri) and this
Council is called the King's Privy, or Private Council, (of which I shall speak
more) and is the King's constant or standing Council, as well in time of
Parliament as when there is none sitting: so as before this Magnum Concilium,
or Parliament, is summoned, this Privy Council consults and deliberates
concerning the Motives and Reasons for calling it, and after such deliberations
and results, does advise the King to send out a Warrant.

And therefore I conceive it useful to set down the Names of such as were of
the King's Privy Council, when the calling of this Parliament was advised and
resolved upon.

At the Court of White Hall, Feb. 1660/1. The KING Present.
His Royal Highness the Duke of York. His Highness Prince Rupert. William, Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, (Juxon.) Edward, Earl of Clarendon, Lord Chancellor
of England, (Hide) Thomas, Earl of Southampton, Lord Treasurer of England,
(Wriothesley.) John, Lord Roberts, Lord Privy Seal, (Baron of Truro.) John,
Duke of Latherdale, (Maitland,) Earl of Guilford. James, Duke of Ormond, Lord
Steward of the King's House, (Butler.) George, Duke of Albemarle, (Monk.)
Henry, Marquess of Dorchester, (Pierpoint.) Montague, Earl of Lindsey, Lord
great Camberlain, (Bertie.) Edward, Earl of Manchester, the King's Chamberlain,
(Montague.) Aldjernoone, Earl of Northumberland, (Piercy.) Robert, Earl of
Leicester, (Sydny.) Charles, Earl of Berkshire, (Howard.) Thomas, Earl of
Cleveland, (Wentworth.) George, Earl of Norwich, (Goring.) Henry, Earl of St.
Albans, (Jermin.) Edward, Earl of Sandwich, (Montague.) Arthur, Earl of
Anglesey, (Annesly.) Charles, Earl of Carlisle, (Howard.) William, Viscount Say
and Seal, (Fiennes.) Francis, Lord Seymour, (Baron of Troubridge.) Frederick,
Lord Cornwallis, (Baron of Ai.) Anthony, Lord Ashley, (Cooper.) Charles
Berkley, Knight and Baronet. Sir George Carteret, Knight, Vice-Chamberlain. Sir
Edw. Nicholas, Knights, Secretaries of State. Sir Will. Morris, Knights,
Secretaries of State.
After the Warrant is signed and sealed by the King, it is sent from the
Signet-Office to the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, and Directions are given
to the Heralds, to make Proclamation (at the Court-gate, and Capital City of
London,) of the King's Resolutions (of which I shall speak more in the Chapter
of Proclamations.)

The Lord Chancellor, etc. upon the receipt of this Warrant, does issue out his
Warrant also to the Master of the Rolls, as the chief Clerk of the
Pettibag-Office, in this Form:

YOu are hereby required forthwith to prepare for the great Seal of England the
several Writs of Summons for the Lords Temporal; As also for the Judges and
others to appear at the Parliament, to be holden the 8th of May next, together
with the several Writs of Election of the several Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses of the several Counties, Cities, Towns, and Buroughs within the
Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, as also
of the several Barons of the Cinque Ports to serve in the said Parliament, in
such Method and Form, and directed to such persons as are and have been usual
in such Cases, all which said Writs are to bear date this present eighteenth of
February, 1661. and for the so doing, this shall be your Warrant. Dated, etc.

Upon receipt of the Lord Chancellor's Warrant, the Clerks of the Pettibag, by
the assistance of the former Precedents of Writs (and anciently by help of the
Masters of Chancery) and by advice with the Heralds (as to Titles and true
Names of Persons) do fix a Schedule, or digest, or Forms of Writs to be issued.

Which Schedule, or digest, they keep fairly ingrost in Parchment, as a Record
in this Office, and this Record is then entitled the Parliament Pawn, and has
no other Name, which is, as they say, the awarding of several Writs for a
Parliament. And this methodical Record is very ancient, (as may be collected,
by comparing this with those which remain in the Pettibag.) And with the like
Endorsments are the Clause Rolls in the Tower; but there are no more Pawns at
present in this Office, than from the 21 of Hen. 8. to this of the 31 of Car.
2. making twenty in all.

Formerly these Pawns, (or Records) some time after the dissolution of every
Parliament (as will be shown) were carried to the Inrolment Office, and then
among many other Parliamentary Matters (of weighty concern) transcribed into
Parchment Rolls, and from thence (for more safety) carried to the Tower of
London, where they lost the name of Pawns, and were and are still called
Parliament Clause (or Close) Rolls: which I mention because I shall have often
occasion in this Treatise to recite such Clause-Rolls, wherein the Pawns were
for the most part inserted or endors'd. And in respect I do not find that any
who have writ before me of Parliaments, have taken notice of those Parliament
Pawns, (although they are Recorded and kept in the Pettibag, an ancient Office
of Record) I have culled out one of the twenty, and made it the foundation of
the whole Scheme of this Treatise.

That there are no more Parliament Pawns in the Pettibag, than (as I said) from
the 21. of Hen. the 8th. to the 13. Car. 2d. this reason may be given, that
when they were again Enrolled and transmitted to the Tower, or Rolls Chapel,
it might be thought needless to preserve them, in respect that from Ed. the 2.
d. to Ed. the 4. th. Inclusive, they are safely kept enrolled among the Records
in the Tower, and from Ed. the 4th. to the 21 of Hen. the 8. Exclusive, they
are kept safe amongst the Records in the Rolls Chapel, and from the 21 of Hen.
the 8th. to the 13 Car. 2d. they are preserved amongst the Records in the
Pettibag Office, and of these which remain in the Pettibag, that of the 31 of
Hen. the 8th. is much defaced and interlin'd, but that of the 21 and all the
rest from the 36 Hen. 8. are farely ingrost and Legible, and Tied up in one
great Bundle, the last of which made up for this Parliament of 13 Car. 2d. is
here Verbatim Transcribed. In which, for want of Application to the Heralds,
the Clerks have Committed many mistakes (I suppose (by long discontinuance of
Methodical Parliaments) not being well instructed viz. In the Titles of the
Lord Stourton, Lord Vaux, Lord Wharton, Lord Pagit, Lord Shandois, Lord
Stanhop, Lord Charles Howard, Ld. Roberts, Ld. John Pawlet, Ld. Coventry, Ld.
Frances Seymour, Ld. Bruce, Ld. Newport, Ld. Colpeper, Ld. Gerrard, Ld.
Langdale, Ld. Hollis, Ld. Cornwallis, Ld. Delamare, Ld. Townsend, Ld. Ashly,
Ld. Crew, and some others which shall be rectified in the 4th. part of this
Treatise. However I thought fit to follow the Record Verbatim (except in the
Marginal Figures and Notes which I have added, with Recommendation of Care for
the future. viz. the 13. Car. 2d. is here verbatim transcribed.

CHAP. II.
The Copy of the Parliament Pawn of the 13. Car. 2d.
Anno tertiodecimo Caroli secundi Regis.
CAROLUS secundus Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex,
Fidei Defensor, etc.
Praecharissimo and dilecto Fratri suo Jacobo Duci Ebor'um and Albaniae magno
Admirallo suo Angliae Salutem.
Quia de Advisamento and Assensu Concilii nostri pro quibusdam arduis and
urgentibus negotiis nos statum and defensionem Regni nostri Angliae and
Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernent' quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem
nostram Westm' octavo die Maii prox' futur' teneri ordinavimus and ibidem
vobiscum ac cum Magnatibus and Proceribus dicti Regni nostri Colloquium habere
and tractatum. Vobis sub fide and Ligeantia quibus nobis tenemini firmiter
injungen'd mandamus quod consideratis dictorum Negociorum arduitate and
periculis imminentibus cessante excusatione quacunque dictis die and loco
personaliter intersitis nobiscum ac cum Magnatibus and Proceribus praedictis,
super dictis Negociis tractatur' vestrumq' Consilium impensur' and hoc sicut
nos and honorem nostrum ac Salvationem and defensionem Regni and Ecclesiae
praedict' expeditionemque dictorum negotiorum diligitis nullatenus omittatis.

T.R. Test Rege.
apud Westm'd decimo octavo die Februarii Anno Regni sui tertio decimo.


CONSIMILE Breve dirigitur Praecharissimo Consanguineo suo Ruperto Duci
Cumbriae T. ut supra. Consimile.
REX, etc. Archiepiscopo Cant' etc.

Consimilia Archi' Ebor and Episcop'.

REX praedilecto and perquam fideli Consiliario suo Edro' Dno' Hyde Cancellar
suo Angliae salutem Quia, etc.

sic vobis mandamus firmiter injungen'd quod omnibus al'pretermissis praedict
die and loco personaliter intersitis nobiscum ac cum caeteris de Concilio
nostro super dictis negotiis tractatur' vestrumq' consilium impensur' and hoc
nullatenus omittatis T. ut supra.

REX Praecharissimo consanguineo suo Thomae Comiti South'ton Thesaurario
Angliae Salt'm Quia, etc. ut supra usque tractatum and tunc sic Vobis sub fide
and Ligeancia quibus nobis tenemini, etc. ut supra. T. ut supra.

CONSIMILIA Brevia diriguntur Personis subscript' sub eodem dat' Videlt'
Praecharissimo Consanguineo suo. Consimilia.


GEorgio Duci Bucks. Carolo Duci Richmond. Georgio Duci Albermarl Exercituum
suorum Generali. Dukes Three.

JOhanni Marchioni Winton'. Marquesses Four.
Edro' Marchioni Wigorn'. Will'o Marchioni Novi Castri. Henr' Marchioni
Dorcestr'.
CHarissimo Consanguineo suo Montague Comiti Lindsey magno Camerario suo
Angliae. Earls Fifty five.
Jacobo Comiti Brecon' Senescallo Hospitii. Edro' Comiti Manchester Camerario
Hospitii. Alberico Comiti Oxon'. Algernon' Comiti Northumbr'. Francisco Comiti
Salop. Carolo Comiti Derb'. Johanni Comiti Rotel'. Will'o Comiti Bedford'.
Philippo Comiti Pembr' and Montgomeri. Theophilo Comiti Lincoln'. Carolo Comiti
Nott'. Jacobo Comiti Suff'. Ric'o Comiti Dors'. Will'o Comiti Sarum. Joh'i
Comiti Exon'. Joh'i Comiti Bridgewater. Rob'to Comiti Leic'. Jacobo Comiti
North'ton. Carolo Comiti Warr'. Will'o Comiti Devon'. Basil'Comiti Denbigh'.
Georgio Comiti Bristol'. Lionell'Comiti Midd'. Henrico Comiti Holland. Joh'i
Comiti Clare. Olivero Comiti Bullingbrooke. Mildmay Comiti Westmerland. Thomae
Comiti Berks. Thomae Comiti Cleveland. Edr'o Comiti Mulgrave. Henr' Comiti
Monmouth. Jacobo Comiti Marlborough Thomae Comiti Rivers. Henrico Comiti Dover.
Henrico Comiti Stamford. Henr' Comiti Peterborough. Henr' Comiti Winchelsea.
Carolo Comiti Carnarvan. Mountjoy Comiti Newport. Philippo Comiti Chesterfield.
Joh'i Comiti Thanett. Jeronimo Comiti Portland. Will'o Comiti Strafford. Rob'to
Comiti Sunderland. Georgio Comiti Norwic'. Nich'o Comiti Scarsdale. Henrico
Comiti sc'ti Albani. Edr'o Comiti Sandwici. Edr'o Comiti Clarendon Canc'
Angliae T. vicesimo nono Aprilis Anno praedicto. Arthuro Comiti Essex. Thomae
Comiti Cardigan. Arthuro Comiti Anglesey. Joh'i Comiti Bathon'. Carolo Comiti
Carliol'T. vicesimo nono Aprilis Anno praedicto.
LEicestr' Vicecomiti Hereford. Viscounts Eight.
Francisco Vicecomiti Montague. Will'o Vicecomiti Say and Seal. Edr'o
Vicecomiti Conway. Baptist' Vicecomiti Campden. Will'o Vicecomiti Stafford.
Thomae Vicecomiti Falconberg'. Joh'i Vicecomiti Mordant.
PRaedilecto and fideli suo Joh'i Nevile de Aburgavenny Chr'. Barons Chevaliers
Sixty eight.
Jacobo Tutchell de Awdley Chr'. Carolo West de la War Chr'. Georgio Berkley
de Berkley Chr'. Thomae Parker de Morley and Montegle Chr'. Francisco Dacres
Chr'. Conyers Darcy de Darcy Chr'. Will'o Stourton de Stourton Chr'. Will'o
Sandys de la Vine Chr'. Edr'o Vaux de Harrowdon Chr'. Thomae Windsor Chr'.
Thomae Wentworth Chr'. Wingfeild Cromwell Chr'. Georgio Eure Chr'. Phil'Wharton
de Wharton Chr'. Franciso Willoughby de Parham Chr'. Will'o Pagit de Beau
desert Chr'. Dudlee North Chr'. Will'o Shandos de Shudely Chr'. Joh'i Carry de
Hunsdon Chr'. Will'o Petre Chr'. Dutton Gerrard de Gerrard Bromley Chr'. Carolo
Stanhope de Harrington Chr'. Henr' Arundell de Wardour Chr'. Christophero Roper
de Tenham Chr'. Rob'to Brook Chr'. Edr'o Mountague de Boughton Chr'. Carolo
Howard de Charlton Chr'. Will'o Gray de Wark Chr'. Joh'i Roberts de Truro Chr'.
Will'o Craven Chr'. Joh'i Lovelace Chr'. Joh'i Pawlet de Hinton St. George
Chr'. Will'o Maynard Chr'. Thomae Coventry de Alesborough Chr'. Edr'o Howard de
Escrick Chr'. Warwic' Mohun Chr'. Percy Herbert de Powis Chr'. Edr'o Herbert de
Cherbury Chr'. Fran'co Seymour de Trowbridge C.D. Lanc' Chr'. Thomae Bruce de
Wharlton Chr'. Fran'co Newport de Higharcall Chr'. Thmae Leigh Chr'.
Christophero Hatton Chr'. Henr' Hasting de Loughborough Chr'. Ri'co Byron Chr'.
Ri'co Vaughan Chr'. Carolo Smith de Carrington Chr'. Will'o Widdrington Chr'.
Humble Ward Chr'. Thomae Culpepper de Thoresway Chr'. Isaaco Astley Chr'. Ri'do
Boil de Clifford Chr'. Joh'i Lucas Chr'. Joh'i Bellasis Chr'. Lodovico Watson
de Rockingham Chr'. Carolo Gerrard de Brandon Chr'. Rob'to Sutton de Lexington
Chr'. Carolo Kirkhoven de Wotton Chr'. Marmaduco Langdale de Holme Chr'. Will'o
Crafts Chr'. Joh'i Berkley Chr'. Denzil Hollis de Ifeild Chr'. Frederic'
Cornwallis de Eye Chr'. Georgio Delamere de Dunham Massey Chr'. Horratio
Townesend de Lynn Regis Chr'. Antonio Ashley Cooper de Winborne Sancti Egidij
Chr'. Johanni Crew de Stene Chr'.
29 April, 1661. REX
Dilecto and fideli suo Rob'to Foster mil'Capitali Justic' nostro ad pl'ita
coram nobis tenend'assign' salt'm
Quia de Advisamento and assensu Consilij nost'ri pro quibusdam arduis and
urgentibus negocijs Nos statum and defensionem Regni nostri Angliae and
Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernen' quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem
nostram Westm' octavo die Maij prox' futur' teneri ordinavimus and ib'm
vobiscum ac cum Magnatibus and Proceribus dicti Regni nostri colloquium habere
and tractatum Vobis mandamus firmiter injungend'quod omnibus alijs pretermissis
praedictis die and loco personalit' intersitis nobiscum ac cum caeteris de
Concilio nostro super dictis negocijs tractatur' vestrumque consilium impensur'
Et hoc nullatenus omittatis

Test Rege apud Westm' decimo octavo die Februarij Anno praedicto.


CONSIMILIA Brevia diriguntur personis subscript' sub eodem dat' Videlt'.

HArbottel Grimston Baronet' Mag'ro Rotulorum Cancellar' suae. Orlando
Bridgeman Mil'Capitali Justic' de Banco suo. Mattheo Hale Capital'Baron' de
scc'io suo. Thomae Mallett Mil'un' Justic' suorum ad pl'ita coram ipso Rege,
etc. Thomae Twisden Mil'al'Justic' suorum ad pl'ita coram ipso Rege, etc.
Wadham Windham Mil'al'Justic' suorum ad pl'ita coram ipso Rege, etc. Rob'to
Hyde Mil'un' Justic' suorum de Banco. Thomae Terryl Mil'un' Justic' suorum de
Banco. Samueli Brown Mil'al'Justic' suorum de Banco. Edr'o Atkins Militi.
Christophero Turner Mil'Baronibus de scc'io. Galfrido Palmer Mil'Attorn' suo
Generali. Johanni Glynn Militi. Johanni Maynard Militi Servien' d'ni Regis ad
legem. Edr'o Nicholas Militi un' Principal'Secretar'.
CAROLUS secundus Dei gratia Angliae Scotiae Franciae and Hiberniae Rex fidei
defensor, etc.
Vie' Cornub' salutem
Quia de Advisamento and assensu Concilij nostri pro quibusdam arduis and
urgentibus negocijs Nos statum and Defensionem Regni nostri Angliae and
Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernen' quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem
nostram Westm' octavo die Maij prox' futur' teneri ordinavimus and ibidem cum
Magnatibus and Proceribus dc'i Regni n'ri colloquium habere and tractatum. Tibi
praecipimus firmit' injungend'quod facta Proclamatione in prox' Com' tuo post
reception' hujus Brevis nostri tenend'de die and loco praedict' duos Milites
Gladijs cinctos magis idoneos and discretos Com' praedict' de qualibet Civitate
Com' illius duos Cives and de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses de discretioribus
and magis sufficien' libere and indifferenter super illos qui Proclamatione
hu'mo'i interfuerunt juxta formam statutorum inde edit' and provis' Et homina
eorundem Militum Civium and Burgens' sic eligend'in quibusdam Indentur' inter
te and illos qui hu'modi Electioni interfuerint inde conficiend'licet hu'modi
eligend'presentes fuerint vel absentes inseri eosque ad dictos diem and locum
venire fac' Ita quod iidem Milites plenam and sufficien' potestat' pro se and
Communitate Com' illius ac dicti Cives and Burgens' pro se and Comitat'
Civitat' and Burgorum praedict' divisim ab ipsis habeant ad faciend'and
consentiend'hiis quae tunc ib'm de Communi Concilio dicti Regni nostri favente
Domino contigerint ordinari super negocijs antedictis Ita quod pro defectu
potestat' hu'modi seu propter improvidam Electionem Militum Civium aut Burgen'
praeditorum dicta negocia infecta non remaneant quovismodo' Nolumus autem quod
tu nec aliquis al'Vic' dicti Regni nostri aliqualit' sit electus and Electionem
illam in pleno Com' tuo factam distinct and aperte sub sigillo tuo and
sigillis eorum qui Electioni interfuerint nobis in Cancellariam nostram ad
dictos diem and locum certifices indilate remitten' nobis alteram partem
Indentur' praedict' praesentibus consut' unacum hoc brevi

T.R. apud Westm' decimo octavo die Februarii Anno Supradicto.


Consimilia Brevia diriguntur Vicecomitibus separat' Com' sequen' sub dat'
praedict' Videlt'.

Kant'. Midd'. Surr'. Sussex. Southt'. Lincon'. Staff'. Suff'. Derb'. Norff'.
Nott'. Salop. Northumbr'. Westmerl'. Eborum. Wigorn'. Essex. Heref'. Devon.
Hertf'. Wilts. Northt'. Somers'. Glouc'. Leic'. Dors'. Warr'. Rotes'. Bucks.
Cumbr. Berks. Bedd'. Hunt'. Monmouth de duobus Militibus and uno Burgens, in
Burgo de Monmouth.
REX
Vic' Cantabr' Salutem
Quia etc. ut supra usque tractatum and tunc sic Tibi praecipimus firmiter
injungend'quod facta Proclamatione in prox' Com' tuo post receptionem hujus
brevis nostri tenend'de die and loco praedictis duos Milites Gladiis cinctos
magis idoneos and discretos Com' praedicti ac de Universitate Cantabr' duos
Burgenses and de qual't Civitate Com' illius duos Cives and de quol't Burgo
duos Burgenses de discretioribus and Magis sufficien' libere and indifferent'
per illos qui Proclamationi hu'modi interfuerint juxta formam Statutorum inde
edit' and provi' eligi and nomina eorundem Militum Civium and Burgens'
praedictorum sic eligend'in quibusdam Indentur' inter te and illos qui hu'modi
Electioni interfuerint inde conficien'd licet hu'modi eligend'presentes fuerint
vel absentes inseri eosque ad dictos diem and locum venire fac' Ita quod iidem
Milites plenam and sufficien' potestatem pro se and Coi'tate Com' illius ac
dicti Cives and Burgens' pro se and Comitat' Universitat' Civitat' and Burgorum
praedict' divisim ab ipsis habeant ad faciend'and consentiend'hiis quae tunc
ib'm de Comun' Concilio dicti Regni nostri favente Domino Contigerint ordinari
super negociis antedictis. Ita quod pro defectu potestat' hu'modi seu propter
improvidam Electionem Militum Civium aut Burgens' praedict' dicta negocia
infecta non remancant quovismodo. Nolumus autem quod tu nec aliquis alius Vic'
dicti Regni nostri aliqualit' sit electus and Electionem illam in pleno Com'
tuo factam distinct and aperte sub sigillo tuo and sigillis eorum qui
electioni illi interfuerint nobis in Cancellar' nostram ad dictos diem and
locum certifices indilate remitten' nobis alteram partem Indentur' praedict'
presentibus consut' unacum hoc brevi

Test ut supra.


Consimile Breve dirigitur Vic' Oxon' sub dat' praedict.

REX
Vicecomitibus London Salutem
Quia etc.

ut supra usque tractatum and tunc Vobis praecipimus firmiter injungentes quod
facta proclamatione in prox' Hustengo nostro post receptionem hujus Brevis
nostri tenend'de die and loco praedict' quatuor Cives de discretioribus and
magis sufficien' Civitat' praedict' libere and indifferent' per illos qui
proclamationi hu'modi interfuerint juxta formam Statutorum inde edit' and
provis' eligi and nomina eorundem Civium sic eligend'in quibusdam Indentur'
inter vos and illos qui hu'modi Electioni interfuerint inde conficiend'licet
hu'modi eligend'presentes fuerint vel absentes inseri eosque ad dictos diem and
locum venire fac' Ita quod praedict' Cives plenam and sufficien' potestat' pro
se and Co'itate Civitatis praedict' divisim ab ipsis habeant, etc. ut supra
mutatis mutandis, etc. and in qual't Civitate sequen' facta proclamatione infra
Com' Civitat' praedict, etc. ut supra and in Villis sequen' infra Com' Villae
praedict, etc.

T. ut supra.


Consimilia Brevia diriguntur Vicecomitibus seperal'Civitat' and Vill'sequen'
sub eodem dat' Videlt'.

Vicecomitibus Civitatis suae. Eborum de duobus Civibus eligend'. Vicecomitibus
Civitatis suae. Norwici de duobus Civibus eligend'. Vicecomitibus Civitatis
suae. Lincoln' de duobus Civibus eligend'. Vicecomitibus Civitatis suae.
Coventr' de duobus Civibus eligend'. Vicecomitibus Civitatis suae. Glouc' de
duobus Civibus eligend'. Vicecomitibus Civitatis suae Bristol, de duobus
Civibus eligend'. Vic' Civitat' suae Cantuar' de duobus Civibus eligend'. Vic'
Civitat' suae Exon' de duobus Civibus eligend'. Vic' Civitat' suae Lich' de
duobus Civibus eligend'. Vic' Civitat' suae Wigorn' de duobus Civibus eligend'.
Vicecomitibus Villae suae Nott' de duobus Burgens' eligend'. Vic' Villae de
Kingston super Hull de duobus Burgens' eligend'. Vic' Villae suae Southt' de
duobus Burgens' eligend'. Vic' Villae suae Novi Castri super Tinam de duobus
Burgens' eligend'. Vic' Villae suae de Poole de duobus Burgens' eligend'.
Vicecomitibus Villae suae Haverford-west de uno Burgens' eligend'. Vic' suae
Carmarthen' de uno Burgens' eligend'. Majori and Ballivis Villae de duobus
Burgens' eligend'. Berwici super Twedam de duobus Burgens' eligend'.
REX
Constabular' Castri sui Dover ac Custod'Quinque Portuum vel ejus locum tenenti
ib'm Sal'tem,
etc.

usque tractatum Et tunc Vobis in fide and Ligeancia quibus nobis tenemini
firmit' injungend'mandamus Quod in quolibet Portu Portuum praedict' duos
Barons de Melioribus and discretoribus eligi and eos ad dictos diem and locum
venire fac' Ita quod dicti Barons plenam and sufficien' potestatem pro se and
Co'itate Port' suorum habeant ad consentiend'hijs quae tunc ib'm communi de
Concilio dicti Regni nostri Angliae favente Domino contigerint ordinari super
negotijs antedictis Ita quod pro defectu potestatis hu'modi seu propter
improvidam Election' Baronum praedict' dicta negotia infecta non remaneant
quovismodo Et habeatis ibi nomina praedict' Baronum and hoc breve

T. ut supra.


REX
Cancellar' suo in Com' Palatino Lancastr' vel ejus locum tenenti ib'm sal'tem
etc.

ut supra usque tractatum Et tunc sic Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes quod
per breve nostrum sub sigillo nostro Com' praedict' detis in mandatis Vic'
nostro ejusdem Com' quod idem Vic' facta proclamatione in prox' Com'suo post
receptionem dicti brevis nostri etc. in quibusdam Indentur' int' ipsum Vic' and
illos etc. Nolumus autem quod idem Vic' etc. Et Electionem illam in pleno Com'
praedict' sic factam distinct aperte sub sigillo Com' praedict' and sigillis
eorum qui electioni illi interfuerint nobis in Cancellar' nostram Angliae ad
dictos diem and locum certificetis indilate remitten' nobis etc. ut supra.



REX
Camerario suo Com' Palatini sui Cestriae vel ejus locum tenenti ib'm salutem
etc. usque tractatum Vobis mandamus firmiter injungend'quod per seperalia
brevia nostra sub sigillo nostro Com' praedict' debite conficiend'detis in
mandatis tam Vic' nostro ejusdem Com' Cestr' quam Vic' nostris Civitat' Cestr'
quod facta proclamatione in prox' Com' suis post receptionem eorundem brevium
nostrorum tenend'de die and loco praed'dictus Vic' dc'i Com' Cestr' duos
Milites gladio cinctos magis idoneos and discretos Com' praed'and praed'Vic'
dc'ae Civit' Cestr' duos Cives dc'ae Civit' de discretioribus, etc. Et nomina
eorundem Milit' sic eligend'in quibusdam Indentur' int' ipsum Vic' Civitat' and
illos qui hujusmo'i Electioni interfuerint Ac nomina praed'Civium sic
eligend'in quibusdam Indentur' int' ipsos Vic' Civitat' and illos qui, etc.
Nolumus autem quod idem Vic' dc'i Com' Cestr' nec praed'Vic' Civitat' praed'nec
aliquis, etc. Et Electiones illas in plenis Com' and Civitat' praed'sic fact'
distinct and aperte sub sigillo Com' Palatini praed'and sigillis eorum qui
Electionibus illis interfuerint nobis in Cancellariam nostram Angliae ad dictos
diem and locum certifices indilate remitten' nobis alteras parts
seperal'Indentur' praed'presentibus consut' unacum hoc brevi

T. ut supra.


REX
Vic' Carnarvon salutem
Quia, etc.

usque tractatum shire Town ejusdem Com' unum Burgensem de discretioribus, etc.
ut supra in Com' Cornub' mutatis mutandis

T. ut supra.


Consimilia Brevia diriguntur Vicecomitibus seperal'Com' sequen' sub dat'
praed'videlt', Radnor. Brecon. Carmarthen. Mountgomery Cardigan. Glamorgan.
Pembroke. Flint. Merioneth. Denbigh. Anglesey de uno Milite tantum eligend'.


SECT. II. Observations on this Pawn.
Pawn or Record of the Writs which were issued for the Summoning this
Parliament; and that my Method in managing of them may be the clearer
understood, I shall set down some Observations pursuant to it.

In the Original of this Pawn, or Record, there are no Figures placed in the
Margents of the respective Paragraphs of it (but I have thought fit, in respect
of the several occasions referring to it, to add the Figures of I. II. III. IV.
V. (being Paragraphs particularly relating to the House of Lords;) and then the
Figures of VI. VII. VIII. IX. X. XI. XII. being Paragraphs particularly
relating to the House of Commons,) for of all these I shall speak distinctly in
this, and the Second Part of this Treatise.

Feb. 13 Car. 2. but there being several Creations of Lords (or at least their
Patents not perfect) after the 18th, all the subsequent Writs for such Lords
were dated the 29th of April following, and that is the reason of the different
Dates of Writs in the Pawn, but all were before the Parliament sat.

Pawn for the Lords House do begin with the words, CAROLUS Secundus Dei Gratia
Angliae Scotiae Franciae and Hiberniae Rex Fidei Defensor. And so the first
Exemplar in the House of Commons, Fig. 6. begins in the like words; yet all the
other Exemplars in the Pawn do begin only with the word Rex, omitting the other
words, which must be understood that the single word Rex, etc. is so entered
only for brevity, not that the Form of the other Examplar or Consimilar Writs
are so concise, either in the preamble or body of the Writs (for the same
reason.)

it is fit I should speak of the Nature of Writs in general.

The Common and Civil Law calls a Writ in Latin, Breve, quia brevibus and
paucis verbis intentionem Legis exponit. And of these in the Common Law some
are called Original, and others Judicial; the Original (if I do not miscount
them, from the Register of Writs) are 727 in Number: and these are used in the
respective Courts in Westminster before any appearance had, or other Process
issued in all matters both real and personal, and are always in the King's
Name, attested by the Chief Justice of the Court from whence they issue; the
other, called Judicial Writs,) if I miscount not the number of them from the
same Register) are 371, which are sent out by order of those Courts where the
original Writ is recorded, and the Case depending; and these latter do also
issue in the King's Name, and attested by the chief Justice of the respective
Courts from whence they proceed, and sealed with green Wax, with the Seals of
the respective Courts.

But the Parliament Writs (of which I am to treat) are of another nature and
quality, issued only by the King's immediate Command and Warrant, and sealed
with the great Seal of England; and these have two appellations, viz. Brevia
Clausa, (or operta,) and Brevia Patentia, (or Aperta.)

The Brevia Clausa are Writs of Summons closed up in yellow Wax, and so sealed
with the great Seal of England, and then (as will be more fully shown, after I
have discoursed distinctly of the Writs) sent (with Labells) to every
individual Prince of the Blood, Lords Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and
Assistants, and to every Sheriff of the Kingdom, for Elections of Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses for the Commons House; and so do concern both House of
Lords, and House of Commons, (as also the Convocation Houses, dirivatively from
the Archbishops, and Bishops Writs,) of which last I shall speak more
distinctly in this Treatise, concerning the Convocation House.)

But the Brevia Patentia do chiefly concern the House of Lords, viz. by Patents
of Creations, (as also some Officers, as will be shown) and all these are
called Patentia, or Letters Patents, because they are not enclosed, but open,
with the Impression of the great Seal of England at large hanging to them, yet
all the Created Patentees have their distinct Writs of Summons, but not the
Official Patentees, viz. Clerk of the Crown, Clerk of the Parliament, Clerk to
the House of Commons, etc.

These Patent Writs have no other appellation than Literal, or Letters Patents,
as I said. But the Parliamentary close Writs are divided into two Titles, viz.
Exemplars and Consimilars, and though the word Exemplar is not used in the
Pawns, yet the word Consimile is constantly used there, which does imply an
Exemplar. The Exemplars are Writs set down at large in the Pawns, and the
Consimilars are Writs not inserted in the Pawns, and yet are to have a
consimilitude with their Exemplars, the Exemplar being so made upon some
extraordinary reason, as will be shown hereafter.

House of Lords (of which I only treat in this first Part) as they are more in
number than any of the other Houses, (not including derivative Writs, Precepts,
or Citations) so they are of a more nice nature, in respect (as I said) they
are personal; for a distinct Writ is to be provided for every individual Lord
sitting in the Lords House, but not so in the House of Commons, or lower
Convocation, (as will be shown) and though the main body of the Writs in those
concerning the Lords House do differ but little from the Writs of former Kings,
or from those of the House of Commons, yet the Titles do very much vary in
every Parliament, partly by the new Creation of Barons, partly in their
Ascension from Barons to higher degrees, and partly by splitting of Titles upon
extinction of Families, and for other causes they are in few years subject to
variation in Titles, wherein every Lord is exact in having his due, and
therefore some of the Heralds, (as I said, according to the several districts
of the Kingdom under their managements) are, or ought to be consulted with,
that the Clerks may commit no mistakes either in their Titles of Grace and
Favor, or in their Titles of Rights and Concessions, before the Writs be
sealed, and the not effectual doing this (which ought to be done) might
occasion some mistakes and differences between the Exemplar and Consimilary
Writs in point of Titles, (as will be shown.)

and herein I shall not trouble my self with showing what reasons were given in
some Writs for summoning a Parliament, or what in others, or the reason of
those Reasons, and why in some there were no Reasons given, only a short
Mandamus.

Pawns, are the Exemplars of all other Writs of Summons for a Parliament which
are not in the respective Pawns, whereby these in this Pawn (with the addition
of the Bishops Exemplar Writs, (which are entered in all former Pawns) did and
do now make 12 Exemplars, but the Writs which are not recited in this and
former Pawns (which I term Consimilars) at the calling this Parliament, were in
all 262.

viz. One to the Lord Chancellor in the Lords House, and to the two Palatines
in the Commons.

House of Lords both Exemplars and Consimilars are Personal and Local, but all
Writs of Summons for the House of Commons are only Local.

These 12 Exemplars are in this following method stated, with their
Consimilars, viz. those 5 for the Lords House are, Exemplar. Consimilar. I. To
the Duke of York 1 1 II. To the Archbishop of Canterbury 1 25 III. To the Lord
Chancellor 1 0 IV. To the Earl of Southhampton, L. Treasurer 1 In this
Parliament, 3 Dukes, 4 Marque 55 Earls, 8 Visc. 68 Barons. 138 V. To the Chief
Justice of the Kings Bench 1 15

So there was in the Lords House 5 Exemplar Writs, and 179 Consimilars. -- in
all 184.

The remaining Exemplar Writs relating to the House of Commons are 7. (of which
I shall speak more in the next part of this Treatise) viz.

VI. To Cornwall 1 4 VII. To Cambridge 1 1 VIII. To London 1 18 IX. To Dover 1
Cinqports 7 X. To Lancaster 1 0 XI. To Chester 1 0 XII. To Carmarthen 1 Wales
11

So there is for the Commons House 7 Exemplars, and 73 Consimilars, in all 80
Writs, in both Houses -- 264

So many Exemplar and Consimilar Writs were issued to Constitute this
Parliament An. 1661. in the Lords House, to Countries, Shires, and Comitated
Cities and Towns, in the Commons House, whereof some years after its Sitting,
one Exemplar and one Consimilar was issued for the Bishopric of Durham) all
the rest of the Writs for Cities, Towns and Buroughs not Comitated, (of which
I shall give an account) do lose their names of Consimilars, when the Exemplar
Writs do come to the respective Sheriffs, for then they pass from the
respective Sheriffs; under the titles of Precepts, (or Derivative-Writs) as
shall be more fully discourst of in the second part, where I treat of the House
of Commons.

Now I shall proceed to the Act of Precedencies, and give a short description
of such as are to be Summoned for the Lords-House only, because I speak more
amply of their Individual-Writs whereby they are Summoned

CHAP. III. Of Precedencies.
HAving shown the Kings Warrant, and the Lord Chancellors, and the Record made
up in the Pettibag, called the Parliament Pawn, and given a touch of the nature
of Writs in general, and in particular, of Parliamentary Writs of Summons,
consisting of Writs Exemplar and Consimilar, as also an hint of Precepts or
Derivative-Writs from those Exemplars, (which are to be more fully treated of
in the 2d. part,) I shall proceed to the Act of 31 of Hen. the 8th. concerning
Precedencies in the Lords House, occasioned from the defect or long disusage of
Pawns, or other State reasons; for there being no Pawns extant but, as I said,
from the 21 of Hen. the 8th. to this time, the other being by Endorsment etc.
on the Records in the Tower or Rolls Chapel; Our King Hen. the 8th. did make
this Act of Precedencies, (which has its chief Reference to the time when a
Parliament is Sitting, and so not proper to be inserted in this place, seeing
my design in this first part is to treat of matters previous to a Parliament,
before I speak of matters Sedente Parliamento) yet it may be allowed in respect
I make no other present use of it, than to inlighten the Readers with the
Characters of such Persons and Degrees as are to have Writs of Summons to sit
there according to that Act, and therefore I shall first show a Transcript of
that Act, then some Observations upon it, and then give some short discourses
of the Noble Degrees therein mentioned, in order to their Writs which shall
distinctly follow.

The Transcript of the Act of Predency, 31. Hen. 8. Cap. 10.

The Act of Precedence, 31. Hen. 8. Cap. 10.
FOrasmuch as in all great Councils and Congregations of men, having sundry
Degrees and Offices in the Commonwealth, it is very requisite and convenient
that an order should be had, and taken for the placing and sitting of such
Persons as been bound to resort to the same, To the intent that they knowing
their places may use the same without displeasure or let of the Council.
Wherefore the Kings most Royal Majesty (although it appertains to his
Prerogative Royal to give such Honors, Places, and Reputation to his
Counselors, and other his Subjects as shall seem best to his most Excellent
Wisdom.) He is nevertheless pleased and contented for an Order to be had and
taken in this his most High Court of Parliament, that it shall be Enacted by
Authority of the same in manner as hereafter follows.

First, It is Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That no Person or Persons of what
Estate, Degree, or Condition soever he or they be of, (except only the Kings
Children) shall at any time hereafter attempt, or presume to sit or have place
at any side of the Cloth of State in the Parliament-Chamber, neither of the one
hand of the Kings Highness nor of the other, whether the Kings Majesty be there
Personally present or absent.

2. And forasmuch as the Kings Majesty is justly and lawfully Supreme head in
Earth under God of the Church of England, and for the good exercise of the said
most Royal Dignity and Office, has made Thomas Lord Cromwell and Lord Privy
Seal, his Vicegerent, for good and due ministration of Justice to be had in all
Causes and Cases touching the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and for the Godly
reformation and redress of all Errors, Heresies, and Abuses in the said Church;
It is therefore also Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That the said Lord Cromwell
having the said Office of Vicegerent, and all other Persons which hereafter
shall have the said Office of the grant of the Kings Highness, his Heirs or
Successors, shall Sit and be placed as well in this present Parliament as in
all Parliaments to be holden hereafter, on the right side of the
Parliament-Chamber, and on the same Form that the Archbishop of Canterbury
sits on, and above the same Archbishop and his Successors, and shall have
Voice in every Parliament to assent or dissent, as other the Lords of the
Parliament.

3. And it is also Enacted, That next to the said Vicegerent, shall sit the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and then next to him on the same Form and side, shall
sit the Archbishop of York, and next to him on the same Form and side the
Bishop of London, and next to him on the same side and Form the Bishop of
Durelme, and next to him on the same side and Form the Bishop of Winchester,
and then all the other Bishops of both Provinces, of Canterbury and York, shall
sit and be placed on the same side after their Ancienties, as it has been
accustomed.

4. And forasmuch as such other Personages which now have or hereafter shall
happen to have other great Offices of the Realm, that is to say, the Offices of
the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord President of the Kings
Council, the Lord Privy Seal, the Great Chamberlain of England, the Constable
of England, the Lord Marshal of England, the Lord Admiral, the Grand Master or
Lord Steward of the Kings most Honorable Household, the Kings Chamberlain, and
the Kings Secretary, have not heretofore been appointed and ordered for the
placing and sitting in the Kings most High Court of Parliament, by reason of
their Offices: It is therefore now Ordained and Enacted by Authority aforesaid,
That the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord President of the Kings
Council, and the Lord Privy Seal, being of the Degrees of Barons of the
Parliament, or above, shall sit and be placed as well in this present
Parliament as in all other Parliaments hereafter to be holden, on the left side
of the said Parliament-Chamber on the higher part of the Form of the same side,
above all Dukes, except only such as shall happen to be the Kings Son, the
Kings Brother, the Kings Uncle, the Kings Nephew, or the Kings Brothers or
Sisters Sons.

5. And it is also Ordained and Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That the Great
Chamberlain, the Constable, the Marshal, the Lord Admiral, the Great Master or
Steward, and the Kings Chamberlain, shall sit and be placed after the Lord
Privy Seal, in manner and form following, that is to say, every of them shall
sit and be placed above all other Personages being of the same Estates or
Degrees that they shall happen to be of, that is to say, the Great Chamberlain
first, the Constable next, the Marshal third, the Lord Admiral the fourth, the
Grand Master or Lord Steward the fifth, and the Kings Chamberlain the sixth.

6. And it is also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Kings chief
Secretary being of the Degree of a Baron of the Parliament, shall sit and be
placed above all Barons not having any of the Offices aforementioned, and if he
be a Bishop, that then he shall sit and be placed above all other Bishops not
having any of the Offices before remembered.

7. And it is also Ordained and Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That all Dukes
not before mentioned, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, counts, and Barons, not
having any of the Offices aforesaid, shall sit and be placed after their
Ancientry as it has been accustomed.

8. And it is further Enacted, That if any Person or Persons which at any time
hereafter shall happen to have any of the said Offices, of Lord Chancellor,
Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings Council, Lord Privy Seal, or chief
Secretary, shall be under the Degree of a Baron of the Parliament, by reason
whereof they can have no interest to give any assent or dissent in the said
House, That then in every such case such of them as shall happen to be under
the said Degree of a Baron, shall sit and be placed at the uppermost part of
the Sack in the midst of the said Parliament-Chamber, either there to sit upon
one Form or upon the uppermost Sack, the one of them above the other, in order
as is above rehearsed.

9. Be it also Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That in all Trials of Treason by
Peers of this Realm, if any of the Peers that shall be called hereafter to be
Tryers of such Treason shall happen to have any of the Offices aforesaid, that
then they having such Offices, shall sit and be placed according to their
Offices above all the other Peers that shall be called to such Trials, in
manner and form as is above mentioned and rehearsed.

10. And it is also Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That as well in all
Parliaments as in the Star Chamber, and in all other Assemblies and
Conferencies of Councils, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord
President, the Lord Privy Seal, the Great Chamberlain, the Constable, the
Marshal, the Lord Admiral, the Grand Master or Lord Steward, the Kings
Chamberlain, and the Kings chief Secretary shall sit and be placed in such
order and fashion as is before rehearsed, and not in any other place, by
Authority of this Act.

SECT. I. Observations.
Commons.

2. The Lords House is here called the High Court of Parliament, i. e. the
highest Court of Judicature in Parliament, and so it is an Act by authority of
the same, including the Kings.

3. It is also ( Parag. 2.) called the Parliament Chamber; and ( Parag. 8.) the
said House, not the House of Lords, or House of Peers, as it is now called.

4. Though this Act does contain the Rules for Places, as the several degrees
do sit in their distinct degrees, yet it does not contain the intermixed
Precedencies of the several Degrees, both in calling over the House, and at
other Solemnities, as will be more exactly shown in the local part.

5. In the 8th Paragraph the Lord great Chamberlain, Constable, Marshal,
Admiral, Steward, and King's Chamberlain are omitted, because it is presumed,
that those Titles were never given to any under the degree of a noble Baron.

6. Here the Seat for the State-Officers (being not Barons) is called a Sack,
but in all Records, where those Seats are mentioned, they are called
Wool-Sacks, being stuffed with Wool, to mind them of the Staple Commodity of
the Kingdom.

7. The use which I make of this Act is to show the several Titles of the
Degrees of such as are mentioned therein, 2dly, the ordering of those Degrees,
and 3dly, how this Act does agree or disagree with the Pawns before, and
subsequent to it.

First, The Degrees mentioned therein are four, viz. first, Princes of the
Blood, 2dly, Lords Spiritual, 3dly, Ministers and Officers of State, 4thly,
Lords Temporal.

1st. The Princes of the Blood are said therein ( Parag. 4.) to be, first, the
King's Son, 2dly, the King's Brother, 3dly, the King's Uncle, 4thly, the King's
Nephew, 5thly, the King's Brother's Son, 6thly, the King's Sister's Son, as in
Paragraph the 1st and 4th.

2dly. The Lords Spiritual are said therein to be the Archbishop of Canterbury
and York, the Bishop of London, Duresm, and Winchester, and all the Bishops of
both Provinces according to their Ancientries, Paragraph 2, and 3.

3dly. The Ministers and Officers of State Ecclesiastical and Civil, are (in
the 2d and 4th Paragraphs) said to be the Vicegerent, and eleven more therein
mentioned, of which I shall speak distinctly, Paragraphs 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10.

4thly. The Lords Temporal are said to be those five Degrees mentioned in the
seventh Paragraph, viz. Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons, of
which I shall also speak more fully, and lower than to these Degrees the Act
does not extend.

5thly. This Act does agree with the Method of the Pawns, in the placing of the
Princes of the Blood, as also of the Bishops, but the Pawns do differ from the
Act concerning the Ministers and Officers of State, for they meddle with them
no otherwise than they are annexed to some Spiritual or Temporal Degrees, but if
they are under the Degree of those Degrees they have then only particular Writs
of Assistance, as shall be shown.

6. The Act does not take notice of the several Assistants of the Long Robe,
viz. the Lords Chief Justices, etc. But the Pawn makes a Record of them also,
and of their Writs, and of their Precedencies, in relation to each other, of
whom I shall speak more particularly in the Thirteenth Chapter.

7. This Act was made upon the dissolution of the Abbots and Priors, and that
there might be no more room for them in the House of Lords, whereas the two
preceding Pawns remaining still in the Pettibag, ( viz. of the 22 and 31 Hen.
8.) did place them next the Bishops, now (their Abbeys, Monasteries, and
Priories being dissolved) they in this Act were excluded, as in all future
Pawns (only Queen Mary did venture to summon the Abbot of Westminster, and the
Prior of St. John's of Jerusalem) but that being turned into a Deanery, and this
dissolved, they were as useless, as all the others, the Ecclesiastical and
Civil Estate of this Kingdom being thereby restored to its Primitive
Constitution, as will be shown.

CHAP. IV.
A Description of the Degrees concerned in this Act of Precedence.
HAving spoken of the Pawns (or Digest of Writs) of Summons in general) as also
of the Act of Precedence, this having respect only to the House of Lords and
other great Councils; those both to the House of Lords and House of Commons,
this only to the Dignity of the Nobles, those not only to the Dignity and
Degrees of Nobles, but also of the form and order of the Writs constantly
enabling the Nobles to make a noble use of their distinct Degrees, that to the
Places and Precedencies of such persons (whenever they meet in Parliament) (as
by the King's favor may be summoned) those to the persons actually summoned,
wherein these Pawns (much ancienter than the Act) were doubtless a good Guide
to the framing of this Act, I think it convenient, before I proceed to
particularize their Writs (for the Titles must be fixed before the Writs can be
perfected) to take a view of the order of such Degrees as are mentioned in the
Pawns, but better methodiz'd in the Act) viz. 1st, of the King's Counselors,
(comprehending all the following degrees and others) 2dly, of the Princes of
the Blood (consisting of seven Degrees) 3dly, of the grand Officers and
Ministers of Church and State, (consisting also of seven Degrees) some of them
being of a mixed nature, viz. Spiritual, Ecclesiastical, and Civil,) and 4thly,
of the Temporal and Hereditary Nobility, (consisting of five entire Degrees,)
and this I shall do by a distinct account of them, for the clearer
understanding of the Writs and Persons concerned in them.

And this I do to entertain the Readers time, whilst the Clerk and others are
busied in Drawing, Writing, and Engrossing the Writs, and carrying them to be
Sealed, and then disposing them to the several persons and places to whom and
where they are to be delivered, which will admit of as much or more time than
may be spent in reading these following Discourses, intended for the reviving
of the memory of some, and improving the knowledge of others, concerning the
Persons to be employed in the House of Lords, as also concerning the Writs for
the House of Commons, and herein (in this First Part, as to the House of Lords)
I shall be guided by the ancient Method of the King's Warrant, the Pawns, and
the Act of Precedence; And first of the King's Counselors.

SECT. II. Of the Kings Privy-Counsellor.
AS to the Original of this Officer and of the reason of its different
Orthography: Obs. I.
sometimes beginning the second Syllable with C. or S. and of its affinitry to
the old Roman Comites Consiliarij, I shall refer them to my annotations, and
here only show how that by the words in the Kings Warrant, by the Pawns, and by
the said Act of 31. Hen. 8. (all which I have recited at large) we may clearly
see that the word Council, does consist of the Persons of the best Quality and
Abilities, to give Counsel and Advice to the King. And when such a number as
the King thinks fit to select for that purpose do meet in a Body Conjunctively,

2. This Council is called the Kings Council, and also the Persons therein are
called the Kings Council, (yet more properly Counselors) and to confirm this,
the Kings Warrant says: To Our Right Trusty and well beloved Counselor Sir
Edward Hyde Knight Chancellor of England, (here it is Personal) then follows,
Whereas We by Our Council, this intimates a Body of Persons or Counselors
Congregated.

3. The Writs in the Pawns sometimes do add to the Person to whom the Writ is
sent (Conciliario suo) and sometimes not, but these following words are
constantly in every Writ, ( Quia de advizamento and assensu Concilij nostri,
which is more large than what is in the Kings Warrant by inserting the words
(Advice and Consent) of Our Council.

4. The said Act says in the Preamble, Forasmuch as in all great Councils and
Congregations of men (which explains Councils) and then, that there may be no
displeasure or let of the Council) (in respect of Precedence) therefore (for
the better reputation of his Counselors and other Subjects, does Enact, etc.
And in the 3d. Paragraph, the President of the Kings Council is there also
named, by which we understand the Kings Privy Council (of which he is
President) to be a Council distinct from other Councils where there are
Presidents; 2ly. And from Parliaments (where there are Speakers instead of
Presidents) anciently called the Great Council, and so it is still, though the
name is altered to Parliament) and 3ly. From other Assemblies and Conferences
of Councils, (which are the words in the last Paragraph of that Act.)

5. And therefore this Council here meant in this Warrant, Pawn, and Act, is
that which we now call the Kings Privy Council. It Is true the King has several
other Councils, (as that of Wales, and in the North, and others both here and
in Foraign Plantations) but this Privy Council is the Supreme standing Council,
out of which sometimes the King thinks fit to select some few for the more
safe, secret and easy dispatch of Affairs.)

6. Which by the Jews were called Cabala, but by us properly Comitties. However
this Privy Council is the standing Council of the Kingdom, giving Forms and
Being to all other Councils, especially what concerns the Beginning,
Continuing, and Ending of any Parliament, and yet this Council or Parliament is
a greater Council than that, and of greater Authority when it is in being, and
therefore anciently, as I said, called Magnum and Publicum Concilium, and this
Privatum Concilium.

7. This Great and public Council consists of the King, Lords Spiritual, Lords
Temporal, ( viz. of such to whom the King sends Writs of Summons) and of
Commons ( viz. of such as the People think fit to Elect by virtue of the Kings
Writs.) But this Privatum or Privy Council are of such only as the King Elects
out of the Degrees next mentioned, or out of other Degrees, as he shall best
judge of their Abilities for it. Yet very often Parliaments have persuaded
Kings to make Alterations in Privy Councils, both as to Persons and Number.

8. The number of the Persons of this Privy Council are in a manner indefinite,
because it depends upon the Kings pleasure. But anciently it consisted only of
12. since that they have increased and varied, and in the beginning of this
Parliament they were 29. but before the end of it above 40. The number of the
Great Council or Parliament is partly indefinite, (in the Lords House) and
partly circumscribed, (and so in the Commons House (as will be shown,) for
these anciently had not above 2. or 300. but this Parliament had in both Houses
above 700. (as will be shown.)

9. This very name of Council and Counselors, (as they are or ought to be) is
much more ancient than the Consuls of Rome, which had their name a Consulendo,
for their abilities in giving Counsel, and possibly borrowed from the name of
Neptune the God of the Sea, who was called also Consiliorum Deus, so as
probably of their two yearly Consuls, one was chosen for the Affairs of the
Sea, (as Admiral) the other for the Affairs of the Land, as General, however it
is observable that the Title of Consul or Counselor did continue 1046. years
in that Empire, deducting three years interposition of the Decemviri (or 10
Governors,) and 4 years of Tribunes (or 3 Governors,) and 12 years of Tribunes
consisting of 4 Governors, and 30 years by Tribunes consisting of six
Governors, and 5 years under an Anarchy, and 2 years wherein Tribunes had a
Consulary power, and then the Government again slid into Consuls, so as
deducting these 56 years, they continued entire under that Consulary Tutelage
990 years: and as that way of Government was useful to Rome whilst it was a
Commonwealth, so we see when Julius Caesar took on him the Roman Empire, and
turned it to a Monarchy, he did not discard the Consulary way of managing
Affairs, nor did his Successors; so as they continued full 540. years after
Julius Caesar in prosecution of that Monarchical Empire, till the Papal
Interests had supplanted the Western Empire, and made General Councils, tending
rather to the dis-uniting of Princes, than for uniting Religion, as was
pretended, and instead of Consuls, erected a Consistory and Conclave, the last
being only new names for a Council.

10. This is certain, that Councils or Counselors or Consuls are of that
nature, that no Government can subsist without them, though by different
Appellations; and I read of few or none in all the Roman Stories, who had the
Title of Consul conferred on him, but those who either by their Wisdom had
given such good Counsel as proved prosperous to the Empire, or had done such
eminent Services, that from such Heroic actions the Emperors and Senators
derived Arguments of their Abilities to Counsel, as having actually done, and
from that experience might Counsel what was fit to be done, and thereupon
formerly called Consul, and now Counsel or Counselor, and fit to sit both in
Privy Council or public Parliament.

11. This Honor was still founded in merit; by the estimation of Judgment,
Experience, or Resolution; for what they had Advised, Counseled, or
Successfully acted, and therefore they were seldom made Viri Consulares till
they were 43. years of age, and for such as had been thus Serviceable to the
Empire, if a Consulship were not void, yet they had always some Offices or
Rewards in store which they conferred proportionably to their Services; and
such Rewards were purposely reserved for such as had either given good Counsel,
or followed it, by venturing their Lives and Fortunes for preservation of the
Empire, and some such Orders were made in our Edw. the 3ds. time, and confirmed
by many Successive Councils, as may be read in Sir Edw. Coke, and Judge
Dodridge.

12. There are also other lesser Councils, (besides what I mentioned before) as
the Common Council of London, (and the like though not for number in other
Cities) (which relate only to the Government of those Cities and Counselors at
Law, and the meeting (of such degrees as are qualified for that purpose) are
called in some of the Inns of Court, Parliaments, which relate only to matters
of Law and Government of their Societies, and Councils of War and Trade, and
many of these are great Assistants and often employed both in the Privy and
public Council of the Kingdom.

13. I have been the longer on this subject because all the Degrees hereafter
mentioned are Members either of the Kings Privy Council or the Parliament, or
both, yet their Writs of Summons are not singly Conciliario, but by annexation
to those Degrees which are capacitated to be Counselors, but the Degrees
mentioned in the Act (of whom I treat next) are constantly of the Privy Council
or Parliament; but there are only some of the Parliament which are of the Privy
Council, by which means matters are more easily managed between the King, the
Privy Council, and the Parliament, the one constantly Sitting, the other
Summoned only upon Emergencies of State, which latter being thus Constituted,
it may well be called Magnum Concilium Animarum, or a Council of Souls rather
than Bodies, so as the King may say with Cicero, Conscientia conciliorum meorum
me Consolatur, i. e. The knowledge and Conscientious concurrence of minds or
Souls, (for so Conscientia sometimes siguifies) and integrity of my Counselors
are my Consolation.

14. In the first Chapter I have shown the List of the Privy Council, who gave
their Advice (as it is said in the Warrant) for Summoning the Parliament to begin
the 8th. of May, 1661. and all but one of them had Summons, and did sit in the
Lords House, or were Elected for the Commons House, yet it may be observed that
Prince Rupert was Summoned as Duke of Cumberland: The Duke of Laderdale (being
a Scotch Lord) was not Summoned till he was made Earl of Gilford some years
after: The Duke of Ormond was Summoned as Earl of Brecknock in Wales, the Lord
Anthony Ashly Cooper was chosen a Burgess of Dorsetshire for the House of
Commons, but his Writ was time enough to sit in the Lords House, Sir Charles
Berkley Knt. was chosen a Burgess in Somersetshire, and soon after made Lord
Fitz Harding, (an Irish Title) and so continued in the House of Commons to his
death, Sir George Cartret Knt. and Bar. was chosen Burgess for Portsmouth, and
continued in the Commons House to the end of that Parliament, Sir Edward
Nicholas Knt. was Summoned to the Lords House, but Sir William Morris was
chosen Burgess for Plymouth, and continued with the Commons to his death. Now I
proceed with the chief of such as are for the most part of the Kings Privy
Council, (mentioned in the Act) and do with others of lesser Degreees
Constitute both the Privatum and Magnum concilium or Parliament.

SECT. III. Of the Princes of the Blood.
IN this Act the King by virtue of his Kingly Office (for so is the word in the
Act) and Prerogative, Obs. I.
having power to give such Honors, Places, and Reputation to his Counselors,
and other his Subjects as shall seem best to his most Excellent Wisdom,
(especially to his Council or Parliament) gives the Priority of all Places and
Precedings to these following seven Degrees of the Bloud-Royal, viz. (1.) to
the Kings Son, (first entitled Prince of Wales in the 11. Edw. the 3d.) (2.)
to the Kings Children, (3.) to the Kings Brother, (4.) to the Kings Uncle, (5.)
to the Kings Nephew, (6.) to the Kings Brothers Son, (7.) to the Kings Sisters
Son, (all of these have Title of Earls or Dukes) and any one of these (where
others in priority are wanting) are to be accounted the first in their own
seven Degrees, and are Prior to the 5 following Degrees, which comprehend all
the Lords Temporal, and these, as they happen to be more or less, have their
distinct Writs, as also their proceedings to all or any other Degrees, either
Spiritual or Temporal, Official or Hereditary, of whom I shall speak more in
the following Sections and Chapters; but if there be a failour of any of these,
or that they are absent from Parliaments in respect of Minority or otherwise,
then some of the Lords Spiritual have precedence to the Lords Temporal, (as
will be shown,)

All that were Summoned of this Degree to this Parliament, were only the Duke
of York, the Kings Brother, and Prince Rupert his Sisters Son, Sect. Cap. 2.
Fig. 1. and 2.

SECT. IIII. Of the Kings Vicegerent or Vicar General.
That forasmuch as the Kings Majesty is justly and lawfully Supreme Head on
Earth under God of the Church of England, and for the good Exercise of that
most Royal Dignity and Office ( viz. of Supreme Head of the Church) has made
Thomas Lord Cromwell ( who was not only Lord Privy Seal (as in the Act is
expressed) but Master of the Kings Jewel-House, Baron of Okham, Knight of the
Garter, Earl of Essex, and Lord Great Chamberlain,)

2. His Vicegerent, (for the good and due administration of Justice to be had
in all Causes and Cases touching the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and for the
Godly Reformation of all Errors, Heresies, and Abuses in the said Church, so as
he enjoyed Dignities and Offices of a mixed nature, Ecclesiastical and Civil,
and thereby was placed above all the Lords Spiritual, and above all the Lords
Temporal of the following Degrees, and not only in respect of his Temporal
Dignities, but as Vicegerent in Ecclesiasticals) had power given him, and to
his Successors in that Office, to sit above those Degrees in Parliament, and to
have a Voice and Liberty to assent or dissent as other Lords.

3. But there has been none employed in this Office since that time, (as
needless I conceive) for the Archbishops of Canterbury and York in their
Provinces, and the Bishops in their Diocesses have ever since in a manner
supplied the Duty of that Office under their own Titles and by their own
Jurisdictions, especially the Archbishop of Canterbury, who is rankt in the
next place in this Act, and in all Pawns (except this) where some of the Blood
Royal are not exemplars.

SECT. V. Of the Archbishops and Bishops.
Bishop is more ancient than the Title of Christian, as I shall show in the
seventh Chapter; however it became more general after Christianity spread it
self.

Greek, (...), i. e. one who is, in Doctrinam and mores sacros gregis
Inspector, and when Bishops grew numerous it was thought fit to place one to
look after them, and he had the addition of Archos, i. e. principalis, and so
called Archi-Episcopus, or Archbishop, having a certain number of Bishops and
their Diocesses reduced to his Province or Care, Canterbury (with his own
Diocese) has twenty two Diocesses, or Bishoprics (of the twenty six) within
his Province, and the Archbishop of York has with his own (four) which makes
in all twenty six, (besides the Bishop of Man, who has no Writ of Summons.)
Anciently these Archbishops and Bishops, with Abbots, Priors, Deans, Lords,
but since Henry the Eighth's time, (when Abbots and Priors were excluded) the
Bishops are summoned to meet the same day that the Parliament begins, but as
Convocation-houses, they are not summoned to meet at Parliament till two or
three days after the Lords Spiritual and Temporal are met and sitting in
Parliament, and those two Convocation-houses are seldom Adjourned, Prorogued,
or Dissolved in three or four days, and sometimes longer, after the two Houses
of Lords and Commons are Adjourned, Prorogued, or Dissolved.

Clause Rolls and Pawns next the Blood Royal (except when there was a casual
interposition (as this last of Vicegerent) and their places distinctly set
down, as in this Act: viz. the Archbishop of Canterbury, then the Archbishop
of York, and the other according to Seniority, or Antientry (as the word of the
Act is) till the Bishops of London, Durham, and Winchester, were (as by this
Act) fixed in their Precedencies to the other twenty one, and yet there is
another method of Precedencies, used in the Lords House, and in all
Solemnities, by way of counterchanging of Precedencies between the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, (as will be shown.)

Lords Spiritual, their Ecclesiastical serving in ordine ad piritualia.

Chancellor and Keeper of the Great Seal, also of Treasurer, President,
Privy Seal, and Secretary, (of which I shall speak more) but since Henry the
Eighth's time these five Offices have been distinctly managed by Laics, of the
chiefest quality and merit, and the Bishops in a manner circumscribed to the
Jurisdiction of their respective Diocesses, which are of a kind of mixed nature,
consisting of Spiritualities and Temporalities.

Lords House they have almost equal Prividledges with the Lords Temporal,
except in matters of Blood, when in respect of their Canons, they commonly
withdraw themselves, appointing Proxies and entering Protestation, but these
Privileges are not Hereditary, (like the Temporal Lords) but merely
Successive, and their Writs are somewhat of a different Nature from those to
the Lords Temporal, (in point of extent concerning the Convocation-houses)
which do make a kind of a Parliament annexed to a Parliament, (of which I shall
speak more at large.) But how the Bishops were Summoned may be read in the
seventh Chapter.

SECT. VI. Of the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper.
Pawns? which the next Ten Officers following have not (in respect of their
Offices) I shall discourse more fully of him so soon as I have given a short
view of the Ten remaining to be spoken of.

Edward Hyde, Baron Hyde, and Lord Chancellor, was Summoned by Writ, Feb. 18.
1661. See Chap. II.

SECT. VII. Of the Lord Treasurer of England.
Pawn to the Earl of Southampton (then Lord Treasurer) and in former Pawns to
other Degrees, and being intended to be discoursed of in the fourth Exemplar,
and in the fifth Section of the Barons of the Exchequer, I shall defer its
enlargement to those Chapters.

Thomas, Earl of Southampton, Lord Treasurer of England, was Summoned by Writ,
Feb. 18. 1661. See Chap. II.

SECT. VIII. Of the Lord President of the King's Council.
John was called Principalis and Capitalis Consiliarius, and so continued till
Queen Elizabeth's time, and after not used, till once in King Charles the
firsts time, and ever since, to the end of this Parliament, the Lord Chancellor
or Lord Keeper has supplied the duty of that Place, though not the Title; the
difference of granting them was, that one was always by Patent, and the other
only by delivery of the Great Seal.

2. There are also other Lord Presidents which sit in the Lords House, viz. the
President of Wales, and President of the North, but being not mentioned in this
Act, and the latter not sitting in this Parliament, I refer them to my
Annotations, as also other Presidents of lower Degrees, as of Colleges, etc.

SECT. IX. Of the Lord Privy Seal.
Edward the Third's time, and long after, this Office was called Keeper of the
Privy or Private Seal, distinguishing him from the other, called the Keeper of
the Great Seal; afterward he was called Clerk of the Privy Seal, (Clerk being
then a Title of Eminency) and Gardien del Privy Seal, and in 34 H. 8. Lord
Privy Seal.

2. He has his Office by Patent, but the Keeper of the Great Seal (as I said)
only by delivery of that Seal, and it is very probable that this Office was in
imitation of that which was used by the Romans, the Officer whereof was called
Comes privatorum, and as Cassiodore calls him, the Governor of the King's
private Affairs.

3. Whilst the Court of Requests was in use he was also called the Master of
it, being Master or Superior to the Four Masters of Requests, who were to
receive, peruse, and present all Petitions to the King, or to the Parliament in
time of Parliament, and direct the Petitioners in the right way of proceeding
in their business, and for want of this direction many men are ruined by crafty
and unskilful directors, and the Parliament troubled with needless
applications; for I conceive this Court was placed (as will be shown) between
the House of Lords and House of Commons for the Masters to sit there in time of
Parliament, as Tryers of Petitions to either House, and were to judge, whether
the matter was proper for either House, or any other Court, which doubtless did
take off a great expense of time from both Houses, and from intangling them in
matters which were properly relievable in other places.

4. There are three forts of Seals which are chiefly used for public Affairs;
two of them pass under the names of Privy or Private, the other, the Great or
Broad-Seal: yet for a clearer distinction, one of the two is called the Privy
Signet, and has four Clerks to attend its Office, the other the Privy Seal and
has also four Clerks to attend its Office; and the third is called, (as I
said) the Great Seal, and has properly six Clerks to attend it, but increased
to many more. The Privy Signet is under the Custody of the Chief Secretary of
State; the Privy Seal, under the Custody of the Lord Privy Seal; and the Broad
Seal under the Custody of the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, so as most
matters which concern a declaration of the King's pleasure in writing, do take
their rise from the Privy Signet, and from thence transmitted to the Privy
Seal, and from thence to the Great Seal, to receive its determination.

5. But to pass by all private or public Matters about which these three
Officers are concerned, this is certain, that the Clerks of these three Offices
(excluding none) in some form or other are concerned in the Warrants and Writs,
etc. for the Summoning every Parliament.

6. When the chief Officer of this Office did pass under the Title of Keeper,
or Clerk of the Privy Seal, most of them were Ecclesiastics, yet having this
Office, he had his Writ of Summons and Place in the Lords House, as may be
collected from the Rolls of 15 Edw. 3. when Sir William Keldsly was Keeper of
the Privy Seal, and 20 Edw. 3. when Mr. Jo. Thoresby was called Clerk of the
Privy Seal, and from 28 Edw. 3. when Sir Michael of Northumberland was Keeper
of the Privy Seal, ( Sir being an Epithet given in those days to the Clergy)
and still in use in the Universities for Batchelors of Arts) and from 11 R. 2.
and 1 and 2 H. 4. when Sir Richard Clifford was Keeper of the Privy Seal, and
these had Writs, and from 3, and 4 H. 6. a Writ was expressly sent Magistro
Willielmo Alrevill Custodi privati sigilli, and from that time (the Rolls and
Pawns which speak of them are dormant or wanting) to the Pawn of 30 H. 8. when
the Writ to John; Earl of Bedford, is there entered Castos privati sigilli, and
he being so in 31 H. 8. (when the Act was made) his Precedence was settled as is
therein shown) and there first entitled Lord Privy Seal, and so this Officer
has continued in that additional Title of Lord to this time. However in the
Latin Writs he is styled only Custos privati sigilli, without the addition of
Dominus, and so in the very Pawn of that year, and in 36 H. 8. and is no more
mentioned in any of the Pawns, till 6 and 7 Edw. 6. when John, Earl of Bedford,
was still Custos privati sigilli, and from that time those Pawns which are
extant do not mention that Officer, till 1 Car. 1. when Edward, Earl of
Worcester, was entered Custos privati sigilli; and 15 Car. 1. when Henry, Earl
of Manchester, was Custos privati sigilli, and had their Writs; but in this
Pawn of 13 Car. 2. none is mentioned, and yet the Lord Roberts was then Lord
Privy Seal, so as it was an omission of the Clerks, as I conceive.

7. Most of the Keepers of the Privy Seal (as I have observed) were
Ecclesiastics before 30 H. 8. but since that time this Office has been
conferred only upon such as were Temporal Lords, above the degree of Barons,
and not under.

8. This great Officer has also an appartment near the Lords House, for his
accomodations, and sometimes used for the Lords Committees, as will be shown.

9. These four last mentioned are placed in this order in the Lords House,
whether or not they be of any of the Noble Degrees. John, Lord Roberts, of
Truro, Lord Privy Seal, was Summoned by Writ of Feb. 1661. See Chap. 2.

SECT. X. Of the Lord Great Chamberlain of England.
THE five foregoing Officers of State, viz. Vicegerent, Chancellor, Treasurer,
President, and Privy Seal, were anciently chosen out of Ecclesiastic Degrees,
but those which I am now to speak of (except the Secretaries, being for the
most part also Clergymen) were chosen out of Laics, persons of the greatest
Merit, Fortunes, or Families, and had their Places as they were annexed to the
Degrees of the Nobility.

2. The learned Institutor says, that if the King gave Lands to a man, to hold
of him to be Chancellor of England, Chamberlain of England, Constable of
England, Marshal of England, or High Steward of England, etc. these Tenures
were called Grand Sergeanties, and these and such like Grand Sergeanties were
of great and high Jurisdictions, some of them concerned matters Military in
time of Wars, and some services of Honor in time of Peace.

3. This Officer ever was, and still is in great Veneration and Use, and I
conceive, though now most of his Employments are about the King's Court, yet
the word Camerarius, which we call Chamberlain, was like to that among the
Romans, called Comes Aerarij, and had such relation to the Treasury of the
Kingdom, as the Chamberlains of London, and the Chamberlains of the Palatines
of Lancaster and Chester have to their distinct Treasuries (of which I shall
speak more fully in order (as also in my Annotations) and I apprehend that
these great Officers need not Writs, because it is requisite these should be
always attending on the Kings Person; but when they are otherwise commanded to
his Employments in their Offices, and there is scarce any of them, especially
this, but are so glutinated to some Noble Person, that it cannot be said
whether the Writ be more in respect of the Office, or Person that Manageth that
Office.

4. This Office was enjoyed for many Successions by the Earls of Oxford (till
Richard the Second by violence took it away) the House of Commons, 1 H. 4.
prayed the King, that it might be restored to Richard, then Earl of Oxford,
being (as it was then alleged) his due Inheritance, yet in 1 H. 6. that King
granted it to the Duke of Gloucester, the 36th of Hen. 8. the Writ was to
Edward, Earl of Hertford, Magno Camerario Angliae, and 1 Edw. 6. to John, Earl
of Warwick, Magno Camerario Angliae. Afterward, by a Match, it was hereditated
to the Family of the Berties, who, after some disputes about the Title, did sit
in Parliament, in the time of Charles the First and this Parliament, as Earl of
Lindsey, and Lord great Chamberlain of England, whereby one part which his
Lordship is to act (as his Predecessors had done) is to take care, that all
things be provided in the House of Lords that may suit with the Grandeur and
Conveniences of the Persons who are there to be employed, and for that and
other purposes he has also an Appartment near the Lords House, as will be
shown.

5. Montague (Bertie) Earl of Lindsey, Lord Great Chamberlain of England, was
summoned by Writ, Feb. 18. 1661. See Cap. 2.

SECT. XI. Of the High Constable of England.
IT may be well supposed, that Constabularius Angliae, was instead of Comes
stabuli amongst the old Romans, which was commonly taken for the Master of the
Horse to the Emperor, and is a Place still of great Honor in most parts of
Europe; but I conceive he was rather called Comes stabuli, as an Officer or
Office of refuge, for so stabulum also signifies. However for many Ages this
Office was held in Grand Sergeanty by those persons hereafter named, but in 12
H. 8. it became forfeited to the Crown, and since that never granted to any
Subject, but pro hac vice, at some Solemnities, as at the Coronation of King
Charles the Second, in April 1661, a little before this Parliament, Algernoone
Piercy, Earl of Nortbumberland, was made High Constable of England, pro hac
vice, for with the Ceremony of that day his Office ended; and Henry the Eighth,
I conceive, did enter it in the Act of 31 of his Reign, that in case there
should be any use of this Officer, when any such Solemnity happened, in time of
Parliament, his place might be known without dispute.

3. Before the 13th. of Henry the 8th. in some respects it had a greater power
than the Earl Marshal, and in others equal to it, and so the extravagant parts
being taken away, the rest fixed in the Earl Marshal, (of whom I shall speak
next) however it has left a name of great honor and use; those of Honor are
the Constable of Dover, etc. those of Use are the high Constables and
Constables dispersed in all parts of England.

4. Whilst this great Officer was of constant use, he was constantly summoned
to Parliaments, viz. 50. E. 3. Thomas de Woodstock, Comes de Buck,
Constabularius Angliae, and so that 1.3. and 4. Ric. 2. and Thomas Dux
Glostriae, Constabularius Angliae, 17. R. 2. and the 1st. of Hen. the 4th Henry
Percy Earl of Northumberland Constab. Angliae, and the 2d. of Hen. the 5th. and
1. H 6. Summons to Humphrey Duke of Gloucester Constable. Angliae, and to John Duke of
Bedford Constable. Angliae 2. H. 6. and from thence again to the Duke of Buckingham
Constable. Angliae, but from thence to the 20. of Hen. the 8. there are no Pawns,
as I said, to guide us to the knowledge of such as were summoned to the
intervening Parliaments, but it appears by other Records that in the 13th. of
Hen. the 8. this Office of Constable of England was turned into an hac vice,
and so only granted upon the Solemnity of Coronation, and thereupon is not
mentioned in any following Pawns to this time, or was of any use in this
Parliament.

SECT. XII. Of the Earl Marshal of England.
THis great Officer has not so great a Latitude of power as the Constable of
England had, yet he has under his Jurisdiction the Care of the Common Peace of
the Land, in deeds of Ams and matters of War, (when it happens in Foreign or
Domestic parts) in most of which he is guided by the Civil Laws, and yet not
to do any thing repugnant to the Common Laws. In times of War he is more
absolute, in times of Peace less: this mane of Marshal ('it is very probable) had
its Original from Mars the Romans God of War, and was the same which they
called Comes Militum.

2. However with us this Great Officer had and has several Courts under his
Jurisdiction, viz. the Court of Chevalry (now almost forgotten) and the Court
of Honor (now quiet laid aside) but the Seeds Mariscalli or Court of Marshalsee
is still in being (where he may sit in Judgment against Criminals offending
within the verge of the Kings Court) and the chief Officer under him is called
the Knight Marshal.

3. As also the Herald Office or College, where when doubts arise, concerning
Descents, Pedegrees, Escuchteons, etc. he determins them; this was Incorporated
by Ric. the 3d. and many priveledges added by Philip, and Mary, 4. and 5.

4. Heralds amongst the old Romans were a certain Order of Priests, (called
Faeciales) and so termed because Bello paceque faciendo apud eos jus erat
pronuntiare, etc. they were also called Caduceatores, (from a little wand,
which they carried) whereon was fixed two wings to represent Mercury, (the
nimble Messenger of War) and quod Contentionem and Bella Cadere facerent.)

5. This Office or College consists of 3 Regulators of Arms, Ceremonies,
Pedegrees, and Descents of Nobility and Gentry; the first is called Garter Rex
Armorum Principalis, chief King at Arms, and is also an Officer to the
Sovereign, and Knights Companions of the most noble order of the Garter: the
2d. called Clarentius also King of Arms, but his Jurisdiction is only on the
Southside of Trent; The 3d. called Norray, also King of Arms for the Northside
of Trent; these two being confined, but Garter not consigned.

6. Besides these, there are 6 more properly called Heralds, quasi Honorem
tenentes, Haeredes Aulae dicentes, such as are able to give an account to the
Court, of Heirs to Families, and these have distinct Titles distinguishing
their Employments, viz. 1. York, 2. Lancaster, 3. Somerset, 4. Richmond, 5.
Chester, 6. Windlesour.

7. And there are also 4 Under Graduats called Pursevants, or such who with
readiness do pursue the Commands of their Superior Officers, properly in
Marshal Causes) and therefore called Pursevants at Arms, to distinguish them
from other Pursevants or Messengers from other Courts, and these 4 have also 4
distinct Titles. viz. Blewmantle, 2. Rougecross, 3. Rouge-Dragon, 4.
Portcullis; but of the Earl Marshal, and Heralds, I shall speak more as they
are employed in Parliamentary Ceremonies.

8. There is no doubt but these Earls Marshals have for many ages sat in
Parliaments, viz. the Duke of Norfolk, Marshal of England, was summoned 15 Ed.
2. But 11 R. 2. the Title of Earl Marshal of England being by Patent granted to
Thomas de Mowbray, Earl of Nottingham, and entailed on the Heirs Males of his
Body, which failing, yet the Title of Mowbray descending on Thomas Earl of
Arundel, King James did by Pattent make him Earl Marshal for life, and he was
Summoned to Parliament by both Titles, but he dying, Thomas Earl of Arundel and
Mowbray Grandson and Heir to the said Thomas had no Writ provided for him, in
Feb. 1660 when this Pawn was made, being then supposed to be a Lunatic, and
upon that account kept close at Padua in Italy; but soon after by the
Solicitation of Henry Howard (next Brother and Heir to the said supposed
Lunatic) the Dukedom of Norfolk was restored after a long Attainder, and by
Act of Parliament settled on the said Thomas the Grandson, and the said Henry
being soon after created Earl of Norwick, did manage the Office of Earl
Marshal, and had a Patent for the same from this present King Charles, therein
settling this Office upon him and the Heirs Males of his Body, with a large
Intaile for want of such Issue to the next Heir Male of that Noble Family. So
Henry was Summond about the middle of this Parliament as Earl of Norwich, with
the Title also of Earl Marshal, and Duke Thomas, dying at Padua about the end
of this Parliament, Henry the Brother succeeded in the Dukedom, and sat as Duke
of Norfolk, and Henry the Eldest Son of the said Duke Henry, being then
entitled Earl of Arundel, did sit as Earl of Arundel and Lord Mowbray, so as
that Title of Earl Marshal is in Duke Henry, and the Title of Mowbray in the
Earl of Arundel, and that Title of Earl Marshal only inpossibility to come
again into Mowbray. And this may be added, that during Duke Thomas his Life
James Earl of Suffolk by Deputation did execute that Office for reasons which I
leave to other Writers.

SECT. XIII. Of the Lord Admiral of England.
England do constantly make Admirals of Squadrons of Ships, but the Admiral
which I am here to speak of, is the highest of all, entitled the Lord Admiral
of England, and may be well called Admirals, from their seeing and knowing the
mirabilia, or Wonders of the Deep. The Greeks called this Officer
Thalassiarcha, from Thalassa, the Sea, and Archos, the Chief at Sea, and from
thence the Romans (according to the Latin Idiom) called him Thalassiarchus, and
of later days Admirallus (which is no Latin word) and in English Admiral.

2. To him is committed the Government of the King of England's Navy, and Power
to decide all causes Maritim, as well Civil as Criminal, and of all things done
on, or beyond the Seas in any part of the World, and many other Jurisdictions
on the Coasts, and in Ports, Havens, and Rivers, and of such Wrecks and Prizes
as are called by the Lawyers, Lagon, Jetson, and Flotson, that is, Goods lying
in the Sea, floting on the Sea, or cast by the Sea on the shore (admitting some
few exceptions and Royalties granted to other Lords of Manors.) And these and
all other Cases dependant on this Jurisdiction are determined in his Courts of
Admiralty, by such Rules of the Civil Law as do not invade the Common Laws of
England.

3. And of these Civil Laws which concern Sea assairs there are two most
eminent Guiders to Civilians, viz. Those made at Rhodes (in the Mediterranean)
by the Grecians, and augmented by the Romans, called Lex Rhodia, or the Rhodian
Law. The other made at Oleron (an Island anciently belonging to England, but
lying on the borders of France) by out King Richard the First, both of which
are still in great veneration.

4. So as well for the Laws by which he governs the Maritim concerns, as for
his great Jurisdiction, being as vast as the Ocean, he may be said to have
alterum Imperium, extra and intra Imperium, and therefore this Honor and Care
is entrusted to the hands of some one of the Blood Royal, or some one or more
jointly of the most eminent of the Nobility.

5. And in respect of this Power there is a constant Converse and Commerce with
all parts of the World, especially where the Civil Laws are practiced, and
therefore it has been the prudence of our former Kings (even to this day) to
allot him a place in the Lords House, as to the Marshal of England, (for both
of their concerns are chiefly managed (as I have shown) by the Civil Laws) so
as the Lord Marshal and Lord Admiral may be looked on as the two Supporters to
the learned Professors of those Laws, as the other Lords are to the Professors
of the Common Laws, and possibly the greatest number of the Masters of Chancery
(of whom I shall speak in order) (who sit in the Lords House) were originally
contrived to be Doctors of the Civil Laws, upon this ground, That if there were
at any time just occasion in that House to make use of any points in that
Profession, they might give their advices or opinions therein.

6. This Dignity, as I said, was ever conferred upon some of the chief
Nobility, by virtue whereof they had their Writs of Summons, and their Place in
the Lords House, and this long before the Act of Precedence, for we find the
Earl of Arundel, in 13 Edw. 3. and the Earl of Northumberland, in 7 R. 2. the
Earl of Devon, and Marquess of Dorset in the same Kings time, and so the Earls
of Salisbury, Shrewsbury, Worcester, and Wiltshire, and others of the like
Degrees recited in the Clause Rolls, (needless to renumerate) being Admirals
were summoned, and in our extant Pawns, in 36 H. 8. Johanni Dudley, Vicecomiti
Lisle, Magno Admirallo, and in 1 E. 6. Tho. Dom. Seymer, Magno Admirallo, and
in 7 Edw. 6. Edv. Fenys, Domino Clinton, Magno Admirallo, and in 1, 2, 3, 4,
Mariae, and Phil. and Mar. Gulielmo Howard de Effingham, Magno Admirallo, and
in 4 and 5 Phil. and Mar. Edw. Fenys (again) and Charles, Earl of Nottingham,
in Queen Elizabeth's time, and George, Duke of Buckingham, in King James's time
and King Charles the First's time, were still summoned to Parliament with the
Title of Admiral added to their hereditary Titles in their Writs, and to this
Parliament, Jacobo, Duci Ebor. Magno Admirallo, etc. And all these had their
places in the Lords House according to the Act of Precedence, as those before
the Act was made.

This Office was conferred on the Duke of York for this Parliament. Vid. Cap. 2.

SECT. XIV. Of the Lord Steward of the King's House.
AS for the Orthography and Etymology and Antiquity of this Title Steward, Obs.
I.
I shall refer them to my Annotations. However as it is sometimes writ with a
T, and sometimes a D, it is under four Considerations; the first, as it
represents a Royal Name and Family, and therefore for distinction, this is writ
Stewart with a T, and has the superintendence, chief interest and influence in
all Parliaments since that Name was of that use in England.

2. The other three are Titles official, and written Steward with a D: and as a
further distinction from the first, in Latin they are called Seneschalli, and
this, the chief of the three, is called Seneschallus Angliae, or Lord High
Steward of England, of whom I shall give a full account in the Chapter of the
Trials per Pares, and show how this great Officer is employed either in or out
of Parliaments.

3. The last and least Degree of the 3 is called also Senescallus, such as are
the Stewards of Corporate Towns, or Manors which are not concerned in the
Summons, or of use in Parliaments, otherwise than as considerable Assistants in
Elections of Members to serve in Parliaments; But the Lord Steward of whom I
now speak was called in H. the 8th. time, Magnus Magister Hospitij Regis, or
the Great Master of the Kings Household, and ever since Magnus Senescallus
Hospitij Regis, or the Lord high Steward of the Kings House, and he has not
only an eminent Employment, Trust, and Authority, in ordering the Kings
Household, but an Authority above all Officers of that House, except the
Chapel, Chamber, and Stables, but in all Parliaments is obliged to attend the
Kings Person, to adjust their Parliamentary expenses, ( Westminster being
anciently the Kings Court, and still within its Verge and his Lordships
Jurisdiction.)

4. His place is appointed by the Act of Precedence in this order; not but that
he was Summoned to Parliaments before that Act, as may be seen in several
Clause-Rolls of Rich. the 2d. etc. but after the said Act, viz. 36. H. 8.
Charles Duke of Suffolk was Summoned, and his Writs directed Magno Magistro
Hospitij sui, but after that, as in this very Parliament 1661. the Writ to the
Duke of Ormond was Jacobo D'no Brecon, (being his English Title by which he
sits in Parliament) Vid. Cap. 2. Senescallo Hospitij, ( Magnus Magister and
Senescallus, being still the same Officer, though varying in Title.

SECT. XV. Of the Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Household.
THat High-Chamberlain before mentioned is called Magnus Camerarius, Obs. I.
but this has not that Epethite of Magnus, and yet his authority is very great
within the Verge of the Kings Court; so that though there is some
Subordination, yet in many great Regalios he has an entire command, and even
in some things which concern the convenience of a Parliament, (and its places
of Addresses to the King) that the furniture of the Rooms may be suitable to the
Majesty and Grandeur of such as are employed there.

2. He has been anciently summoned to sit there, as may be seen in the
Clause-Rolls of the 25. and 27. and 28. of Edw. the 3d. in the Summons of Sir
Bartholomew Bergehurst Camerario Hospitij, he being also Guarden of the
Cinqueports, and in 1. H. 4. to Sir Tho. Erpingham, Baneret, Camerario
Hospitij, he being also Guarden of the Cinqueports, and so the 10. H. 6. to
Radulpho Cromwell Chevalier or Baron, Camerario Hospitij, I might instance many
others, but I shall skip as the Records do to the Act of Precedence, 31. H. 8.
where he is called the Kings Chamberlain, and in the Pawns of the 36. H. 8. the
Writ was Carolo Duci Suff. Magno Magistro Hospitij sui and Praesidenti Consilii
sui, (and in the same Pawn which may be observable, the Office of great
Chamberlain of England was supplied by Edward Earl of Hereford, of a lesser
Degree than a Duke) in the 6. and 7. Edw. 6. the Writ was Tho. D'no Darcy
Chevaleer Camerario Hospitij sui, and in the 43. Eliz. to Tho. Carry Lord
Hunsden, Camerario Hospitij, and continues in the same Office, he was Summoned
again primo. Jacobi, and in the 15. Car. 1. Philip Earl of Penbrook was
Summoned, Camerario Hospiti sui, and to this Parliament, first Edward Earl of
Manchester, Camerario Hospitij, then Henry Earl of St. Albans Camerario
Hospitij, and after him Hen. Earl of Arlington, Camerario Hospitij, who
continued his place and precedence in this Parliament to the Dissolution of it.

3. Edward Earl of Manchester Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Household was
Summoned so by Writ 18. Feb. 1661. Vid. Cap. 2.

SECT. XVI. Of the Principal Secretary of State.
HE brings up the Honorable Rere to all the 12. Officers of State, both in
this Act of Precedence and in the Pawns, and therefore I may the more
justifiably defer my Discourse of him, till I come to his Writ of Summons, and
past the method of the Pawn, as I have done the method used in the Act of
Precedence, and so conclude these Sections with some few Observations.

Observations.
WHen the Act of 31. H. 8. was made, Obs. I.
the State Officers (though now but 9 in use, were then 12. a Number (as I
shall show) agreeable to the 12 Judges, 12 Masters of Chancery, 12 Constituting
a Jury, and much more of the efficacy of that number, (cited by the Learned
Institutor and Petrus Bongus de Sacris Numeris) and this number is thus used by
us, as it is thought, in veneration, either to the 12 Tribes of the Jews, or 12
Tables Sacred among the Old Romans, or to to the 12 Apostles of the Christian
Religion, or 12 Signs in the Zodiac reverenct in Astrology

2. That if the Writs to any of these Officers, be to any of the Lords
Spiritual, or such Officers as have usually consisted of the Clergy, as the
Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper, the Lord Treasurer, Lord Privy Seal, then the
Writs were like the Assistants Writs to the Judges, (of which I shall speak in
order) but if any of these Offices be executed by any of the Temporal Lords,
then the Writ is the same as to that noble Person to whom the Office is anext,
or if any be Summoned merely virtute Officij without annexation, to the Degree
of some Lord Spiritual or Temporal Lord, then the Writ is only as an Assistant
Writ, and they sit in the Lords House but as Assistants without Vote, etc. as
will be shown.

3. Sir Edward Nicholas Knight was summoned by Writ dat. 18. Feb. 1661. Vid.
Cap. 2. and now I proceed to the fixed Nobility, called Lords Temporal.

CHAP. V.
SECT. I. Of the Degrees of Nobles.
Act of Precedence, I shall speak of the fixed Nobility, as they are considered
in Distinct Degrees; and these are not mentioned distinctly in the Kings
Warrant for Summoning a Parliament, but referred therein to the Lord Chancellor
to distinguish them by their Writs.

1. As for the Nobility in general, most Authors derive the word Nobiles or
Nobles in the Plural, from Noscibiles, viz. Viri Nobiles or Persons indu'd with
great knowledge than other men, and so conceive it may admit of another
Etymology, viz. Nobilis, quasi Non-bilis, i. e. men of such debonair and
complacent tempers, and so much Masters of their passions, that they are not
(in respect of their better Education) subject to choler, wrath, or fierceness,
(for so the word Bilis is Englisht) but of even and serene tempers, which
dispositions are fittest for Affairs relating to Government: but to pass these
niceties, the Question is amongst some.

2. How far the Degrees of Nobility do extend? which is partly resolved by Sir
Tho. Smith in his Republica, who says there be two sorts of Nobles, viz.
Majores and Minores, (and this was according to the Old Romans,) the Majores he
calls the fixed Hereditary Nobles diversifide into 6 Degrees, viz. Princes of
the Blood, (of whom I have spoken in Cap. the 4th.) Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
Viscounts and Barons, (not of the Blood) and descend no lower, and these are
capacitated by such Creations and Writs to sit in the Lords House. The Minores
he begins at Knights, (for he wrote before Baronets were known) Esquires, and
Gentlemen, and descended no lower; and out of these, the Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses for Parliaments are Elected and Composed, and thereby capacitated to
sit therein, as the Representatives of the Commons of England: but of these
Nobiles Minores I shall speak more in the second part of this Treatise; but of
the Majores now in their Order, which consist of 5 Degrees, besides those of
the Stem Royal, (of which I have spoke) and first of Dukes.

SECT. II. Of Dukes.
BEfore I proceed to the Writs of Summons to the Individuals of these Degrees,
Obs. I.
I shall give a brief description of the nature of them; and first as for the
word Duke, it is the same with Dux in Latin, (from Duco to lead) for they were
anciently Leaders of Armies, and thereby gained that Title, (as might be shown
from Histories) and were it not for hindering my other intentions, I might
recite most of the Learned Seldens Authorities, (which he has rendered from
other Authors concerning Dukes) but in short he tells us that Comes i. e. a
Count or Earl was esteemed of an higher quality than Duke, and that Earl was
chief in Matters Civil, and Duke in Matters Military; but in process of time
the Sword got the upper hand, and prioritie of Earl; and further says that
both Dukes and Earls from Substitutes to their Princes, (in certain dependent
Territories) became afterward Sovereigns, (as the great Duke of Tuscany, etc.
and the Earl of Flanders, etc. (still owning the Titles of Dukes or Earls,
though they had gained an entire and independent Sovereignty.)

2. The diversity of Names attributed to Dukes, both in sacred, profane, and
modern stories, were according to the humor of the region where they swayed;
for in some Nations he was called Princeps, Magnus, Illustrissimus, Robustus,
Millenarius, (that is a Duke, or Leader of a Thousand Men) in other Countries,
Grave, Waiward, and Despot, and still the words Duke and Earl, promiscuously
used to one and the same Person: but whatever they were or are in foreign
parts, Dukes are now in England accounted the chief and most honorable
Subjects, and first Degree of Nobility (except Princes or Dukes of the
Blood Royal) and, as a distinction from the rest, is called Grace) given to no
other Spiritual Lord, but the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, and to no
other Temporal Lord, (except to the Lord High Steward, pro hac vice, upon trial
of Peers) for the Princes and Dukes of the Blood, are entitled Highness, and
all the other Temporal Lords, Right Honorable, but any of those being Admiral
or General, Excellence.

3. The Title of Duke was very probably used here in England before Edward the
Third's time; for History tells us of Asclepiodolus, Duke of Cornwall, in Anno
Christi, 232. (which was in the time of our old Britains) and well might he be
called Duke, for disgarrisoning of all the Roman Holds, Prideaux Introduct. to
Hist.
and for his quick Marches to London, and killing the Governor thereof, and
for many other Heroic Actions, in freeing his Country from their Servitude.
However, there were many Dukes Created in Germany about that time. But our
History tells us, That none was Created a Duke in England, Seldom. Speed 's
Acts.
till 11 Edw. 3. An. Christi, 1344. when the King in Parliament Created his
eldest Son, Edward, (being first made Earl of Chester) then Duke of Cornwall,
and from thence that County was erected to a Duchy or Dukedom, and many more
Dukes, both in that King's time, and almost in every Kings Reign since that
time, have been Created to that Title.

4. The Dukes of England are of two sorts, first, those of the Blood Royal, i.
e. such as have a possibility to inherit the Crown upon a legal succession.
2dly, Those not of the Blood Royal, i. e. such as are not related to the
Succession of the Crown, or at least so remote, that it is not visible to mere
probability; and these two sorts have sat in former and in this Parliament, as
will be shown.

5. As they are distinguished in their Titles, so they are also in their
Coronets, Robes, and Habits, etc. with which they are invested before they
enter the House of Lords, (which will be in the third Part of this Treatise
represented in Figures.)

6. Here I must not pass over one observable, That to this Parliament of 13
Car. 2. there were three Dukes summoned by Writ, viz. George, Duke of
Buckingham, Charles, Duke of Richmond, and George, Duke of Albemarle; the Duke
of Buckingham was then Master of the Horse, the Duke of Richmond of the Blood
Royal, by the Scottish Line, yet neither of those two appendant Titles were
mentioned in their Writs; but George, Duke of Albemarle, in his Writ is
entitled, Generalis exercituum suorum, and is placed the third in that Record,
and the reason may be, because there was no provision for that great Office in
the Act of Precedence, whereby to preceed all of the same degree (as other
degrees do) (being a Title not mentioned in the Act, though on some occasions
he preceeds by virtue of his Office the other grand Officers) and so being not
in the Act he is named in this Pawn the last of the three Dukes, without
respect to his Office of Generalship. Nor do I find in any Clause Roll, or
Pawn, the Title of General annexed in any Parliament Writ to any one of the
Degrees (except this) though History does plentifully furnish us with several
persons of those several Degrees who were Generals when Parliaments were
summoned; and yet, as I said, there is no provision in this Act, for the Place
or Precedence of this great Officer, as there is for the Marshal, Admiral, etc.
although his great merits might well have deserved an additional Clause to that
Act for his precedence.

7. Three Dukes were summoned 18 Feb. 1661. as in the Pawn, vide cap. 2. The
next Degree to Dukes are Marquesses.

SECT. III. Of Marquesses.
THe third Degree of the Hereditary and fixed Nobility, is entitled, Marquio,
Obs. I.
(and Marquess in English) which began in Germany, Anno Christi, 925. when
Henry, (Emperor of Germany) and the first of that Name in that Empire) Created
Sigefred (then Earl of Kinglesheim) Marquess of Brandenburgh; who after, in the
Year 1525. having the addition of Duke of Prussia, did exchange the Title of
Marquess, to be called Duke of Brandenburgh: However, he was the first Marquess
of that Empire, and probably the Emperor did fix this Title between the Dukes
and Earls, that there might be no more disputes concerning them; for the two
Titles of Duke and Earl were promiscuously used till this Title of Marquess was
interposed; and the same reason might also occasion Philip the Fair, King of
France, 425 years after, viz. Anno Christi, 1350. to insert into John, Duke of
Britain's Patent: Vt ne posset (says the Patent) in dubium revocari Ducem
ipsum (qui Comes fuit aliquando, etc.) ut Ducem in posterum deberet vocari,
etc. and the reason is therein given, Seldom.
Quod Comitatus ejus potius debet duci and esse Ducatus, quam Comitatus,
quoniam sub se habet december and ultra Comitatus, and 56 years after, viz. Anno
Christi, 1386. This might occasion also our Richard the Second, to make Robert
d'Vere the first Marquess of England by Creation, and hereby the dispute
between the two Titles of Duke and Earl, or Comes, was settled both in the
Empire, in France, and in England, by the interposed Title of Marquess.

2. From whence this Title is derived, there are several conjectures, but most
agree, That it comes from Marken, or Mark, or March, ( High Dutch words)
signifying with them as with us, a Mark or Limit, and from thence he that was
deputed Governor of that Limit or Mark which he was to take care of, and
preserve, was called a Marches, or Marquess, and the Territory under his
Jurisdiction, a Marquisate, and to this day the Marquisate of Brandenburgh is
divided into three Marks, or Marches, viz. Alte-Mark, or old March, Heylin's
Cosm.
the middle Mark, and the new Mark, or March: and we in England do still call
such kind of Limits by the name of Marks, or Marches, viz. the Marches of
Wales, and the Marches of Scotland, which were Frontiers to be defended against
the Scots and Welsh; and some would derive Marquess from Mare, the Sea, because
their Marken or Limits were juxta Mare posita, and the learned Seldom (in his
Titles of Honor) likes it well enough, that Marquess should be derived from
Marken, but not Marken from Mare.

3. But I must not ravil into Disputes of this Nature, and therefore shall
refer them to his Book, and my Annotations, and conclude this Section with
this, That as most Sir-Names are derived from some significant word or words,
so these noble Titles (without derogation to their other Titles) are from some
signal Action, as a Duke from leading an Army; a Marquess from Maris
acquisitio, (a gaining something from the Sea, or preserving something against
the Sea) and so of the other Titles (as will be shown) and thereupon had
condignal Honors conferred on them, to testify their Employments, which are
since (as Memorials of their Merits (therein become hereditary.

4. Four Marquesses were summoned, 18 Feb. 1661. as in the Pawn, vide Cap. 2.

SECT. IV. Of Earls.
THe learned Seldom tells us, Obs. I.
(as I have shown) That the Titles of Dukes, and Counts, or Earls, were
promiscuously used as well in foreign parts as in England, till the Title of
Marquess was interposed; and it is agreed, that Comes is the Latin word for
Count, (in whatever Territory that word is used) and that Count is derived from
Commitatus, or County; and Comitatus from Committo, denoting the particular
County committed to his Care) and vice versa, Committo begets Comitatus, or
County, and Comitatus, Comes, a Count, i. e. Earl. Of these Counts the learned
Seldom reckons but 6 Sorts, viz. the Single Count, (who has no addition but
his Christian name) 2d. Count Palatine (from Palatium or some Palace in it,)
3d. Count of the Empire, 4th. Count of Frontiers, where the Title of Marquess
is also used instead of Count, 5th. Count of Provinces, (or Counties joined)
which in Foraign parts are called Landgraves, (the word Grave and Comes
signifying the same Title) and 6th. Count of Cities or Towns, and these latter,
as in England, are called Comites Castrenses or Burgraves, or Counts of Castles
or Buroughs, (all which are more fully described in his second Book.) But I
find that Cassiodorus in his 6th. Book mentions 22 Sorts more than Mr. Seldom,
of which 6 of Mr. Seldens, or 28 of Cassiodorus, we in England retain but few,
viz. a Count of a County, (as Algernonus, Comes Northumbriae; A Count of a
City, (as Albericus or Awbry, Comes Oxoniae (or Oxford,) and Guilelmus, Comes
Novi Castri or New Castle upon Tine, (being both a Castle and Borough.)

3. All the curiosity lies in finding out how Comes or Count happens to be
transmutted into the word Earl, so much different in Pronuntiation and
Orthography from each other, and yet, as we say, are the same in Substance.

4. Now it being no hard matter to believe (as I have shown) that Duke is
derived from Duco, and Marquess from Mare, but Earl from Comes or Count, is not
so intelligible; but this may be said, that the Saxons from whom we borrow this
word Earl, did use it as a word of Honor, and in the same sense with Comes,
for they did call their chiefest Governors of Shires, (of which many of our
Counties still retain that name, as will be shown) and of Cities and Buroughs,
by the name of Earldermen, and for a more easy pronounciation Ealderman, and
after Alderman, and for brevity Earl, and the Danes after them Earlan; and
commonly the Earlan or Earl had a Shire or more for his Earldom, and the number
of Earls increasing, some had part of a Shire, others some chief Town, of which
he was made Earl or Earldermanus; and whatever other Etymologers say, (of which
I can speak more freely in my Annotations) I conceive the Dominion of those
Earls were allotted near some spreading Rivers, (in Fenny-Countries) which are
to this day called Eas, and those Inland Isles (which we now write Island, Sir
William Dugdale.
and some corruptly calls Eyes) were anciently writ Ealands, as Rumen-ea, (now
Rumney-Marshes in Kent) and Ely an Island in Cambridgeshire is anciently writ
Ealand, and so Worrel Island, (near Chester) sometimes called Ealand, and
sometimes Island, and I could reckon up what I have seen in Cambridgeshire, and
Lincolnshire, at least 40 ancient Cuts and Sewers of Water, which still are
called and writ by the name of Ea, viz. Boston Ea in Lincolnshire, Popham Ea in
Northhamptonshire, (signifying great Waters in those places) and many more
might be instanced to prove that as Marquess may safely be derived from Mare,
(as denoting one that had the guard of the inundations from Saltwaters) so Earl
may as safely be derived from Ea, (or one that had the guard and care against
the Inland innundations of fresh waters) and some observe that this word Ea is
still retained in most of those Counties which are entitled Shires, or
bordering on those Shires (Shire being (a Saxon word) as will be shown) but in
other Counties which are not called Shires, the word Ea is scarce known, so as
Comes or Count was used in such places as were called Counties, and Earl in
such as were called Shires.

5. This Tutelage of grounds gained or preserved from waters, was so great an
honor, that Caius Marius, (who was made seven times Consul or Comes, (for as
Seldom says, Comites dici possunt Consules a Consulendo) which was rendered
Earl, did by a Cut or Drain so secure the Inundation of Salt waters often
overflowing a large Fenny County near Arles in France, that in memory of so
benificial a Work, it was called Fossa Mariana, (or the Consul Marius his
Drain) and in Pompeys time the securing of the inundations of Freshes about 40
Miles from Rome was esteemed to be so good Service, that one of the two Consuls
were usually appointed to attend the Gallick Enemy, the other had the care of
the Ea or Watery Enemy; and it is no small honor now to the Earl of Bedford to
be Governor of 365000 Acres of Fenny Grounds, entitled by his name of Bedford
Level subject to inundations, but by his vigilance preservs it.

6. And when this Title of Earl was first given in England, (as it is said) by
William the first, to Hugo de Aurank or de Ibrinks, making him Earl of Chester,
it was doubtless from some eminent Service done in preserving the Banks or
Brinks of that County against the inundations of the River Dee upon the
South Side of Worrcl Ealand aforesaid, reaching from the Town of Chester to the
Hebrea, for shortness called Heber, and so round that Hundred, (besides the
Banks in other parts of that County.)

Some do question whether this d'Aurank or d'Ibrink was the first Earl, but it is
likely he was so Titularly, and other the like Earls before him: but that which
is agreed on is, that Albericus or Aubry d'Vere, was the first that was by
Charter (or Patent) created Earl by Henry the 2d. who had the additional Title
of Earl of Oxford or Oxenford in Oxfordshire, and continues in that Family to
this day; but I cannot pass the word Ford, which does imply a passable Ea or
Water, which was necessarily to be preserved from the overflowing of at least 7
several Rivers in that little County, for the more safe passage of Men and Oxen.

7. To conclude, Ihope I may be allowed so much of the Art of Tachygraphy or
short writing, as may render my application of this word more plausible, by
writing Earl for Ea Regalia, so as whether Ea be considered as a Saxon word, or
the plural of the pronoun Ea, it confirms my notion, and may serve as well to
explain the word Earl, as SPQR the Senate and People of Rome, or DNS to
signify a Baron of the Realm or Chr. Chevaleer.

8. I have said sufficiently of the word; now as to the antiquity of it in
England, it is Authentic from History and Record, that the word Earl and
Honor of it, was in use in the Saxons, and Danes time, and continued with the
Normans, and Earls had the like extensive power in Shires and Counties as they
have had since their formal creation by Charter, which it seems was a mode and
form not used till this to the Earl of Oxford, since which there has been some
variations in the Form, but especially in the time of Henry the eighth and King
James, as will be seen when I come to recite so much of their Charters of
Creation as relate to their interests in Parliament.

9. The learned Seldom divides this Title into two sorts, a Local and a
Personal Earl; by Local he means such Counties, Cities, Castles, Towns, or
Buroughs, as are fixed to the Title of Earl, (or Comes) as Earl of Oxford,
Earl of Kent, etc. (being not County Palatines) or of such as are County
Palatines, whereof there are five, viz. Cheshire, Lancashire, (which are in the
Crown) Pembrokeshire (in the present Earl of Pembroke) Durham and Ely, (which
two are County Palatines, belonging to the Bishops of those Counties, never
granted to any Temporal Earls) so as the Bishops of Ely and Durham do sit in
Parliament Virtute Tenurae, and not Virtute Comitatus Palatinae.

As for Personal Earls, there are but three remaining at this day, viz. the
Earl or Lord Great Chamberlain, granted to Berty, Earl of Lindsey, with a large
intale to that Family, 2ly. the Title of Earl Marshal granted to Hen. Howard
Earl of Norwich, and after Duke of Norfolk, with a large intale as I have
shown, 3ly. granted by Patent to Savage Earl Rivers being made a Baron in 5
Edw. 6. and also Viscount of Colchester in 19 Jacobi, and in the 2d. of Charles
the first was made Viscount Savage of Rock Savage in Cheshire, whereby he is a
double Viscount, and Earl Rivers, which is the Name of an illustrious Family,
and not of a Place, but all the other Earls are entitled from some noted Place.

10. Forty nine Earls Summoned the 18th. February, 1661. and six more Summoned
the 29th. of April, 1661. See the Pawn. Cap. 2.

The next I am to treat of is the Vicecomes, Vice Earl, or Viscount.

SECT. V. Of a Viscount.
Vicecomes, or Viscount, may properly here intend a Companion, (for the word
Comes does as well signify a Companion or Associate, as a Count or Earl) and
the addition of Vice (which signifies instead, or by course or turns (of which
word Turn I shall speak more) did intimate, thar when the Turn of this Comes
came to Govern, he was for that time called Vicecomes, all other times Comes
only, or, as I conceive, as the one was called Comes, because he commanded a
County, the other was called Vicecomes, from the Latin word Vicus, because he
commanded a Village, Street, or Structure, or some lesser Command than that of
a County.

2. The dignal Title of Vicecomes is also ancienter in foreign parts, than in
England, and is the same with Vidame, or Vicedominus (which are properly the
foreign Titles of a Substitute to a Bishop) but as we take the Title in an
official sense, it signifies the King's Deputy or Sheriff in every County, and
so is as ancient as the Saxons, who made Comes to signify Earl, and Vicecomes,
or Viscount, to signify the Office of Shereeve, or Sheriff, for we had the
words Earl and Sheriff from the Saxons, and the Count and Viscount from the
Romans, Comes and Vicecomes: and probably for the same reason, that Marquess
was interposed to Duke and Earl in Richard the Second's time, so it was thought
fit in Henry the Sixth's time (though some say in Henry the Fifth's time) to
interpose the Title of Viscount to Comes, or Earl, and the Noble Baron, there
having been the like promiscuous use of the Titles of Comes, or Earl, and
Baron, as had been of Duke and Comes, and thereupon I conceive John d'Beaumont
was Created the first Viscount of this interposing Dignity, it being, as Mr.
Cambden says, an old Name of Office, but a new Name of Dignity, or a
Vicecomes, or Sheriff, turned from an annual Office into a Dignity hereditary.

3. Yet this Office of Vicecomes, or Shereeve, or Sheriff, was, and still is an
Office of dignity; only the difference is, that the Vicecomes dignified, (as I
said by Hen. the 6th. is a Parliamentary and Nobilitated Dignity and Place,
(both in their Patent of Creation, and in the Act of Precedence) fixed between
Earl and Baron, etc. made Hereditary, but the other Viscountship or Sherifdom
is Official and Annual and not Hereditary, and has no place in the Lords
House; and particularly excepted to be chosen into the House of Commons, by the
Writs of Elections, (as will be shown) and the reason is, because the Official
Viscountship is in the King, who gives only an annual Deputation to the Person
who executes that Office in such County, of which he is made Vicecomes or
Deputy to the King, and so is not the Noble Viscount, (who cannot be made
Sheriff or returned of a Jury) but has his constant Writ of Summons to every
Parliament, (as will be shown;)

4. Seven Viscounts Summoned by Writ 18. Feb. 1661. and One Viscount Summoned
by Writ 20th. Ap. 1661.

And now I come to the Barons, the last Degree of the Nobility, but anciently
the First or Second.

SECT. VI. Of Barons.
I Shall refer the Etymology of this word Baron to my Annotations, (because the
learned Cambden, Seldom, and others have taken pains about it) but for many
ages, as at present, it comprehends all such Prelates and Bishops as are
Summoned by virtue of their Baronies or Tenures to sit in the House of Lords.

As also all such Dukes, Marquesses, Earls and Viscounts, as did anciently
mount to any of those 4 Degrees, by the proportion of their Baronies, which
they obtained by gift from the King, or other acquisitions, so differing from
the other 4 in Nominal gradations, rather than Essential. And though there were
Nominal differences anciently in the Tenures of Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
Viscounts, and Barons, yet they were all subject to a general Contribution to
the Kings affairs, according to their certain number of Knights Fees; for as
Baronies made the other 4 Superior Degrees, so the increment of Knights Fees
(whereupon I conceive Sir Thomas Smith made that Degree of Nobiles Minores) did
capacitate a Baron to be made a Baron, and so a certain number of Baronies to
be a Viscount and Earl, and of Earledoms to be a Duke, as may be read in Sir
Edward Coke, (and others more ancient by him cited) and Mr. Seldom (forgiving
the Knight) says that Istud verbum Baro est caput and scala dignitatum
Regalium, i. e. Majoris Nobilitatis.)

2. In former times these proportions were observed amongst the Temporal Lords,
but not with the Spiritual, for Mr. Seldom tells us of a Bishop ( page 580.
Tit. Hon.) that had 220 Baronies, and did sit in Parliament by virtue of his
Baronies, yet was neither Duke nor Earl) so those were the computations of
Honor and Contributions, till the method of Creations were used, and at last
by the late Act of Parliament all Tenures in Capite were Dissolved, and thereby
the Tenurial Contributions, but not the Titles of Honor: yet for a little
variety I may inform some, that in former times the Spiritual Barons had some
exemptions from Contributions, unless there was (as the learned Seldom calls
it) Trinoda necessitas, viz. of War, of Repairs of Castles, or Bridges, but
they were generally exempted from Personal Assistance in War; for though (as he
says) that in the 4th. year of William the First, that King made the Bishops,
etc. subject to Knights Service in chief, by creation of their Tenures, and so
was the first King that turned their possessions by Frankalmoine a French word
signifying charitable Gifts, for so began their temporalities) into Baronies,
and thereby made them Barons of the Kingdom by Tenure, yet when it was prayed
by them in the 5th. Hen. the 3d. Vt omnes Clerici tenentes Baronias, etc.
personaliter procederent contra Regis adversarios, etc. it was answered by the
Bishops (and their Answer allowed) Quod non debent pugnare cum gladio materiali
sed Spirituali, scilicet cum Lachrymis and orationibus humilibus and devotis,
and quod propter beneficia sua manutenere debent pacem non bellum, and Quod
Baroniae eorum ab Eleemosynis puris stabiliuntur, etc. So as (he conceives
that) the Baronies of the Clergy were made of such Lands as formerly were, as I
said, held in Franckalmoine.

3. But what ever exemptions the Spiritual Barons had, the Temporal Barons were
obliged by their Baronial Tenures (of several natures) to all defensive and
offenfive duties for the King and Kingdoms preservation, according to the
proportion of their dependent tenures or territories; and so are yet in honor
obliged to perform, and they all had and have equal Votes in Parliament by
virtue of their Baronial Interest; for as to matters Parliamentary, the Title
of Baron is more ancient, copious, and comprehensive, than any of the other
Titles of Lords in Parliament.

4. This word Baron we see is appilicable, not only to the two degrees of Lords
Spiritual, viz. Archbishops and Bishops, but to the 5 degrees of Lords
Temporal, so as the noble Barons and all the Degrees above them do set in the
Lords House, virtute Baroniae, and by Writs of Summons, the Superior Titles to
the Barons differing rather upon some extrinsick order, than any real
intrinsic distinction.

5. As for those Titles of Barons which are given to Degrees equal or under the
noble Barons, they are of several sorts; 1st. Some noble Barrons by Ancienty
never Summoned to a Parliament, yet capable of Summons; 2ly. The Barons of the
Exchequer, (which are 4 in number, who are Summoned by Writ ad consulendum, or
to be Assistants in the Lords House, (as will be shown;) 3ly. Barons of the
Cinqueports (out of whose number 16 are usually Elected) to sit in the House of
Commons, (as will be shown;) 4ly. Barons of Court-Barons, who are also capable
of being Elected to sit in the House of Commons; 5th. Barons in the Law- French
called Baron, i. e. and Husband, (and Feme the Wife) but I here only speak of
the Nobiles Barons distinct from these Titular Barons, though such of them as
sit in the Lords House are in some sort thereby Nobilitated, of whom I shall
speak more when I come to the Assistants; and such as sit in the Commons House
are thereby Dignified though not Nobilitated, (of whom I shall speak when I
come to the House of Commons.)

6. Now it may here be observed, that some Persons of merit have been Summoned
to sit in the Lords House as Barons, which were not Barons, or any otherwise
capacitated to sit there but by Writs of Summons; upon this occasion Sir Edward
Coke cites a Case where one Summond by Writ to sit in the Lords House, died
before he sat there, and it was adjudged that if he had sat there, he had been
Nobilitated thereby, but having not sat there, whereby that writ was not
executed for want of his Personal attendance, it was adjudg'd that the
direction or delivery of the Writ barely to the Person to whom the Writ was
directed, (without Personal appearance and investiture of Robes and a
possession of place) was not sufficient to enoble him, without a conjunction of
those Circumstances and Ceremonies.

7. But Barons created by Letters Patents, (and made to them and their Heirs)
are thereby Nobilitated, and to be esteemed Nobles though they do not Sit, in
respect of the power given them by Patent to Sit without restrictions or
ceremonial qualifications; and therefore Sir Edward Coke says, that though the
Creation by Writ be ancienter than by Patent, yet the Creation by Patent is the
surer way, for that one may be sufficiently Created by Patent and made Noble,
though he never sit in Parliament, and he gives this reason; That if issue be
joined whether one be a Baron or not, that point shall not be tried by a Jury
of 12 men, but by the Records of the Parliament, and if he did not sit there,
there can be no Record, but a Patent is a Record.

8. So there were 62 Barons Summoned by Writs of the 18. of Feb. 1661. and 6
more by Writs of the 29. of Ap. 1661. whereby the number of Temporal Lords
Summoned to this Parliament began the 8th. of May 1661. were -- 140. viz.

1. Two Dukes of the Blood. 2. Three Dukes not of the Blood. 3. Four
Marquesses. 4. Fifty five Earls. 5. Eight Viscounts. 6. Sixty eight Barons.
In all of the 6 Degrees 140. as in the Pawn Cap. 2. which we may compare with
former times, viz.

Regno. Anno. The highest Number Summoned in these Years. Number. Maj. The lowest
Number Summoned in these Years. Anno. Number. Mi. Edwar. 3. 25o 62 4o 18 Richar.
2. 8o 63 18o 36 Henry 4. 1o 50 11o 39 Henry 5. 2o 44 3o 29 Henry 6. 38o 55 1o
23 Edwar. 4. 7o 47 12o 37 Henry 8. 37o 45 28o 44 Edwar. 6. 6o 59 1o 47 Mariae
2o 56 1o 42 Elizabeth. 30o 60 43o 52 Jacobi 21o 98 1o 84 Caroli 1. 15o 109 1o
97 Caroli 2. 13o 140

I do insert this observation, That the Ingenious Historian may see, whether
the greater or lesser number of the Nobility in Parliament has been most
advantageous to its Constitution; and the like may be observed concerning the
number of the House of Commons, (of which I shall speak in the next part.)

By which we may see that the highest Number was in 12. and 13. of Car. 2d. and
the Lowest in the 4th. of Edw. the 3d. not troubling the Reader with the
Numbers Summoned to Intervening Parliaments.

Thus having given some short Illustrations of those Titles of Honor which are
mentioned in the Parliamentary Writs and the Act of Precedence, for the clearer
satisfaction of such as are not verst in matters of that nature; I may now with
the more content to them and my self proceed to the particular Writs of Summons
to those noble Degrees which I have regularly mentioned, according to their
prescribed Order, both from the method of the Writs in the Pawns and Act; and
these Writs of which I am particularly to speak (others falling in
collaterally) are; Sect. 1. The form of the Writs to any of the Blood Royal. 2.
The form of the Writs to Archbishops and Bishops. 3. The form of Writs to the
Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper. 4. The form of Writs to Dukes not of the Blood,
Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons, wherein the Grand Official Titles
beforementioned are inserted.


CHAP. VI. Of Writs of Summons, and first of the Exemplar Writs for Summoning
Princes, Dukes, and Earls of the Bloud-Royal to the Parliament.
SECT. I.
I Have shown in Chap. 2. how Parliament Writs are sorted into Close Writs, and
Open Writs or Patents, and those into Exemplars and Consimilars. I need not
enlarge more therein, but proceed to the first Exemplar Writ of Summons, and so
to other such Writs of Summons to other Degrees as concern the Lords House; for
I shall speak of other Parliament-Writs of another nature, when I have
dispatched the Summoning Writs and Patents of Creation, according to the method
of Pawns and Clause-Rolls made before the Act of Precedence, as also in all
Pawns since that Act. Those of the Bloud-Royal are placed in the first Rank of
those Records, and were still Exemplar to the rest, and therefore the Writ
which I am now to speak of, viz. To the Duke of York (Brother to King Charles
the 2d.) is the Exemplar of the Consimilar Writ to Prince Rupert Duke of
Cumberland, (being Son to the Sister of King Charles the First) and so persuant
not only to the said Act, but to the most ancient methods of Writs of Summons,
(as will be more fully shown in the following Chapters.)

But before I recite this Writ, methinks I hear some say, Nolumus consuetudines
Angliae mutare, therefore let us know what Writs of this nature were issued in
former Ages by former Kings, which is a Question so pertinent to my own
scruples, that (I hope) the same ease I gave to my self (after my inquiry) will
serve to satisfy others; for having gone backward with as much safety (to the
avouching of Records as I could,) and being not satisfied with what was
delivered to us, concerning the Parliament Writs in the British, Romans,
Danes, Saxons, or Norman times, or by some of the Plantagenets, or those of
Hen. 3ds. time, from whence most Writers of our English Parliaments take their
Original; I fixed upon and took my Rise from the Writs in the 15th. of Edw. 2d.
which are clear and still extant in the Records of the Tower, which the other
are not.

By these Records it is evident, that in 97. Parliaments, as I account them,
which were Summoned from that 15th. year to this Parliament, there is no
material difference in this Exemplar Writ from those Antecedent; and therefore
that this Writ to the Duke of York may be compared with that of Edw. 2d. I have
here set them both down verbatim, so that upon 339. years experience, viz. from
the year 1322. to the year 1661. Inclusive, we may acquiesce, that we in this
Age have not much trespass't or varied from the ancient and wise Form
prescribed to us by so many former Kings, and continued to this time.

The Form of the Exemplar Writ to the Princes of the Blood.
Tempore Edw. 2.15.
EDwardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae Dominus Hiberniae and Dux Aquitaniae,
Edwardo Comiti Cestriae filio suo Charissimo Salutem,
Super diversis and arduis negotiis nos and statum Regni nostri specialiter
tangentibus Parliamentum nostrum apud Eboracum a die Paschae prox' futuro in
tres septi'anas teneri and vobiscum and cum ceteris Prelatis Magnatibus and
Proceribus dicti Regni habere proponimus colloquium and tractatum.

Vobis Mandamus in fide and dilectione quibus nobis tenemini firmiter
injungentes.

Dictis die and loco omnibus aliis pretermissis personaliter intersitis ibidem
nobiscum and cum ceteris prelatis magnatibus and proceribus supradictis
negotiis tractatur' vestrumque Consilium impensur' Et hoc Nullatenus omittat'

Test me ipso apud Westm' decimo quarto die Martii Anno Regni nostri decimo
quinto.
Caroli 2.13.
CArolus Secundus Dei Gratia Angliae Scotiae Franciae and Hiberniae Rex fidei
defensor, etc.
Praecharissimo and dilecto fratri Jacobo Duci Eborum and Albaniae magno
Admirallo suo Angliae Salt'm
Quia de

Advisamento and assensu Consilii nostri pro quibasdam arduis and urgentibus
negotiis nos statum and defensionem Regni nostri Angliae and Ecclesiae nostrae
concernentibus Quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem nostram Westm'
octavo die Maii prox' futur' teneri ordinavimus and ibidem nobiscum ac cum
magnatibus and proceribus dicti Regni nostri colloquium habere and tractatum.

Vobis Mandamus in fide and ligeantia quibus nobis tenemini firmiter
injungentes quod consideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate and periculis
imminentibus cessante excusatione quacunque

Dictis die and loco personaliter intersitis nobiscum ac cum magnatibus and
proceribus predictis super predictis negotiis tractatur' vestrumque consilium
impensur' Et hoc Sicut nos and honorem nostrum ac Salvationem and defensionem
Regni and Ecclesiae predictae expeditionemque dictorum negotiorum diligitis
nullatenus omittatis

Test me ipso apud Westm' decimo octavo die Februarii Anno Regni nostri Decimo
tertio.
SECT. II. Observations.
IN An. 12. Hen. 8. the words fidei Defensor, were then added before Salutem,
instead of Super diversis causis. The latter Writs are Quia de advisamento and
assensu concilii nostri pro quibusdam causis, yet I find the word Quia used in
the great Councils or Parliament Writs, before Edw. 2ds. time, and probably the
words assensu Concilii nostri is added to show the distinction of his
Privy Council and his Public Council or Parliament.

2. Instead of Specialiter tangentibus, the latter Writs are concernentibus
quoddam.

3. Instead of habere proponimus, the latter Writ is teneri ordinavimus, and
habere is put in between Colloquium and Tractatum.

4. Ligeantia is put in the latter Writs instead of Dilectione, this word
Dilectione being for many Ages particularly applied to the Episcopal Writs.

5. The latter Writs do contain all that are in the more Ancient, (except the
Insertions of some Causes of Summons, and some inlargements added upon Emergent
occasions) viz. quod consideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate and periculis
imminentibus cessante Excusatione quacunque.

6. And also those words are added near the end of the latter Writ, viz. Sicut
nos and honorem nostrum ac Salvationem and Defensionem Regni and Ecclesiae
predicte expeditionemque dictorum negotiorum diligitis, which additions are
only more full Expressions to oblige the Attendances of the Grandees.

Thus having shown the Exemplar Writs to the Blood Royal, Ancient and Modern, I
shall set down such Earls, Dukes, or Princes of the Blood Royal to whom this
Exemplar Writ was directed, even to this time, according as they are either in
the Clause Rolls in the Tower, or in the Pawns in the Pettibag-Office, which I
shall recite in English, though the Writs are in Latin.

SECT. III.
THe Exemplar Writ was then to Edward Earl of Chester, Exemplar. 15 Edw. 2.
Eldest Son to King Edw. 2d. and by virtue of this Writ, this Prince had his
Exemplar Writ but for this one Parliament, and was soon after King Edw. 3d.

2. 3 Edw. 3.
To Edward Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester, Eldest Son to Edw. 3d. and this
Prince had Exemplar Writs for 9 Parliaments, viz. 3 Edw. 3. 4. Edw. 3. and 4.
Edw. 3. 5. Edw. 3. 25. Edw. 3. 27. Edw. 3. 28. Edw. 3. 29. Edw. 3. 42. Edw. 3.

3. To Thomas Earl of Norfolk, 4 Edw. 3.
soon after created Duke (Marshal of England, great Uncle to Edw. 3. who had
his Exemplar Writ but for this one Parliament.

4. To Henry Earl of Lancaster, 14 Edw. 3.
(soon after created Duke, (Son to John the 4. Son of Edw. 3.) who had Exemplar
Writs in this Kings and Richard 2. and H. 4ths. time, for 7 Parliaments, viz.
14. Edw. 3. 17. Edw. 3. 18. Edw. 3. 22. Edw. 3. 25. Edw. 3. 23. Rich. 2. 1 Hen.
4. as Duke of Lancaster.

5. To John Duke of Lancaster, 37 Edw. 3.
(who then was King of Castile and Duke of Acquitane) the 4th. Son to Edw. the
3. as aforesaid, and Uncle to Rich. the 2.) who had Exemplar Writs for 17.
Parliaments in this and Rich. the 2ds. time, viz. 37 Edw. 3. 38. Edw. 3. 1 R.
2. 3 R. 2. 4 R. 2. 7 R. 2. and 7 R. 2. and 8 R. 2. and 8 R. 2. 9 R. 2. 13 R. 2.
14 R. 2. 15 R. 2. 17 R. 2. 20 R. 2. and 20 R. 2. 21 R. 2. Exemplar.


6. 50 Edw. 3.
To Richard Prince of Wales, (Duke of Cornwall and Earl of Chester, Grandchild
to Edw. the 3d. and Son to Edw. the former Prince of Wales, and afterward King
Richard the 2d.) who had an Exemplar Writ but for this Parliament, and at the
opening thereof he did sit in the Kings Chair.

7. 10 Ric. 2.
To Edmund Earl of Cambridge, Duke of Clarence, and first Duke of York, (the 5.
Son of Edw. the 3d.) who had Exemplar Writs for 3 Parliaments, viz. the
10.11.12. of Rich. 2. as Duke of York.

8. 11 Ric. 2.
To Thomas Duke of Gloucester Uncle to the King, who had one Exemplar for one
Parliament.

9. 1 Hen. 4.
To Henry Prince of Wales and Duke of Cornwall, who had his Exemplar Writs for
9. Parliaments in his Fathers life time, and was after King Hen. the 5th. viz.
1 H. 4. 2 H. 4. 3 H. 4. 6 H. 4. 7 H. 4. and 7 H. 4. 9 H. 4. 11 H. 4. and 13 H.
4.

10. To Thomas the 2d. Son of Hen. the 4th. Duke of Clarence and Earl of
Albemarl, had Exemplar Writs for 7 Parliaments, in this and Hen. 6ths. Reign,
viz. Exemplar.
1 Hen. 5.
1 H. 5.3.4.5. of Hen. the 5th. and in the 1st. and 6. and 3 H. 6.

11. To John Duke of Bedford 3. 8 Hen. 5.
Son to Hen. 4th. who had Exemplar Writs for 5 Parliaments in this and Hen.
6th. Reign, viz. 8 H. 5.4. and 4.11.14 H. 6.

12. To Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, 2 Hen. 6.
(the 4th. Son of Hen. 4.) he had Exemplar Writs for 10 Successive Parliaments,
viz. 4.6.9.10.15.18.20.21.25. and 25 H. 6.

13. To Rich. Duke of York, 27 Hen. 6.
(Grandchild to Hen. 4. and Eldest Son to Edw. the 4. when Duke of York) who
had Exemplar Writs for 4 Parliaments, viz. 27.29.31.33 H. 6.

14. To George Duke of Clarence, ( 3d. 7 Edw. 4.
Brother to Edward the 4th.) who had Exemplar Writs for 3 Parliaments, viz.
7.9.12. Edw. 4.

15. To Edward Prince of Wales, 22 Edw. 4.
(Eldest Son to Edward the 4th.) who had Exemplar Writs for Two Parliaments,
and after was King Edward the 5th.) viz. 22. and 23. Edw. 4. Note, That from
this time to the 21. of Hen. the 8th. we are disappointed of the knowledge of
any Exemplars, and from thence to the 21. of King James there are no Exemplar
Writs to any of the Blood Royal, only to other Lords Temporal, as will be shown
in its proper place; but in the 21. of King James Exemplar.


16. 21 Jacob.
An Exemplar Writ was to Charles Prince of Wales, Duke of York, for that one
Parliament, who was afterward King Charles the First.

17. 15 Car. 1.
To Charles Prince of Wales, who had an Exemplar Writ for one Parliament, and
after was King Charles the Second.

18. 13 Car. 2.
To James Duke of York, who sat by virtue of the aforementioned Writ in the
Parliament begun the 8th. of May, 1661. to the end thereof.

SECT. IV. Observations on the Title of York.
THere were other Dukes of York besides these which are mentioned in this
Collection, viz. Edward the Son of Edmund Duke of York, and upon Edwards Death
his Brother Richard was created Duke of York, and Henry the son of King Henry
the 7th. was created Duke of York, who after was styled King Henry the 8th. but
these 3 Dukes of York, being not mentioned in any Clause Rolls to have Exemplar
Writs, I have omitted them in the Register of Exemplars.

2. The City of York was dignified with the Title of an Archbishopric (in the
year 180 as some say) but all agree that Taurus was Archbishop there in the
year 610.) and also with the Title of a Dukedom in the 10th. year of Ric. the
2d. whereas London the Metropolitan of England has only a Bishopric, but no
Dukedom, Earldom or Marquesate appropriate to it, and in Anno the Civil
Government of the City was honored with the Title of a Lord Mayor, as it was
at London, but how far the equivalency of that Title extends to those two
Cities, will be further discourst when I speak of London in its proper place,
and in my Annotations.

3. Whilst the quarrel continued between the Dukes of York and Lancaster, which
lasted for many Ages, York had the Title of White-rose, the House of Lancaster
called the Red-rose, till both were inoculated into one Stock of Hen. 7th.

4. The Title of this James Duke of York and Albany, (in Scotland is the same
which was given by King James to Prince Charles (afterward called King Charles
the First) being first created Duke of Albany, etc. and at 4 Years of age Duke
of York.

SECT. V. Of Consimilar Writs to the Royal Exemplars.
NOw I should proceed to the Consimilars of these Exemplars, but in respect
that they consist of a very great number, and it were too great a labor to
treat of all Consimilars, I shall forbear to recite them. Especially being in
hopes that my Learned Friend Sir William Dugdale will publish a particular
Treatise of them, and ease me of that labor; so as I shall only take notice
here of the Writ for this Parliament to Prince Rupert, (the Sisters Son to King
Charles the First) and this is Consimilar in all parts to the Duke of Yorks
Exemplar, (except in the Title) so I need not set it down at large, but by
abbreviation shall thus render it, viz. Carolus, etc. Rex, etc. Praecharissimo
Consanguinco Duci Cumbriae Salutem, and so Verbatim with the Dukes Exemplar.
Duke of Cumberland being his English Title.

SECT. VI. Observations on these Consimilars.
1. FIrst in most of the Clause-Rolls and Pawns from the 15. of Edw. the 2. to
this time, after the Exemplar Writs are set down, these words following are in
the Clause-Rolls and Pawns, viz. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur Subscriptis, and
in some, Consimiles Literae (instead of Brevia) directae Subscriptis, and in
some, Consimiles Literae directae Conscriptis, thereby seeming to retain the
ancient words of Patres Conscripti, which the Romans did usually apply to their
Elected Senators. But here it is only Consimile Breve, in the singular,
Dirigitur praecharissimo, etc. Ruperto, there being no other of the Blood in
England.

2. Princes of the Blood have been Consimilars, when Princes of the Blood have
been Exemplars, as in the 25 Edw. 3d. Edward Prince of Wales was Consimilar to
Henry Earl of Lancaster his Uncle, of the Blood; but not where any were
Exemplars who were not of the Blood: and so many more might be cited, which may
be seen in Cottons Collections of the Tower Records.

3. In this Consimilar Writ, Prince Ruperts Foraign Titles are omitted, because
none of the Peers do sit in the Lords House but in respect of their English
Titles; yet in the Proxy-writs which they allow to others, their Foraign Titles
are recited without scruple, as will be shown in the 10th. Section of the 12th.
Chapter.

4. I cannot but take notice here, that till the Union with Scotland, there was
a Chair placed in the Lords House on the right hand of the Kings Chair, for the
King of Scots, and called the King of Scots Chair. Yet I cannot find by any
Records of the House of Lords or elsewhere, that the King of Scots did ever sit
there, or was Summoned, or had any proxy to sit there for him, by virtue of any
Exemplar or Consimilar Writ.

And now I shall proceed to the Exemlar for Bishops.

CHAP. VII. The second Exemplar, viz. To the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Pawn in the Pettibag, (which I have recited verbatim) as all the other
Exemplars are, but it is entered in the Chancery Crown-Office, (an Office of
Record also, as I have shown) being issued after the Parliament was sitting;
nor would I have entered it here (in respect my design in this first part is to
write only of such Writs as were previous to the sitting of this Parliament)
had not I found that the Exemplar for Bishops is constantly entered in all the
Clause-Rolls extant, (from the 15 of Edw. 2d.) and in all Pawns extant, (from
the 21 of Hen. 8.) except in this of the 13. Car. 2d. which omission
(proceeding from the reasons which will be given in the following Chapter) was
upon the first sitting of this Parliament rectified; and therefore I thought
fit rather a little to deviate from my method, than to defer or puzzle the
Reader with the discourse of it at too great a distance from all the other
Writs of Summons, of which I intend to treat according to the order of the
Pawn; and so I crave leave, as most suiting to all former precedents, to treat
of this Exemplar in the second place, especially having the Act of Precedence
unrepeal'd also to justify my proceedings.

2. Before I proceed to discourse of Archbishops or Bishops, it is convenient
to look back to the several Titles which were given to those who were Managers
of the Religion practiced in this Island, before the name of Bishop was here
known.

This Religion was by the Jews called Paganism, and the Professors thereof
Pagans, Panims, Ethnicks, Gentiles, Heathens and Infidels, which Titles are all
of the same nature. The word Pagan comprehending the other five, only the word
Infidel was not used till after Christ's time; and then those who did not
believe the Christian Religion, were by the Christians called Infidels or
Unbelievers; but the word in Hebrew for Pagan was used (after the building of
Jerusalem by Melchizedeck, before called King of Salem) when those who did live
in neighboring Villages or more remote places, and not coming to partake in
the Devotions offered to God in Jerusalem, were from Pagus a Village called
Pagani, or refusers of that Religion which the Hebrews did practice there; and
whoever afterward were not of the Hebrew or Jewish Religion, were called
Pagans, etc. (as Plautus calls all who were not Grecians, Barbaros, or
Barbarians) So that the Pagan Religion is to be esteemed, but as the Hebrew or
Jewish Religion adulterated by the Progeny of Noah, who (growing numerous)
spread themselves into many parts of the World, and by mixing with other
Nations perverted their Primary Religion (which they had from Noah, (and
afterward more methodically dictated from their High Priest Melchizedeck) into
Paganism.

This mixed Religion was brought into this Island by Mesech the 6th. Son of
Japhet the Son of Noah, who here called himself Samothes, and after Samothes,
Magus, Shanon, Druis, Bardus, Longobardus, and Celtes, succeeded each other;
(Seven in all) who being Priests were also called Princes of this Island: The
Hebrews (and Welsh (who some say had most of their native Language from the
Hebrew) using the same word for Prince and Priest.

These Seven were men of great learning, gained partly by tradition from Noah,
and partly by being contemporary with Sibylla Samia, and Pythagoras; from one
they learned the Prophecies of Christ's Incarnation and Sufferings; from the
other, the high speculations of the Souls immortality and transmigration: of
which I shall speak more in my Annotations.

Of these and the Founders of this Religion, and their Doctrines, I shall give
a more large account in my Annotations, as well for the vindication of that
discountenanced Book of Berosus, published by Johannes Annius, as to free this
Island from the common imputation of a pitiful illiterate sort of People,
which either the laziness of later Writers, (though otherwise deserving)
inclined them to think it not worth their while to abstract the notions of what
was true, from what was merely fabulous; or the Maliciousness of others, whose
interest it was to suppress the Records of the Ancient Renown of this Island;
such as might have demonstrated their variety of knowledge in all kinds of
Literature.

For the present I shall only select two of those 7 Wisemen of Britain, as
most eminent in Philosophy, Policy, and Matters Divine, viz. Druis and Bardus.

Druis is set forth in History to be Master of Pythagoras, (from whom it is also
said that Timagoras brought the Greek Letters to Athens) He took upon him to be
Judge in Causes Ecclesiastical and Civil; and performed all the Rites and
Ceremonies of that Religion in Groves, (imitating the Idolatrous Jews) which
Groves chiefly consisted of Oaks, (as a Tree sacred to Jupiter) and from thence
(say they) he took his name Druis, ((...) signifying an Oak) however he was
Founder of the Sects called Druids in this Island.

The other was Bardus the Founder of the Sect of the Bards, Learned also in
Magick-Philosophy, (in the best sense, as Studiers of Wisdom and Inquirers into
the energy and activity of natural Agents) and Politics; but they were more
Famed for their skill in Poetry and Music; and thereby did cheerfully Sing
Rhyme, and so (like Orpheus) charm men into Civil Religion, and Heroic Actions.

From these did spring (as I said) the two Sects of Druids and Bards; which our
Brittish-Welsh, Roman and Saxon Histories do so often mention, that there is no
doubt concerning them.

The Bards continue even to this day in some parts of Wales, (of which I shall
speak more) but the Druids being afterward more employed in the Priestly
Functions, and growing numerous when the Romans were Possessors of this Island,
(and had divided its Government into Three Provinces) they also committed the
charge of the Religious Duties within these 3 Provinces, to Three of the
chiefest Druids, (altering their Title from Druids into Archflamins, and the
lesser Druids into the Title of Flamins, (for so was the Ecclesiastical
constitution among the Old Romans) the chief of the Three Archflamins being
there called Flamen Dialis, or Jupiters Archflamin or High Priest; and as those
there, were Subject to the Senate, or Empire of Rome; so now these here, were
Subject to the Emperors, Kings, or Governors of this Island, not disputing
their power to alter, put in or out, as they saw just cause.

These Archflamins and Flamins continued till some time after the coming of
Christ; but when they perceived that the Oracles of the Sibylls (which they had
so long adored) were fulfilled by the coming and passion of Christ) and that
all Oracles were ceased, these Flamins, Druids and Bards, did give way to the
Christian Institutions, (as will be shown.)

But to reduce this Section to the subject in hand, it does appear by our most
Ancient Histories, that these Druids and Bards were consulted with both in
Peace and War, both in the British, Romans, and Saxons time, even to the
coming of Christ; though the form of their Councils and mixing with the Laics,
do not appear (for reasons before alleged) now. I shall proceed to show the
Institution of Christianity instead of Paganism, and then the Titles of such as
did manage it in this Island, and how they were still mixed in Civil Councils.

3. The Religion which succeeded Paganism in this Island, was the Christian,
which had its denomination from Christ; who may be said to have been before his
death in this Island, Prophetically, Personally, and Nominally; but least I
should divert the Reader too much from the method intended in this Treatise, I
shall refer the discourse of those 3 points to my Annotations.

But concerning the introducing of Christianity into this Island of Britain,
what is most credited in our Histories, is, that Joseph of Arimathea, (the same
who begged the Body of Christ after his Crucifixion) with 12 Disciples more, are
said to plant it here within Thirty Years after Christ's Resurrection; and
Aristobulus (being, before his coming, Ordained Bishop of Britain) was one of
the 12 which were sent with Joseph to take care of his charge here: and this is
that Aristobulus mentioned by St. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, Cap. 16.
Verse 10. who was the first Bishop we in these parts hear of, (being 5 years
before any was made Bishop of Rome) which brings me to the discourse of the
several Titles of such as were the first Managers of Christian Religion.

4. The first Titles which were given to the Managers of Christanity, were to
Christ himself, who by St. Paul, Matthew. 21.4. is called the Prophet of
Nazareth, and by St. Paul, Heb. 3.1. High Priest and Apostle, and He by his
Divine Authority did constitute 12 Apostles ( Matthew. 10.1. and Luke 6.13.) by
particular names) who were called both Disciples and Apostles: but the Selected
12. were of an higher nature; for some of them were also called Evangelists,
(and none of the Disciples had that Title, except St. Luke, one of the 4. nor
any called an Apostle, (except those 12.) but St. Paul, Gal. 1. v. 1. And these
12 Apostles were of so eminent a Degree, that it is said in the Revelations
Cap. 21. and 14. that the names of the Twelve Apostles were writ on the 12
Foundations of the Heavenly Jerusalem.

After these 12. Christ did Constitute 70. other Disciples of a lesser Degree;
but the names of these 70. are no where certainly to be found; however we have
the Scripture to justify the number of Seventy; and there were also those who
were called Presbyteri, also Deacons, of which Deacons the Ecclesiastical
Stories tell us of 7. by name, but no number of the names of the Presbyteri;
however these remaining Apostles, Disciples, Presbyters and Deacons, were soon
reduced into the Title of Bishops, (in all places) not by ordinary Institution,
but by an higher and a more extraordinary Function; and these Bishops among
themselves had also several eminent Titles of distinction, (within few years
after Christ's death, according as their charge of Souls did extend) viz.
Episcopus, Patriarcha, Archiepiscopus, Papa, Presbyter, Inspector, Pastor,
Curator, Observator, Minister, and Custos animarum, which 7 last Titles being
but descriptions of the Office of the 4 chiefest, viz. Bishops, Patriarchs,
Archbishops and Popes: I shall speak first of these 4.

5. It is evident that the first eminent Title in the Ecclesiastical affairs of
Christianity, was the Title of Bishop; the Presbyteri still submitting to the
Bishop whenever he was placed over them.)

This Title of Bishop (as I said) was placed on some of the Original Apostles
and Disciples; as St. James, St. Mark, etc. for the word Episcopus does
properly signify one that does Inspect or Circumspect all the concerns of
Christian Religion; so as those who live under him may be instructed to a Good
and Pious Life suitable to the Rules of Christianity, (whose duty is more
particularly expressed in St. Paul's First Epistle to Tim. Cap. 3.) so that the
word Episcopus, as the Superior Order, was more generally used than any other
Title wherever Christianity was practiced; Yet other Titles were also used in
several parts of the World, as they did agree with the Idiom of their native
Language, viz. The Hebrews called their Bishop Princeps, Sacerdos, Patriarcha.
( Patriarcha was also applied to the Fathers or chief of every one of the 12
Tribes as upon a Civil account, so also upon the Ecclesiastic) The Syrians,
Presbyter, Pastor, Minister, and Curator animarum: The Arabians, Pastor, and
Observator animarum: The Aethiopians, Papa, Pastor, and Custos animarum: The
Graecians, Patriarcha, and Archiepiscopus, and Pastor animarum, (all which are
thus so rendered into Latin by Dr. Walton's Polyglotta from the Oriental
tongues;) so as the 4 chief Titles and the others having but one signification,
and those Titles dispersed into several Regions, every one using what they
thought fit in their own Territories, I shall only betake my self to Episcopus
and Papa, as having been used not only in Britain and Rome, but more
universally in most parts of the World, (unless we admit Presbyter from
Presbyter-Johns Country to be an Ecclesiastical Title) So having shown the
meaning of the word Bishop in general, the Antiquity of it is not to be past
over. The Jewish Graecians did use it in their Old Testament, for in Psalm. the
109.28. they read Episcopatum ejus accipiet alter, (which very Text St. Luke
cites in the First of the Acts v. 20. upon the Election of Matthias to be an
Apostle, (instead of Judas) viz. Let another take his Bishopric, which show
that the word was in use among the Graecians before Christ's time, and was no
new imposed word upon the Christians, but a compliance with Jewish Titles to
win the circumciz'd Jews in Greece; and this may be said, that though Rome did
change the name from Bishop to Patriarck, Archbishop, and Pope, which signifies
no more than Father or chief Father, yet Britain has been very constant to
the name of Bishop, and did not take upon it Archbishop till the Emperor
Constantius Chlorus or the Pope, thought it worthy of that Title.

6. In this Section I place Britain before Rome, because our Histories tell us
that Aristobulus was ordained Bishop of Britain, (and Joseph of Arimathea
there with him) 5 years before Linus, (the first Bishop of Rome was made Bishop
of Rome) and so now I shall take a short view of the Priority and Successions
in both places, relating to the subject of this Treatise.

Aristobulus is affirmed, as I said, to be the first Bishop of Britain, and
some few years before any Bishop was Constituted at Rome; but what the names
were of such Bishops as succeeded him, is uncertain; (for the reasons before
given) but the Story relates, That about an 100. years after Christ, one Lucius
was King of Britain, and was the first King of this Island who embraced the
Christian Religion. Whereupon he sent Damianus and Fugatius to Eleutherius,
then Pope of Rome; so it is very probable they were Bishops and Successors to
Aristobulus, and Instruments of the Kings Conversion; for none else could be
supposed to make attempts on the King, but such whose eminent Titles and
Employments did give them the more opportune admission; and doubtless these
were very considerable Persons, especially Damianus, whose very name continues
at Rome even to this day in great renown; for we find that at one time, a
Bishop was of that name, and at another time a Bishop Cardinal, and a Church is
still in Rome, (dedicated Sancto Cosmo, and Damiano) belonging to one of the 14
Deacon-Cardinals. These two Bishops, or at least eminent Persons, were sent to
Eleutherius, to confer about the ordering of the Church Affairs, and it seems
they did acquaint the Pope, (as appears by that Letter) that King Lucius had
the Old Testament, and the Writings of the Apostles, called the New Testament;
so that the Christian Doctrine being fixed here, there seemed nothing more to be
done, than to settle the Discipline, and the means for its support; wherein it
may be justly collected, that the King desired such concurrence with the Pope
of Rome, as might not disoblige him or the Roman Emperor Commodus, to whom he
was a Tributary, and with whom in all Civil matters this King stood then more
fair and quiet than his Predecessors had done before him.

7. I have given a brief account of the Managers of the Christian Religion in
Britain, from Aristobulus to Damianus and Fugatius, in the time of King
Lucius. I will now see what was done at Rome in that time, concerning which
their Histories tell us that Linus was the first Bishop, (who according to
computation, was 5 years after Aristobulus was Bishop of Britain) but St.
Jerome is as zealous to have St. Peter the first Bishop of Rome before Linus,
as Ireneus to have Linus the First, (two great Fathers of that Church) so that
if St. Peter be first, then we must account 13 to Eleutherius, (before named)
if Linus, then Eleutherius is the 12th. (and with this computation of Ireneus,
most Histories do agree) The first Eight of these Twelve had no other Title
than Bishop; till Eugenius the Ninth of that See, took upon him the name of
Papa or Pope, (and afterward Hildebrand called Gregory the 7th. challenged it
as his sole right to be called Pope) and so Eleutherius being the 4th. Pope
from Eugenius, and the 9th. in Succession from Linus, did return a kind Answer
to King Lucius, by two eminent Persons which the Pope also sent, viz. Helvanus
and Meduanus, and with them a Letter, which may be read at large, wherein in
the Pope takes notice that the Old and New Testament were then in Britain, and
in that Letter (leaving the ordering of Ecclesiastical affairs in Britain to
the King) declared him to be Christ's Vicar in his own Kingdom: which made King
Lucius go cheerfully on, and (as History tells us) that whereas the Archflamins
had been the chief Managers of the Pagan Religion in this Isle, (each having
one Province) the King reduced those Three Provinces to Two, and placed Two
Archbishops therein, and instead of the Flamins did constitute Bishops, and so
there was an amity between the Archbishops and Bishops of Britain, and the
Archbishops or Popes of Rome, neither of them struggling for Priority, but still
carrying on the work of Christianity.

But the Emperors of Rome declining in their power, and the Pope still taking
advantage of their declinations, grew at last so considerable with the
Emperors, that they could not safely deny them any thing; so that whereas the
Emperors of Rome formerly had the disposal of their Popes, and the Kings of
Britain of their Bishops, (and so other Princes in their Territories) the
Popes by degrees did take the power to themselves, to make what Bishops they
pleased, to summon Councils, make Decrees, distribute them, and enjoined
obedience to their Universal Jurisdiction, that the name of Pope might be the
more authentic.

It was used in many parts of the World besides Rome; for (it is said) that
about 300. years after Christ, Nestorius the Heretic had 6000. Bishops
appeared against him, which were under the Government of several Popes, and
this was above 300. years before Boniface the 3d. (Popes increasing as well as
Bishops) who obtained of Phocas then Emperor of Rome, that none should be
called Pope, but the Pope of Rome; and though Gregory (the first) his immediate
Predecessor, (but one) declared against it, and many Popes before him, yet
Boniface having obtained this Supremacy (what he did in other Kingdoms I shall
omit) in Britain, to make sure that none should be placed there, but such as
should be dependent on Rome; he confirmed Augustine a Monk the Archbishop of
Canterbury, (being made so by his said Predecessor Gregory) and soon after, he
and 4 succeeding Bonifaces filled up all the rest of the Bishoprics, with such
Foraigners or others as had a clear dependence on Rome, by Promotions,
Stipends, or Foreign Interests, (amongst the rest, Faelix a Burgundian was
made Bishop of Dunwich, in Suffolk, (the fifth Bishopric then in rank, of
which I shall speak more) and so in a few years after, all the Bishoprics
which were then, and soon after added, were filled up with his dependents, as
also all Abbeys, Priories, Monasteries, etc. and so continued to be supplied
according to his appointment from Rome without any material opposition by the
Kings of this Island, (but such as hereafter mentioned.) And having this Power,
it was no hard matter to fix themselves into all Councils within this Kingdom;
for in all Histories we find them as Actors therein, and in respect of their
Ecclesiastical Interests, one of the Estates; and when the name of Parliament
was given to our chief Council, they were methodically fixed in the second rank
of the Pawns, and so in the Clause Rolls: and this place in Parliament was
never denied them whilst they continued here. But the Pope's Power and
Supremacy over this Island was ever disgusted by our successive Kings; yet
being backed by so great a Temporal Prince (as the Pope of Rome) joined with
the Interest which by long continuance they had gained from the Emperors, the
Kings of this Island had little success in their struglings. For w^ see King
John tried it, to his co^^ by single oppositions, without the Kingdom's
unanimous Conjunctures. Aftewards Henry the Third began again, and other
succeeding Kings did try what Parliamentary or Municipal Laws could effect, and
to that end these following Laws were Enacted.

7. H. 3.
Henry the Third, Anno 9. cap. 33. (being part of the great Charter) that
Parliament did grant, That all Patrons of Abbeys which have the Kings Charters
of England of Advowson, or have old Tenure, or possession of the same, shall
have the custody of them when they fell void, as it has been accustomed, and
as it is before declared. See Coke Inst. 2.

Henry the Third, Anno 9. cap. 36. (being also part of the great Charter) the
Parliament did grant, That if any Man should hereafter give Lands to a
Religious House, the Grant shall be void, and the Land forfeit to the Lord of
the Fee, and in corroboration and Enlarging of this Statute many other Laws
were made 7 Ed. 1. and by 18 Ed. 3. and 15 R. 2. and 23 H. 4. called the
Statute of Mortmain.

Edward the First, Ed. 1.
Anno 35. cap. 1. made the Statute de Asportatis Religiosorum, wherein it is
declared, That the Monasteries, Priories and Religious Houses in this Realm
were founded by the King and his Progenitors, and by the Noblemen and their
Ancestors; and that no Abbot, etc. shall lay any Tax on any Religious House, to
send the same beyond Sea, or carry any Goods with them out of the Kingdom; and
that no Abbots (being Aliens) shall impose any Tax, etc.

Edward the Second, Anno 9. Enacted, Edw. 2.
That the King by his Letters may absolve Excommunications, where they were
made in prejudice of his Liberty or Prerogative; (to show the King's Power
above Ecclesiastic Censures of the Pope; and this may be of great Use.)

Edward the Third, Anno 25. Edw. 3.
That the King went on further by Act of Parliament, forbidding (under a
Praemunire) all applications to Rome for obtaining any Ecclesiastic
Preferments, or in Suing to the Court of Rome for Reversing any Judgments.

Richard the Second did back this Statute with several other Statutes, Rich. 2.
viz. in Anno 3. cap. 3. and Anno 7. cap. 12. and 15. and Anno 13. cap. 2, and
3. and Anno 16. cap. 2, and 5. and in these same Parliaments the Archbishop
protested against the Pope's Authority in England: And good reason for it, as
Sir Richard Baker in his History tells us, That about this time the Abbots,
Bishops, etc. which were placed here by the Pope, were so numerous, that it was
proposed to him by the Commons, that he would please with their Revenues to
make 150 Earls, 1500 Knights, 6200 Esquires, and Erect 200 Hospitals for
maintaining of maimed Soldiers, etc. But it seems he had not that Courage which
Henry the Eighth did after assume, and it was needless for one or two to oppose
his Power. However, H. 4.
Henry the Fourth went on, and in the Second and Seventh Years of his Reign,
made Acts against Purchasing of Bulls from the Pope, for Exemptions or
Benefices.

Also Henry the Fifth, H. 5.
Anno 5. cap. 4. made Acts against Provisors from the Pope; and all these
subject to a Praemunire.

In Henry the Sixth's time, H. 6.
the Bishop of Winchester, being made Cardinal, was admitted of the King's
Council, with this Protestation, That he should absent himself in all Affairs
and Councils wherein the Pope or See of Rome were concerned, (which he assented
to:) and also he Enacted, That no Alien should be a Broker.

That Priories and Aliens Lands should be seized in time of War.

That no Advowson, Presentation, Collation, or Induction, be made to any Alien
of any Benefice or Ecclesiastic Dignity.

That Aliens attending the Queen or King be removed and banished (except those
allowed by the Council.)

That Aliens should lodge only in Englishmens Houses; and to serve in War, if
able.

That no Priors be Collectors of Disms.

He also confirmed the Statutes against Provisions by the Sea of Rome.

In Edward the Fourth, Ed. 4. R. 3. H. 7.
Richard the Third, and Henry the Seventh's time, there was a Calm to that See;
none of the Laws repealed, but so slenderly used, that they made no great
impression at Rome; and though these and former Kings did strive to make their
respective Supremacies in Ecclesiastic Matters within their Dominions, and to
lessen the Pope's Power and Profit, yet none could substantially effect it,
till Henry the 8th, who seeing there was no other remedy, and that all Laws
against the Roman See were evaded, and other Essays fruitless, he fell to it
with right down Blows (which is the only way to master a good Fencer) as will
appear in this next Section.

8. Henry the Eighth did so contrive his matters, H. 8.
that he did first ingratiate himself with the Pope by writing (in defense of
the Church of Rome) a Book against Luther; which so affected the Pope, that he
immediately sent him a Bull; (which is in the same nature of a Patent with us)
and therein gave him the Title of Defensor Fidei; Anno 12.
which he accepted, and for three years, Anno 21, 22, 23.
viz. in the 21, 22, and 23 years of his Reign went plausibly on, by making
several Acts about Wills and Testaments, Mortuaries, and against Pluralities,
and Sanctuaries, and Deeds to Churches; but in the 24th he began to discover
his Opinion, Anno 24.
that though he was for the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, against Luther, yet
he had no mind to suffer his Kingdom to be exhausted for the Support of the
Court of Rome: whereupon an Act of Parliament was made against all Appeals to
Rome; Anno 25.
and the next year, Anno 25. That no First Fruits should be paid (as formerly,
out of this Kingdom) to Rome: And in another Act, That not any Imposition
should be laid on his Subjects by color of any Power from the Pope; and then,
to secure himself, and rivet his Subjects to him, an Act was made, declaring
his Title and his Successor's to the Crown: That being done, an Act of
Parliament was made, Anno 26. to entitle him Supreme Head of the Church of
England; and in the same year a positive Act, Anno 26.
That no First Fruits or Tenths should be paid out of any Promotions in
England, to the Pope of Rome.

In this time the King makes Archbishops, Bishops, Anno 27.
and Suffragans; and in the 27th year chooses sixteen Spiritual and 16 Temporal
Lords to settle the Canons for the Church of England, and erect an Office of
Augmentation: so, as having gained the two points of his Supremacy, in
opposition to the Church and Court of Rome, viz. Defensor Fidei and Supremum
Caput, one from the Pope himself, the other from the Parliament; and settled an
Office for his purpose: In the same year all Monasteries, etc. under 200 l. per
Annum, and all the Ornaments, Goods and Jewels belonging to those Houses, were
settled on him and his Heirs by Acts of Parliament. And four years after, viz.
31 H. 8. it was Enacted, Anno 31.
That the King and his Heirs should have all Monasteries, Abbeys, Priories, and
other Religious Houses dissolved, or to be dissolved, with their Manors,
Lands, etc. And yet it is observable, That in this very Parliament of 31 H. 8.
there were twenty Roman Bishops, twenty four Abbots, and two Priors, in all
forty six, and but forty four Temporal Lords, the Act for Precedence in the
House of Lords made the same year, being not (as I conceive) altogether for
regulating Precedencies, but for purging the Abbots, etc. by that Act of
Parliament; so as doubtless they lost their Interest more by the King's
resolution for expunging them, than by Vote of Parliament.

9. However, the Abbots, Priors, etc. being thus dissolved (their Baronies, by
which they did formerly there sit, being disposed of to other persons,) they
had no foundation to sit in the Lords House, which caused the first great
Alteration in the Method of the following Writs, for such as were to sit there,
(as will be further shown.)

And in this great Alteration, doubtless, there was also a Divine Hand; for as
Pope Boniface the Third (before mentioned) did put out all the English Bishops,
and placed Foreigners (his creatures) in their rooms, and made many more
Bishoprics than he found; so now, by the Lex Talionis (Like for Like) Henry
the Eighth did put out all the Pope's dependents, and placed such Bishops in
their rooms as would justify the King's Supremacy here, and renounce the
Pope's. And accordingly Bishop Bonner, Cranmer, Gardener, and others, (who
wrote against the Pope's Supremacy) were made, one an Archbishop, and the
others Bishops. And he also did erect six new Bishoprics, viz. Chester,
Gloucester, Peterborough, Bristol, Oxford, and Westminster, (which last, (after
one Bishop (...) was turned to a Deanary, as now (...) such of the Nobility and
Gentry tha^ (...) to his Resolutions, wanted not Lands and Manors to gratify
them.

So that, now he had the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in
Parliament, and the Kingdom it self on his side, and even the Nobility and
Gentry of England, who formerly were almost entire for the Popes Authority,
their Judgments were now split in two, some for the Court and some for the
Church of Rome; and so even the King and many of his Council did live and die
in that Persuasion. But he did not think himself safe in carrying on so great
an opposition as was like to be, (well knowing how the Papal Interest was
dispersed in all Kingdoms and States of Europe) till he had encouraged the
offspring of the Waldenses, and other opposers of Rome in France, Germany, and
in other Kingdoms and States, to revive their Doctrines, as also to embrace the
Lutherans Centum Gravamina, and the Calvinian Institutions, and others less
remarkable, (yet all serving to his purpose) whereby, in a few years after,
almost all Christendom was brought into a Papal and Antipapal Balance, or
rather consisted of Professors of the Roman Religion, and Protestors against
both the Court and Church of Rome, as Usurping and Antichristian.

10. But on the other side, the Pope seeing that he could not by forcible ways
withstand this almost universal desertion of him, he made his Applications to
several Kings and Princes for his assistance; And at last, by a more plausible
way, he did obtain a Council of Trent, wherein it is observable, That he did
not think fit to move in his Point of Supremacy, till after eighteen years,
that That Council had been sitting by Adjournments and Prorogations, and then
the Question was, That Episcopus Locum principalem teneret a Pontifice Romano
dependentem; to which the opposers did so far comply, that they allowed,
principalem Locum sub Romano Pontisice, but not dependentem; so, after that
Council had sat nineteen years, (in the sixth of Queen Elizabeth) it was
dissolved by 4 Legates, 20 Cardinals, 3 Patriarchs, 25 Archbishops, 168 Bishops,
7 Abbots, 39 Proctors, and 7 Regulars of General Orders, without Determining
that Point (to the satisfaction either of England or other Kingdoms and States)
the Dispute of which begot 7 Civil Wars in France (which lasted near 40 years,
till within 3 years of Queen Elizabeth's Death) also Inquisitions in Spain and
Flanders, Tumults and Wars in Germany, and near 40 years Wars in the
Netherlands between them and Spain, and for some few years, Fire, Fagots and
Insurrections in England.

11. In this Hurly Burly about Supremacy, H. 8. left his Crown to an Infant,
Edward the 6th; Ed. 6.
who had the Laws against Rome corroborated, and his Revenues augmented by
Chapels, Chantries, etc. enjoying them but few years; and then the Pope
revived fresh experiments by Queen, Mary.
Mary to reverse all, especially after she was Married to King Phillip,
compelling a submission to the Popes Supremacy by Fire and Fagots, so as, in H.
8. time and even till now (upon the sudden Changes of Religion it might be
said by the Historian) Deus bone hic suspenduntur Papistae, illic comburuntur
Antipapistae: but her time being short, the Supremacy was once more reverst,
and taken up by Queen Elizabeth, Eliz.
who managed it with such dexterity (considering the conjuncture of Affairs in
this and other Kingdoms and States) that it was needless for the Pope to make
any open Attempts, but by Marriages, Foreign Negotiations, and the assurances
given by some of the chiefest Nobility and Gentry of the Roman persuasion in
this Kingdom (who were, as they pretended, for the Church, and not for the
Court of Romes Supremacy) of their peaceable resolutions; the Billows of penal
Laws seemed to be calmed, and this Kingdom thought it self as secure, as the
pretty Halcion in her Nest.

But those who kept to Calvin's Institutions in England and Scotland, were
finely yoak't together to a disturbance; for it being insinuated to them That
the Title of Supreme Head of the Church (given by Act of Parliament) was
declined and dwindled into an etc. and that the Title of Defender of the Faith
(given by the Pope) did only remain with an etc. made them call to mind what
was alleged in the Council of Trent, That the original of Church Government
was Aristocratical, and Governed by a certain number of the Presbytery, and
afterward it was thought fit to put it into a Monarchical way, viz. by a
Bishop (as Superintendent;) and finding that the Popes and Kings of England and
other Princes, had long disputed about this Ecclesiastical Monarchy, without
determination (only in a connivance) they thought it convenient to return to
the Primitive way of Aristocracy, and set up Presbytery (that original
Government as was pretended,) and thereupon one and all cried against Bishops
(which bravely workt for the Papal interest;) and the clamor proved so geat
that the Learned King James did what he could by Writing to quiet them, and his
unfortunate, thought Blessed Son, King Charles the First tried it by Action,
but without Success. For the Independent, Anabaptist, Fifth Monarchy-Men and
others, coming into the Presbyters assistance, he was necessitated after the
Wars with Scotland upon the same grounds, amongst other condescentions to yield
(with the Consent of the Lords Temporal, 17. Car. 1.
and Commons) and pass an Act for Abolishing the Bishops temporal Jurisdiction
in this Kingdom.

Now see what followed; instead of making of Earls, Knights and Squires, and
maintaining of Hospitals, as was proposed to Richard the 2d. (as I said) the
Bishops were not only put out of the House of Lords, but the Temporal Lords
soon after, and the Knights and Squires secluded from the House of Commons, and
the Hospitals, (and all) ruined by an intestine Bloody War, the King
Sacrificed, and every one of the Machineers disappointed of their original
plausible intentions; and in conclusion, by most miraculous Turns in Assairs,
there was a total submission to a Reestablishment of that Form of Church and
State, which they had before so zealously overthrown, and the Bishops again
brought into the Lords House.

12. I should now proceed to the Writs, which empowered the Bishops to sit in
the Lords House: but first I think it pertinent to show how these two Titles,
of Fidei Defensor, and Caput Ecclesiae Anglicanae, were used, disused, and
altered in theirs and other Writs.

Though all the Kings of England, at their Coronation, are Sworn to defend the
Christian Faith, and the words defensionem Ecclesiae Anglicanae, having been in
most Parliament-Writs since the 11th of Edward the 3d. Yet the Pope (as I said,
for the good Service which Henry the 8. had done, in Writing against Luther)
sent him a Bull, and therein entitled him Defensor Fidei, with this Caution,
that it should be placed next his Title to France, and before his Title to
Ireland; and it may be observed, That in the same year he sent the like Bull to
the Emperor Charles the 5th. intituling him also Defensor Fidei; upon which the
Emperor took an Oath, not only to be Defensor Fidei, but Defensor Pontificiae
dignitatis, and Romanae Ecclesiae, i. e. Defender of the Court and Church of
Rome. But Henry the 8th, though he accepted the Title, did not think fit to be
bound by an Oath; nor do I find that he styled himself in any public Acts
Defensor Fidei, till the 2.1 of his Reign, and then in a Decree made in the
Star Chamber (which is Printed in Poltons Abridgment) he is Styled Defensor
Fidei, and in terra Ecclesiae Anglicanae and Hiberniae Supremum Caput, which
was 5 years before the Supremum Caput was settled by Act of Parliament; but as
a preparative to it in the 22 of his Reign he is styled Praepotentissimus and
Metuendissimus Angliae and Franciae Rex, and only Fidei Defensor is added, and
no mention of Supremum Caput. Then, in the 30 year of his Reign he is Styled,
Defender of the Faith, and Lord of Ireland, and on Earth Supreme Head,
immediately, under Christ, of the Church of England. In the 32. year he left
out the word immediately, and the next year the words under Christ. So that, in
the 33 of his Reign the Title was Hen. by the Grace of God King of England,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and of the Church of England, and
also of Ireland, on Earth Supreme Head. And thus by making himself King of
Ireland, he disobeyed the Pope, in placing Defender after Ireland; and this
Title continued thus all his Life, and the Circumscription on his Great Seal
wrote accordingly; and so did his Son, Edward the sixth, on His Great Seal, and
in Public Acts. And the like did Queen Mary in the first year of her Reign;
but upon her Marriage with King Philip, in the second year of her Reign, (and
first of both) their Title was King and Queen of England and France, Naples,
Jerusalem and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Princes of Spain and Cicily,
Archdukes of Austria, Duke of Milan, Burgundy and Brabant, Countess of
Hasburgh, Flanders and Tyroll, quite jostling out Supreme Head during their
Reigns.

When Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, the Circumscription of her Great Seal
was Elizabetha Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regina, Fidei
Defensor, yet she maintained both Titles of Defensor and Supreme during her
Reign.

When King James came to the Crown, the Circumscription of his Broad Seal was
also Jacobus Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex, Fidei
Defensor, and no more; yet he maintained the other Point both in his Government
and Writings, as may be read in his Praemonition to all Christian Monarchs, and
his Declaration against Vorstius, and his Defense of the Right of Kings against
Cardinal Perrone, and in several of his Speeches in Parliament, leaving men at
liberty, as Queen Elizabeth did, to use the Title of Supreme Head in their
Pulpits and Evidences as they thought fit; so as the learned Cambden in his
Dedication of his Britannia to King James, instead of Defensor, writes him
Propugnator Fidei.

When King Charles the First came to his Crown, the Circumscription of his
Great Seal was Carolus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae,
Fidei Defensor, and no more; yet to justify both Titles, in the seventeenth
year of his Reign he caused the 39 Articles (which were agreed on in the fourth
of Queen Elizabeth) to be reprinted, and in the Front did publish his own
Declaration in these words: Being by God's Ordinance, according to our just
Titles, Defender of the Faith, and Supreme Governor of the Church within these
Our Dominions, He therein declares, That the Articles of the Church of England,
allowed and authorized heretofore, do contain the Doctrine of the Church of
England, and requires his Subjects to continue in the uniform profession
thereof. And then, as to the Discipline he further declares himself Supreme
Governor of the Church of England, and that if any difference arise about the
external Policy concerning Injunctions, Cannons, or other Constitutions
whatsoever thereunto belonging, the Clergy in their Convocations is to order
and settle them, (having first obtained leave under his Majesty's Broad Seal so
to do) and he approving their said Ordinances and Constitutions. So here the
word Supreme Head is changed into Supreme Governor.

When King Charles the Second came to the Crown, the Circumscription of his
Broad Seal was Carolus Secundus Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and
Hiberniae Rex, Fidei Defensor, and no more; yet to justify both Titles, the
very same year of his Return, Anno 1660. he published a Declaration to all his
loving Subjects (well worth the reading) concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs,
which shows both his Christian condescension to his Subjects, and
Justifications to those two Titles for which he is styled by Writers Supreme
Moderator.

Now though in all Parliament-Writs which have come to my view, and in other
public Acts, and Writings since the first of Queen Elizabeth to this time,
after the words Defender of the Faith (except in their Broad Seals) there is
added only one etc. which I conceive was done for brevity, and must be
understood in relation to the Act of 36 Hen. 8. never yet repealed, and every
man had then and has still liberty in their Deeds or Pulpits to mention the
full Titles, but by degrees, about the year 1640. it began to cease in Pulpits,
and soon after in Pens, contenting themselves with the etc.

These and other matters (seeming trivial, though proving dangerous in the
consequences) were yielded to as condescentions to gratify a dissenting party
in England, who, very probably, were incited thereunto, by underworking Papal
Contrivers, (being excellent Artists in spurring on the least humor of Schism
in this Church) and so dealing in little things till greater were ripened, in
which latter they often made Attempts, as may be read in Queen Elizabeth, King
James, King Charles the First, and this present King's time (yet without
success) except in the Assassination of King Charles the first, which was
managed with such dexterity, that it was made difficult to judge whether some
of the English Dissenters in those times, or the Romish Incensors were the
chief Actors. And after that it was carried on by a subtle way of redeeming
their credits in this King's Preservation at Worcester, yet still underhand
endeavoring to subvert the whole Fabric of this Kingdom, as was discovered
about the end of this Parliament, 1678. (which determined my public
Employments, and therefore shall leave that Subject to other Pens.)

Thus the new Empire of Rome and the old Empire of England have strugled
through many Ages for Supremacy.

It is the Interest of England to be quiet within its own liquid Arms, and so
increase it self, with other Kingdoms and States, by a real mutual Traffic and
Commerce. But it is the Interest of Rome to be troublesome, and increase it
self in all Kingdoms and States, without any real commutation or advantage to
any but it self.

Yet it is difficult to make the Dissenters to the Church of England believe
that the way which they take in opposing Rome will in time be destructive to
their own Designs and Opinions. Some of the Dissenters to the Church of England
see and know this, yet are so inveigled by such Dissenters to the Court of Rome
(who pretend to be for that Church, but not for that Court) under a plausible
notion of Liberty, as may destroy that which they ought to maintain, viz. to
prevent the Inundation of Rome, whereby they bring it to this Question, Whether
they had better comply with a Foreign Interest, which they pretend to hate, or
their Native Interest, which they pretend to love; and whether they are not
like (by concurring with those pretended half Romanists, which they do in
effect, by opposing the English Constitutions) to fall into that which they
pretend to avoid. For these admitting one Error, are subject by those delusions
to strike upon greater, because they who now are only for the Church of Rome
against the Court, will undoubtedly (when they have gained their Proselytes) be
both for the Church and Court of Rome, when they have once the Dissenters of
the Church of England to be its Opposers; for Dissension mounts as naturally to
violent Opposition, as Conspiracies to Rebellion.

And now, craving pardon for this long digression, I shall proceed to the Writs
by which the Bishops have been anciently and still are Summoned to sit in
Parliament Cum Praelatis Magnatibus and Proceribus, giving this Hint, That
their Summons to Parliament were still in relation to their Baronies, and their
advancements to other Dignities as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, was and is in
respect of their great Learning, Knowledge, Fidelity and Experience in Affairs.

And now I shall set down the Form of their Writs of Summons both Ancient and
Modern.

SECT. XIII. The Form of the Exemplar Writ to the Archbishop of Canterbury, 15
Edw. 2.
EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae,
venerabili in Christo Patri Waltero eadem gratia Cantuarii Archiepiscopo,
totius Angliae Primati, Salutem.
Quia super diversis arduis negotiis nos, statum Regni nostri specialiter
tangentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Eborum a die Paschae proximo futuro in
tres septimanas teneri, and vobiscum and cum caeteris Praelatis magnatibus and
proceribus dicti Regni habere proponimus Colloquium tractatum Vobis Mandamus in
fide and dilectione quibus nobis tenemeni firmiter injungentes, quod dictis die
and loco omnibus aliis praetermissis personaliter intersitis ibidem nobiscum
and cum caeteris Praelatis Magnatibus and Proceribus supra dictis negotiis
tractaturi vestrumque Consilium impensuri, Praemonentes Priorem and Capellanum
Ecclesiae vestrae Cantuariae Archidiaconos totumque Clerum vestrae Diocesae
quod iidem Prior and Archidiaconus in propriis personis suis dictum Capellanum
per unum idemque clerum per duos procuratores idoneos plenam and sufficientem
potestatem ab ipsis Capellano and Clero habentes una vobiscum intersitis modis
omnibus tunc and ibidem ad faciendum and consentiendum hiis quae tunc and
ibidem de communi consilio (favente deo) ordinari contigerint super negotiis
antedictis. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis.

Test meipso apud Derby 10 Martii Anno Regni nostri quintodecimo.
Observations.
THe same reasons which guided me in the 3d. Chapter, to begin with a Writ in
Ed. 2d. time to a Prince of the Blood, induced me here also to begin with a
Writ of the same Date, from the same King to the Bishops; and here it may be
observed, that this is the first Writ in the Tower-Record, wherein the
Praemonentes are added to the Writ, for before this Writ (in respect of the
Bishops Baronies) their Writs were in the same Form, as to the Temporal Barons
(of which some are Cited by Mr. Pryn and others) but here such of the Clergy as
are therein mentioned, viz. Priors, Archdeacons, etc. were to be Forwarn'd,
Cited, or Summoned by the Bishops; and yet this Clause of the Praemonentes in
their Writs was not constantly used in aftertimes; for in some subsequent
Kings Reigns since this of Ed. 2. it is omitted; but very rarely. And so in
some Clause Rolls there are Exemplars to the Archbishop, but no Consimilars
mentioned; and likewise an Exemplar to some Temporal Lord, but no Consimilars
named, which doubtless was the Error of Clerks, for there are Sealed Writs of
both sorts, extant at such times as they were omitted in the Rolls. But from
Hen. 8. to this time, there is no material alteration from this Ancient Form;
Except in some few particulars, which will be shown in the following Writs.

SECT. XV. The First Writ in the Pettibag amongst the Pawns 21. Hen. 8. is to
Cardinal Wolsey Archbishop of York, viz.
HEnricus octavus Dei gratia Angliae and Franciae Rex Fidei Defensor and
Dominus Hiberniae. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri Thomae miseratione divina
tituli sanctae Cicilliae Trans-Tyburinae Sacrosanctae Romanae Ecclesiae
Presbytero Cardinali Archiepiscopo Eborum, Angliae Primati and Apostolicae ac
etiam de Latere Episcopo Wintoniensi nec non exempti Monasterii Sancti Albani
Commendatorio perpetuo Salutem. Quia de advisamento and assensu Concilii nostri
pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis nos statum and defensionem Regni
nostri Angliae and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus quoddam Parliamentum
nostrum apud Civitatem nostrum Londini tertio die Novembris proximo futuro
teneri ordinavimus, ac ibidem vobiscum ac cum caeteris Prelatis Magnatibus and
Proceribus dicti Regni nostri Colloquium habere and tractatum. Vobis sub fide
and dilectione quibus nobis tenemini firmiter injungendo mandamus quod
consideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate and periculis imminentibus cessante
excusatione quacunque, dictis die and loco personaliter intersitis nobiscum and
cum Praelatis Magnatibus and Proceribus praedictis super dictis negotiis
tractaturum vestrumque Concilium impensur' and hoc sicut nos and honorem
nostrum and salvationem and defensionem Regni and Ecclesiae supra praedictorum
expeditionemque dictorum negotiorum diligitis nullatenus omittatis Praemonentes
tam Decanum and Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae Ebor' quam Prior' and Capit'
Ecclesiae vestrae Wintoniae nec non Archidiaconum totumque Clerum vestrarum
diocesium praedictarum quod iidem Diaconus and Prior nec non Archidiaconi in
propriis personis suis ac utrumque Capitulorum praedictorum per unum idemque
Clerum per duos procuratores Idoneos plenam and sufficien' potestatem ab ipsis
Capitulis and Clero divisim habentes praedicto die and loco personaliter
interserint ad consentiendum hijs quae tunc ibidem de Communi Concilio dicti
Regni nostri (divina favente Clementia) contigerint ordinari. Test meipso apud
Westm' nono die Augusti Anno Regni nostri vicesimo primo.

Consimilia brevia dirigenda Archiepiscopo Canturiensi and Episcopis
subscriptis sub eadem dat' viz.

Reverendissimo in Christo Patri Gulielmo eadem gratia Archiepiscopo
Canturiensi totius Angliae Primati.

Cutberto Episcopo Londin. D. Johanni Episcopo Exon. D. Nicolao Episcopo Elien.
D. Johanni Episcopo Lincoln. D. Laurentio Episcopo Sarum. D. Johanni Episcopo
Carlilin. P. Johanni Episcopo Roffensi. P. Roulando Episcopo Coventry and
Lichffeldiae. Henrico Episcopo Assanensis. D. Georgio Episcopo Landavensis. D.
Thomae Episcopo Bangorensis. P. Gulielmo Episcopo Norwicae. P. Johanni Episcopo
Herefordiae. D. Roberto Episcopo Wintoniensis. D. Gulielmo Episcopo Bathon. and
Wellen. Roberto Episcopo Cecestriae. D. Custodi Spiritualitatis Episcopatus
Wigorn. ipso Episcopo in Remotis agente. Custodi Spiritualitatis Episcopatus
Dunelmensis ipsa feed vacant.
XX. in all.

SECT. XVI. Observations on this Writ to Cardinal Wolsey.
THis Writ, except the Title of it, is like that of Ed. 2d. yet I have thought
fit to enter it for some reasons particularly.

1st. For the Eminent nature of the Titles which this Cardinal ascribed to
himself, who had also tried several experiments to have been made Pope: and
probably the Passions of Hen. 8. and the Cardinals disappointments therein,
might hasten the dissolution of the Abbots, and other proceedings in order to
the lessening the Popes interest here; and this refusal of the Cardinal, may
justly give an occasion to say that the English have always had hard measure in
their Attempts therein; for though the Conclave have admitted above 50. English
men to be Cardinals, yet (it seems) their Policy has been not to admit of any
English man to be Pope (except one in our Henry 2. time) called Nicolas
Brakespear, who being Pope, Entitled himself Adrian the 4th.) so that from
Higynus's time there has been but one English man made Pope (unless Johannes
natione Anglicus, Gussarus.
officio Papa, Sexu Faemina quae sedet in Papatu An. 20. Men's. 6. who in
English we call Pope Joane) be allowed for one of the 246. Popes to this time,
yet the Pope has exercised the highest Jurisdiction here that England could
afford, which is a very Partial and unequal way of dealing.

2. The 2d. reason of Entering this Writ, is to show that the Archbishop of
York, was herein the Exemplar to the Archbishop of Canterbury, of which there
is no Precedent before; for the three Cardinals which were Archbishops, viz. in
the time of King John, Edward the 3d, and Hen. the 6th. were all three
Archbishops of Canterbury, so as this precedence must be attributed to the
Cardinals Dignity above all Archbishops, and not to any irregularity in placing
the Exemplar. And here it may be observed, that as the Title of Archbishop did
long since leap over the Title of Bishop, and the Titles of Patriarch and Pope,
over Archbishops, afterward, viz. Anno Christi 1099. when the Title of
Cardinal first began (by Pope Pascal the 2d. his institution) the Title being
raised by him, of certain Parochial Priests in Rome (of whom he had more
confidence) did in effect leap over all the Four other Degrees, and by it had
the sole power of Electing Popes, being under their management; so as the Pope
has only the Title left, and the 70 Cardinals the power of Electing him, in
which they are unwilling to admit of any English man, although if they did, he
would be so overballanc'd, that there were no great hazard of his Election. In
the mean time, the Conclave is so kind to its own Interest, as to appoint one
of those Cardinals to be Protector of England, he being at this day Styled,
Eminentissimus Dominus Franciscus Cardinalis Barbarinus Angliae Protector.

3. It may be observed that amongst many other Titles he Entitled himself
Presbyter, to gratify all interests.

4. Though H. 8. might entitle himself Fidei Defensor 8 years before this Writ,
yet this is the first Writ on Record wherein this Title is given; and this also
is the last Writ, that I find was sent to any Cardinal to sit in Parliament;
for though Cardinal Pool was Cardinal, and Archbishop of Canterbury in Queen
Mary's time; yet he had no Writ, either as Cardinal, or Archbishop, or both;
but the Exemplar was in that Parliament, to the Bishop of Winchester, and no
Writs to the Bishops of Canterbury, York, London, or Durham.

5. When this Writ was made, he was Lord Chancellor, yet it is not inserted in
the Writ, possibly because Sir Thomas More was in Prospect to be Lord
Chancellor, and was actually so before the Parliament met. And now having shown
the first Writ among the Pawns, I shall proceed to the Writs in the subsequent
Pawns, and then show the alteration of them.

The second Pawn or bundle of Writs extant in the Pettibag is of the 31 of Hen.
8th. wherein the first Writ is to Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury; and this
Writ also agrees with the former (except in the Titles) and with all the Writs
to Archbishops, from Edward the 2ds. time to this, as they are in the Clause
Rolls.

The third Pawn, or Record of Writs in the Pettibag, is of the 36 of Hen. 8th.
which is the remarkable Writ, because it differs from all the former Writs
since Ed. 2ds. time, both in the Titles and the Praemonition; for in this Writ
he is entitled King of Ireland, and Supreme Head; but before this, only Lord
of Ireland. Now as to the Title of King of Ireland, Hen. the 2d. did give the
same to his Son King John, but the Pope would not let him enjoy it; nor did any
of his Successors assume it, till Hen. the 8th. resolved to reassume it in
defiance of the Pope, and writ himself King of Ireland, instead of Lord of
Ireland; because, as I said in the former Section, he would not place the Title
of Defender, before Ireland, as the Pope had directed him in his Bull; or it
may be in respect the Pope pretended a Title under King John to Ireland; and as
for the other Title of Supreme Head, though it was given him by the Parliament
12 years before, yet I find it not in any Parliament Writ till this year of the
36. H. 8. So that the Preamble, or Titular part of the Writ is thus, Henricus
Dei gratia Angliae Franciae and Hiberniae Rex, fidei Defensor, and Ecclesiae
Anglicanae and Hiberniae Supremum Caput. Then for the Premonition, whereas the
words Priorem Capellanum or Capitulum were placed next unto Praemonentes; in
this Writ the words were Praemonentes Decanum and Capitulum, because Abbeys and
Priories were newly dissolved, and Deanaries Constituted and so the Writs thus
altered have continued till this Writ for the year 1661. But before I set down
the Writ for 1661, I must a little repeat some short progresses and methods
ushering in that Writ, for though the Bishops were in the year 1641. by an Act
of King Charles the First, with the Consent of the Lords Temporal, and Commons,
disabled from Exercising any Temporal Jurisdiction or Authority; and thereupon,
soon after put out of the Lords House (as I have shown) yet there was no
occasion of new Writs to them till the year 1661. and then there could be no
new Writs made for their Restoration, till they were restored by the same
power of King, Lords Temporal, and Commons, by repealing that Act; in order to
which the remnant of the Parliament of 1640 (which still continued in several
shapes) was by the Kings Consent dissolved, his Majesty appointing another to
begin in April 1660. So the 29th. of May 1660. he came successfully from beyond
Seas to confirm it, and this Parliament lasted till December following, in
which time, as Preparatories to the Bishops Introduction; provisions were made
for restoring Ministers who had been outed of their Livings, and also
Commissioners were appointed (who did sit accordingly) to compose the
differences which might arise between the Purchasers of the Bishops Lands and
the Bishop, wherein they used so great Lenity, that the Bishops did come into
their Temporalities; (with some satisfaction to both Interests) (after they had
been enjoyed by the Purchasers near Twenty Years) and in the same Month his
Majesty did also set out a Declaration before mentioned, concerning
Ecclesiastical Affairs; and after these Preparatories, that Parliament
consisting of the King, Lords Temporal, and Commons, being also Dissolved, as I
said, in December. His Majesty was pleased in February following, to Summon
another Parliament of the Lords Temporal, and Commons, to begin the Eighth of
May 1661. before which time, his Coronation was Solemnized, viz. the Twenty
third of April 1661. yet before the Ceremony was performed, he thought himself
obliged to take Care for the Bishops, (for many Ceremonies essential to his
Coronation were to be performed by them) and thereupon at a full Council in
Whitehall, the Tenth of April, this Order was made: ORdered by his Majesty,
That the Lord Chancellor do forthwith give directions to the Clerk of the
Crown, to draw up Writs of Summons to pass his Majesty's Great Seal, directed
to the most Reverend Father in God, William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Accepted Lord Bishop of York, for Convocation of the Lords, Bishops, Deans,
Archdeacons, and the Clergy of their respective Provinces in usual Form.

Accordingly, the Parliament met the said Eighth of May 1661. and did sit till
the Thirtieth of July, where amongst other Acts, one did pass for Repealing the
Act of Abolishing Bishops, and Restoring them to their Estates, Dignities, and
Places; and so the Parliament Adjourned to the Twentieth of November following;
after which Adjournment, upon the Twenty ninth of August following, the Writs
which were ordered the Tenth of April aforesaid, did pass under the Great Seal,
and were distributed, so as the Twentieth of November 1661. they did take their
places in the House of Lords, and have continued so to do during this
Parliament; and notwithstanding this long deprivation, (wherein the King
himself, the Temporal Lords, and the chief of the Commons were Sharers) they
may be said to be in the House of Lords upon an Interest of Right, though the
Interest of Form in their Introduction was wanting, that Act of Abolition being
partly Authentic, and partly not, (for Acts of Parliament are good Absente
Clero, though not Excluso Clero,) and so next I shall show the Exemplar Writ,
as it is entered in the Crown Office, (for it was too late to enter it amongst
the Deposits or Pawns in the Pettibag.)

SECT. XX. The Form of the Writ to the Archbishop of Canterbury the 29th. of
Aug. 1661.
REx
Reverendissimo in Christo Patri praedilecto and fideli Conciliario nostro
Gulielmo eadem gratia Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi totius Angliae Primat' and
Metropolitano Salutem.
Quia de Advisamento and Assensu Concilii nostri pro quibusdam arduis and
urgentibus negotiis nos Statum and defensionem Regni nostri Angliae and
Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernen' quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem
nostram Westm' octavo die Maii praeterito teneri ordinavimus and ibidem
nobiscum cum caeteris Praelat' Magnatibus and proceribus dicti Regni nostri
Colloquium habere and tractare Vobis in fide and dilectione quibus nobis
tenemini rogando Mandamus quod consideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate and
periculis imminentibus Cessante excusatione quacunq' dictis die and loco
personalit' intersitis nobiscum ac cum Praelatis Magnatibus and Proceribus
praedictis super dictis negotiis tractatur' vestrumque Concilium impensur' and
hoc sicut nos and honorem nostrum ac Salvationem and defensionem Regni and
Ecclesiae praedict' Expeditionemque dictorum negotiorum diligetis nullatenus
omittatis Praemontes Decanum and Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae Cantuariae ac
Archidiaconos totumque Clerum vestrae Diocesis quod idem Decan' and
Archidiaconi in propriis personis suis ac dictum Capitulum per unum idemq'
Clerum per duos procuratores idoneos plenam and sufficientem potestatem ab
ipsis Capitulis and Clero divisim habentes praedictis die and loco personaliter
interfuerint ad consentiendum hiis quae tunc ibidem de Communi Concilio dicti
Regni nostri divina favente Clementia contigerint ordinari

Test meipso apud Westm' vicesimo nono Augusti Anno Regni nostri 13. Annoque
Dom. 1661.
SECT. XXI. Consimilia Brevia dirigenda.
TO the Archbishop of York; Reverendissimo Accepted Archiepiscopo Eborum
Angliae Primati, (leaving out Totius before Angliae) as in the former.

To each of the other Bishops Reverendo, etc. as they are entered in the
Memorials of the Chancery Crown Office in this following order.

Reverendo Gilberto Johanni Briano Gulielmo Roberto Gulielmo Johanni Mattheo
Henrico Humphrido Georgio Roberto Georgio Gulielmo Benjamino Hugoni Richardo
Briano Johanni Gilberto Edwardo Gulielmo Nicolao

Episcopo Londini Dunelmensis Wincestriae Bathon and Wells Oxoniae Bangor
Ruffensis Eliensis Cicestriae Sarum Worcestriae Lincolniae St. Asaph St. David's
Burgi Petri Llandaff Carlioniae Cestriae Exoniae Bristoll Norwici Glocestriae
Herefordiae

Vulgo Durham Rochester Chichester Salisbury Minuensis Peterborough Carlisle
Exeter
All these Writs dated 29. Aug. 1661. except the last.

Johanni Episcopo Lichfeildiae and Coventriae Jan. 30. 1662.

There is also the Bishop of Man Island, but in respect he has no Writ to sit
in the Lords House, I have not entered him.

Note, That except the two Archbishops and the Bishops of London, Durham, and
Winchester, whose Precedencies are settled by the Act of 33. H. 8. all the other
Bishops are entered into the Pawns according to the dates of their Consecrations.

SECT. XXII. Observations on the Writ.
UPon comparing the Writ of Edw. the Second, with the middle Writ of 21th. of
Hen. the Eighth, and the Writ of the 13. Car. Secundi, these follow-Particulars
may be observed.

First, The Titles of several Kings in their Writs, as well to the Lords
Temporal as Spiritual, have varied according to the Successive Kings Increase
or Decrease of their Dominions, but more remarkably in Hen. the Eighths time,
relating to the Clergy (as I have shown.)

Secondly, All Writs concerning Bishops, from Edward the Seconds time and
before, to the 13. of Car. Secundi inclusive, were directed to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, as the Exemplar Writ, in respect of his Dignity, except where
any Cardinal was a Bishop of England, or the Popes Vicar General, or that the Sea of Canterbury was void, or that a Bishop was Chancellor; and then the
Exemplar Writ was directed to that Bishop, and to neither of the Archbishops;
or if both Archbishopricks were void, then to the Bishop of London.

Thirdly, The Exemplar and Consimilar Writs to Bishops, have been generally
placed in the Clause-Rolls, and in all the Pawns extant before any Degrees,
except Princes of the Blood, though their places in the Lords House are
otherwise.

Fourthly, Sometimes the Writ to the Archbishop was without any Epethit to his
Christian name; but the Epithet of the most constant Application was Venerabili
Archiepiscopo, and the like to Bishops; but in Hen. the Eighths time it was
altered, Reverendissimo to Archbishops, and Reverendo to Bishops.

Fifthly, Also an other Title is usually in the Bishops Writs; as in the Writs
to the Lords Temporal, viz. Praedilecto and fideli Conciliario, which is not in
the ancient Writ; but of late it is entered as an addition to such as are of the
Kings Privy Council, whereof the Bishop of Canterbury is for the most part one.

Sixthly, In the 36. of Henry the Eighth, the Writ is, Primati and
Metropolitano, which latter word was not extant till that Writ.

Seventhly, In the latter Writs, the words de advisamento and assensu Concilii
nostri, are entered, which are not in the old Waits, and some other words which
are in the Dukes Writ, and not in the old Writs, as may be observed in the
Figures which I have placed in that Writ.

Eighthly, And in the Mandamus, instead of Firmiter injungentes to the Temporal
Lords, the Writs to the Bishops are Rogando Mandamus; and instead of Fide and
ligeantia to the Temporal Lords, it is, In side and dilectione to the Lords
Spiritual; so that to the word Praemonentes, the Writs both to the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal do agree, as well in the Originals, as Alterations,
except in those particulars before named.

Ninthly, From the word Praemonentes in the Writ, there is a greater Latitude
of power granted to the Lords Spiritual, than to the Lords Temporal; for the
Lords Temporal are not empowered by their Writs to Summon the Laity, (who sit in
the House of Commons as Representatives of the Commonalty) but the Lords
Spiritual are empowered by their Writs, to Summon Deacons, Archdeans, and
Proctors to attend the Parliament, (as Representatives of the Clergy) who being
met at places appointed, (distinct from the House of Lords, or House of
Commons) those places where they meet, have the Titles of Convocations; the
Bishops making the upper Convocation, the Representatives of the Clergy, the
lower; Suting to those two of the Laity; one called sometimes, the House of
Lords or Peers, or upper House, the other sometimes the House of Commons, or
lower House.

The General Writs for this Parliament were dated (as I have shown) the 18th.
of Febr. 1661. to meet the 8th. of May 1661. but the Writs to the Bishops were
not dated, till the 29. of August following; yet by these Writs, they are
appointed to meet (die and loco) at the day and place, viz. on the Eighth of
May, and at Westminster, as in the General Writs; so as the latter Writs seem
to command an Impossibility; but this is to be understood in a
Parliament-sence, viz. That the first day of the Meeting of a Parliament,
continues to the end of a Session, or Prorogation, and is accounted but as one
day, for an Adjournment is but the continuance of that day; and a passing of
Acts upon an Adjournment (as in this case) was not a determining the Session,
because they were passed by way of Proviso, That it should not thereby
discontinue the Parliament; so that the Bishops being admitted before any
Session of determining the Parliament, or before any Prorogation of it; it is
to be esteemed in a Parliament-sence, (as I said) as one day. And so it is in
Law; where a Sum is due the Eighth of May, payable at Westminster, and not paid
till the 29. of August, and then paid in London, and then accepted by the
Creditor; it does bar all breaches or punctilios in Law or Equity, between the
Creditor and Debtor.

Besides, If a Parliament continues some Months without Adjournments or
Prorogations, in which time many Members of both Houses Dye, so as there is a
necessity to send out Writs for a Supply of Members; if the Writs should not
issue in a certain Form, with respect to a certain day, though past, it would
produce many inconveniences, attending the Discretion or Indiscretion of
Clerks who are to form such Writs; and therefore all Writs though after
Prorogations, though many years subsequent, have still reference to the first
day of the Parliament, as will be further shown; for it has been the Wisdom of
Parliaments to admit of no variation in that point.

Next, As to the place of Meeting; the Bishops are Summoned to meet Cum
Praelatis Magnatibus and proceribus, at Westminster, which the Bishops do as to
their Co-Interest in the House of Lords; but in relation to the inferior
Clergy, the Bishops do meet at Westminster, and sometimes Adjourn to such
places out of Westminster, as the Archbishop or his Vicar appoints; which
before the Fire in 1666. was at the Convocation-House on the South Side of St.
Paul's Church in London, but since, in Westminster-Abby. The Bishops in all this
Parliament sit in Henry the Sevenths Chapel, (as the upper Convocation) the
Deans, etc. in St. Benedicts Chapel, on the North-side of the Abbey; (as the
lower Convocation) so as they have distinct Houses or Places from the House of
Lords, and House of Commons, as also distinct days of meeting; but always after
the Parliament first meets; and so of sitting some days after any Adjournment,
or Prorogation, or Dissolution, which is appointed beyond the Lords or Commons,
as will be shown in the Chapter of Convocations.

11. Concerning the alteration of Priorem. into Decanum, I have given an
account.

12. Instead of favente deo the later Writs say, favente divina clementia.

13. In the old Writs the year of Christ is not added, for it was more than 300
years after Christ, before the Computation was used; but in the later Writs it
is not omitted.

14. Till about the year 855. there was not above 16 Bishoprics, and then they
increased to 19 and 21, and in Hen. 8. time to 26, and so they have continued
ever since; but in all times there have been several Transplacings, and
Transmutations; so as the names of the Bishoprics of Dorchester, Dunwich,
Haglested, Sydnacester, and Leicester, Landasfirm, Selsy, Sherborn, Chester in
Durham, Crediton, and St. Petrocks, 10 in all, are utterly lost and drowned in
the now remaining 26 Bishoprics.

15. The Bishops being men well Educated, in all Sciences Divine and humane,
were still employed by our Successive Kings, as well in matters Temporal, as
Spiritual; for I find that of 153 Chancellors, and Keepers of the Great-Seal
(from William the Conquerours time) there have been 62 Archbishops, and Bishops
employed in these Offices; and from the first Institution of Treasurer (in
William the 2d's. time to Ed. the 4ths. time) there have been 42. Archbishops
and Bishops, Treasurers, but from Ed. the 4th's. to this time, no Bishop has
been Treasurer, except William Archbishop of Canterbury, in Charles the 1sts.
time, then Bishop of London; they have been also Chief Justices, etc. But for
other Offices, in respect I find them not mentioned in any of their Writs of
Summons to Parliaments, as additional Titles: I shall not make any further
inquiries; but indeed anciently most of the Judicial Offices in the Kingdom or
State, were under the Care, and Management of the Clergy; and therefore the
Chancellor, Treasurer, Privy Seal, etc. were called Clerici, or Clerks, as a
distinction from the Laity. And being men generally of the greatest Knowledge
and Learning, were thereupon chosen into Offices of the highest nature.

16. That though for many Ages before the end of Hen. the 8th's. Reign) the
Bishops were then of the Roman Religion, yet whenever they had the least
encouragement from the present Kings of England (and sometimes without it) they
still opposed the Superintendency, and Supremacy both of the Church and Court
of Rome (as to the Dominions of the respective Kings of England) protesting
that the same was a destruction of the Realm, and Crown of England, which has
always (said they) been Free, and has no earthly Sovereignty, but only God in
all Regalities, as may be seen in the Parliament Rolls of Rich. 2d, Hen. the
6th. and in other Kings Reigns, and since Hen. the 8th. the Bishops and Clergy
under them, have been almost the only Bulwark against the Storms, and
Encroachments of Rome upon us.

17. It appears by a long concatenation of Records that they have had these
various Titles of Honor, viz. in the Latin Records Archiepiscopi, and
Episcopi, Praelati, Pares, and in such Records as are writ in French or
English, Archevesque and Evesque Archbishops, Bishops, Prelates, Peers, Grantz,
Grandees, or Great ones, in distinction of the Lesser Peers, or House of
Commons (of which I shall speak more) also Seigniors singly, and Signiors du
Parliament, also Lords, and Lords Spiritual, and Barons claiming only a Vital
Feudal, Tenurial, and not Nobilitated Peerage, in distinction of the Lords
Temporal, whose Peerage is Personal, Hereditary, and Nobilitated.

18. Though they absent themselves from the House of Lords upon Trials of
blood, yet it was, and is still in obedience to the morality of the Canon-Laws;
for though those Canon-Laws were practiced in times of Popery, yet the
reasonableness, and conscientiousness of that Law still continues; and now we
are free from the bondage of Popery, the Protestant Bishops still think
themselves obliged to it, as the Papal Bishops were before, like the 4th.
Commandment, which still morally obliges Us, as formerly it did the Jews; yet
where they do absent themselves in Cases of blood, it is done by leaving Proxy,
or protestation of their Right of Sitting, etc.

19. And lastly it may be very well observed, though their influence and
Interest (upon a Spiritual, and Temporal account) is spread over this whole
Kingdom, their Revenues great; and thereby their Tenants, Officiates, and
Dependents very numerous; yet I do not find in Histories, that the Bishops of
England did ever raise an Army, to justify their interest against any of our
Kings, or against the other two Estates, of Lords Temporal, or Commons, by
Sword, or Force; but still supported it by their Pen, or Prayers.

20. Thus I have given an account of the Managers of Religion in this Island;
and of the Writs, whereby they were Summoned to Parliaments; and of other great
employments wherein they have been entrusted, of a mixed nature, part Civil, and
part Ecclesiastic; and both tending to Religious Duties. I should now proceed
to the Writs which concern Abbots and Priors, which till the 36. Hen. 8. were
ever entered next the Bishops in the Clause-Rolls, and Pawns; but there having
been no Writs directed to them since the said 36. of H. the 8th. (except two in
Queen Mary's time; one to the Abbot of Westminster, the other to the Prior of
St. John's of Jerusalem) I shall follow the Method of the Pawns, since the said
36th. year, referring the Discourse of them to the Chapter of Dissolutions; and
here proceed to the third Exemplar Writ, viz. to the Lord Chancellor, being the
first Officer of State, and Principal Assistant, and now annexed to a Barony,
and after to his Title of Earl, as will be shown.

CHAP. VIII. The Third Exemplar of the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper.
AMongst the Romans this great Officer was called Actuarius, Scriba, Notarius,
Principis praesentis Vicarius, and Cancellarius; and so it came into France,
and amongst the Saxons it had the name of Referendarius; but in England we do
not find this Title of Chancellor, till the first of King John An. 1199 (though
Lambert, and others derive it from Edward the Confessors time. This Officer
continued in so high an esteem, that in the 5th. of Richard the 2d. The Commons
in Parliament in their Exhibits to the King, desired that the most wise and
able man in the Realm might be chosen Chancellor, which made Budaeus (one of
Hen. the 8ths. Orators) to give this Description, Hunc (says he) rerum omnium
cognitione, omni Doctrinarum virtutumque genere instructissimum and
ornatissimum, ingenioque ad omnia versatili, omnia in numerato habere oportere
fatendum est.

This Description is also to be applied to the Keeper of the Great Seal, which
invention of a public Seal, as it was more ancient with the Romans, so it
seems to be very ancient with us in England, (that Office being Constituted by
William the Conqueror in the Year 1067.) and for the honor of both, (as it is
shown in this Section) Geffrey a Natural Son to Hen. the Second was Chancellor,
and the Queen to Henry the Third was Keeper of the Seal.

2. These two Offices were sometimes kept distinct, and sometimes united in one
Person, till the Fifth of Queen Eliz. and then it was Enacted, That both those
Offices should be accounted but as one and the same, and that hereafter both
should not be used at one time by distinct Persons.

3. Whilst they were distinct, they had two Seals; the Chancellors was of Gold,
and the Keepers of Silver; the Court esteemed Officina Regis, and the Seal,
Clavis Regni; but whenever they were either united, or distinctly executed,
still this high Office was managed by Archbishops or Bishops, or by the most
eminent Laics for Learning, Integrity, and Abilities, as may be seen by
comparing the History of them with their Catalogues.

4. To manifest their Eminency, it is evident from the Rolls, that in the
opening of all Parliaments, the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper, did constantly,
by the Command of the King, show them the reasons of Summoning them, (unless in
a Vacancy, or on a special account of Absence, and then it was performed by one
of the Chief Justices.

5. But to pass these, (being more fully shown in my Annotations) I do not find
in any of the Clause-Rolls, or in the Pettibag-Pawns, that a Chancellor or
Keeper had any distinct Writs of Summons to a Parliament, till the 28. of Eliz.
(when Sir Tho. Bromley Knt. being the Queens Solicitor, was made Lord
Chancellor, and Summoned by a distinct Writ, in the same Form as is hereafter
set down, which very Form has continued ever since. And in the 35. of Eliz.
Sir John Puckering being but Sergeant at Law, was made Custos Sigilli, and had
a particular Writ of Summons to that Parliament; and in the 39. of Eliz. Sir
Tho. Egerton Knt. being then Master of the Rolls, was made Custos Sigilli, and
had this assisting Writ of Summons for that Parliament; and the like in the 43.
of her Reign; and so in the 21. of King James; and in the First of Caroli
Primi, particular assisting Writs were sent to the Bishop of Lincoln, in these
words: Reverendo in Christo Patri praedilecto and fideli Consiliario nostro
Joanni Episcopo Lincolniae magni sigilli Angliae Custodi: So as he had this
Writ as an assisting Writ, and another Writ virtute Baroniae.

6. It may here be observed, that this was the only Bishop that was either
Keeper or Chancellor, from the First of Eliz. to this time; whereas before
Queen Eliz. for the most part Bishops or Ecclesiastics did execute those
Offices; but whenever it was conferred upon the Laics, choice was made out of
the most eminent Families; as in the 26. of Hen. the Second, (as I said)
Gessrey, Natural Son to Henry the Second, was made Chancellor; and in the 15th.
of King John, Ralph de Nevile was made Keeper of the Great Seal; and in 22. of
Henry the Third, Geffrey a Templer, and John de Lexington, were made Keepers of
the Great Seal; and in the 37. of his Reign, his Queen, upon the Kings going
into Gascoine, (which is remarkable, as I said) had the Custody of the Great
Seal; and in the 45. of that Ring, Walter de Merton was made Chancellor; and in
the 49. of that King, Thomas de Cantilupe was made Chancellor; and in the 53.
Richard de Middleton made Custos Sigilli; and in the 56. John de Kirkley, and
Peter de Winton, made Keepers of the Seal; and in the 2. of Edward the Third,
Henry de Bughersh made Chancellor. In the 14. of Edw. the Third, John de St.
Paul made Keeper of the Seal; in the same year, Sir Robert Burgtheire Knt. made
Chancellor and Keeper of the Seals; and the like in the 15th. to Robert
Parning, and in the 17th. to Robert de Sadington, and in the 19th. to John de
Offord, and in the 20. to John de Thoresby. In the Records of the same year, it
is said that Sir Lionel Duke of Clarence, the Kings Son, (then Lord Keeper of
England) gave Command by Proclamation, That no Arms should be worn sitting that
Parliament; (whose name is omitted in the Catalogue of the Lord Keepers, by Mr.
Seldom in his Discourse of the Office of Chancellor and Keeper) and in the 45.
to Sir Robert Thorpe, and in the 46. to John Knivet; and in the 2. of Rich. the
Second, to Sir Le Scroop; and in the 6. of Rich. 2. to Sir Michael de la Pool;
and in the 11. of Hen. 4. to Sir Thomas Beaufort; and in the 32. H. 6. Richard
Earl of Salisbury was made Chancellor singly; and in the 21. of Hen. the
Eighth, Sir Thomas Moor Knt. made Chancellor and Keeper; and in the 24. of Hen.
the Eightht, Thomas Audley made Chancellor and Keeper; and in the 36. Hen. 8.
Thomas Lord Wriothesly made Chancellor and Keeper; and in the First of Edw. the
Sixth, Sir William Pawlet Knt. Lord St. John of Basing, made Keeper; and in the
same year, Sir Richard Rich made Chancellor; and in the First of Eliz. Sir
Nicholas Bacon Keeper; and the 21. Thomas Bromley Chancellor, who continued so
to the 28. of her Reign, and was the first that I find, (as is before
mentioned) that had a particular Writ of Assistance; and though in the
Fourteenth of King James, Sir Francis Bacon was Keeper, (in the Eighteenth of
Jac. Henry Viscount Mandevile, Lord President of the Council, and Lodowick Duke
of Richmond, William Earl of Pembroke, Sir Julius Caesar, had jointly the
Custody of the Great Seal; and in the first Car. 1. Sir Thomas Coventry; and in
the 16. Car. 1. Sir Edw. Littleton; and 21. Car. 1. Sir Rich. Lane, were
Keepers of the Great Seal) yet we find no particular Writs in the Pettibag
directed to any, but such as I have before mentioned, and to these which
follow, viz. in 15. Car. 1. Sir John Finch Knt. Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas was made Custos Sigilli, and had a particular Writ of Summons to
attend that Parliament.

7. As to this Writ of 13. Car. 2. of which I am to treat, it is to be observed
that the Warrant (before mentioned) sent to Sir Edward Hyde Knt. and
Chancellor, to empower him to send out Writs, was directed in these words, To
our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Counselor, Sir Edward Hyde Knt. Chancellor
of England; but in his Latin Writ of Assistance, the words are, Praedilecto
and perquam fideli Consiliario suo Edwardo Domino Hyde Cancellario suo Angliae:
leaving out Militi or Equiti aurato, and putting in Domino; and the reason of
this variation (as I conceive) was, That the Warrant was agreed on by the King
and Council before the Third of November, at which time he was Baron of Hindon;
and therefore in the Warrant he is named only Sir Edward Hyde Knt. but in the
Writ, Domino Hyde, which is the Adjunct Title of a Baron, as he then was; and I
find before the Parliament met, he was created Viscount Cornbury and Earl of
Clarendon, and thereupon had another Writ in relation to those Dignities, which
was entered in the Pawn, and the entry dated the 12th. of April before the
Parliament met, and in the latter Writ he had also his additional Titles; so
that I observe, that if the Chancellor or Keeper be above the Degree of a
Baron, he has his Writ according to his Degree, and therein only intimating
his Chancellorship or Keepership, (as is before shown in the 36. of Hen. the
Eighth. 1 Mariae, etc. But if he be not a Baron, then he has this Assisting
Writ, Quatenus Chancellor or Keeper, as may be seen in the former Precedents,
from the 28. of Eliz. to this Writ of 13. Car. 2. If he be a Baron, as I said,
he has or may require a Baronial Writ besides this Assisting Writ; The form of
his Assisting Exemplar Writ is as follows: the other will be seen among the
Barons.

SECT. VIII. The Form of the Assisting Writ to the Lord Chancellor or Lord
Keeper.
CArolus Secundus Dei Gratia Angliae Scotiae Franciae and Hiberniae Rex fidei
defensor, etc.
Praedilecto and perquam fideli Conciliario suo Edwardo Domino Hide Cancellario
suo Angliae salutem
Quia de advisamento and Assensu Concilii nostri pro quibusdam arduis and
urgentibus negotiis nos statum and defensionem regni nostri Angliae and
Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem
nostrum Westmonasterium octavo die Maii proxime futuro teneri ordinavimus and
ibidem voibscum ac cum (...) Proceribus dicti ^^egm nostri (...) habere and
^^actatum. Vobis Mand^^^^ firmitur (...) quod (...) aliis praetermissis (...)
personaliter intersitis nobiscum ac cum caeteris de Concisio nostro super
dictis negotiis tractatur' vestrumque Consilium impensur' and hoc nullatenus
omittatis Test apud Westmonasterium decimo octavo die Februarii Anno Regni suo
decimo tertio.

Grimston.

SECT. IX. Observations on this Writ.
FIrst I shall show how it differs from the Writs to the Nobles; Secondly, How
it differs from the Writs to the other Assistants. First, It differs from the
Writs to Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, in these particulars.

First, To Dukes and Marquesses, the Writ is directed Praecharissimo
Consanguineo, to Earls and Viscounts, Charissimo Consanguineo, to Barons,
Praedilecto and fideli; and to Assistants only dilecto and fideli, but this
Writ is directed as to a Baron, viz. Predilecto and perquam fideli, yet the
body of the Writ differs from the Barons; the word perquam is added to fideli,
being in no other former Writs, but is a proper word to express our English
Right Trusty; and here it may not be improperly hinted, that in English
Superscriptions, Right Trusty is placed before Well-beloved, but in Latin
Well-beloved, (or Praedilecto) is before Right Trusty, or Perquam Fideli.

Secondly, The words Sub fide and ligeantia, are in the Lords Writs next to
Vobis Mandamus, but in all the Assisting Writs, those words are omitted;
probably because in former times, the Assistants had not Tenures, but only
knowledge of the Laws which occasioned them to be sent for by Writ Pro Concilio.

Thirdly, The words (Consideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate and periculis
imminentibus cessante excusatione quacunque) in the Lords Writs) are left out
in the Assistants Writs, and instead thereof, (omnibus aliis praetermissis) are
inserted. In the Mandatory part of the Writ, the words in the Writ are (ac cum
caeteris de Concilio nostro) instead of (ac cum Magnatibus praedictis) which is
the chief distinction between the Peers and the Assistants.

Fourthly, In this part also of the Writ, the Words are only in short, and hoc
nullatenus omittatis, but in the Lords Writs, (and hoc sicut nos and honorem
nostrum ac Salvationem regni and Ecclesiae praedictae expeditionemque dictorum
negotiorum diligitis) their Lordships being more eminently concerned in the
Kingdoms Interests.

Fifthly, In all the Pawns extant, and in most of the Clause-Rolls, (after the
Exemplar Writ of every Degree or Quality is named,) these words are added,
Consimilia dirigenda; but there is no Consimilar directed to this Writ, and
although the Master of the Rolls is an Officer very little differing in many
things from the Office of the Chancellor or Keeper, yet his Writ is made a
Consimilar to the chief Justice of the Kings Bench his Writ, and not to the
Lord Chancellor; the Lord Chancellor standing Exemplar without any Consimilar,
(and there are but Two of the same nature in all the Pawns, from the 36. of
Hen. the Eighth to this time, viz. That to Chester and to Lancashire, as will
be shown in their order) the true reasons thereof are (as I conceive;)

1st. That this Officer is of so transcendent a nature, that a Consimilar
thereunto were improper, because the Original Warrant for issuing out Writs (as
is before recited) is made from the King only to the Lord Chancellor or Lord
Keeper, and the like Warrant not to any others of the Assisting Degrees.

2dly. His Lordship usually, and in most Cases, is necessarily the chief
Minister of of State.

3dly. He is the Supreme Assistant of all the Assistants in the House of Lords;
for he is not only Lord Chancellor and Assistant, but of late years constantly
Speaker of that House.

4thly. His Grandeur is such that he has four places in the Lords House, one
behind the King of Scots-Chair, the other next to the Dukes of the Blood, the
third on the first Woolsack, 4thly. at the Table (as will be shown) whereas
each of the other Assistants have but one single place, different from those
provided for the fixed Nobility (as will be shown in the Local part.)

6. I cannot conclude this Chapter better, than from Sir John Davy (an Eminent
Lawyer, in his Epistle to his Excellent Reports) who Describes a Chancellor in
these words, Says he, Is he not ad Latus Principis, to attend him?
Auricularius Principis, to advise him? Does not the King make him the Conduit
of his Wisdom, when he uses his Voice, and Tongue to declare his Royal
pleasure? Does he not make him the Organ of his goodness, when he trusts him
with his Mercy, and Conscience in sweetning the bitter waters of summum jus,
and in mitigating the rigor of Law to his people? Does he not represent
Reverentiam Principis in the Power and Authority of his Office? In a word, if
the greatest honors do belong to the greatest virtues (for what is honor but
a reflection and reward of virtues) How virtuous a person must he be, with what
Gifts and Graces, with what Abilities, with what Ornaments, both of Art and
Nature must he be endowed and furnished? viz. with all Learning, Law, Policy,
Morality, and especially Eloquence to impart and Communicate all the rest: he
must withal have a long, and universal experience in all the Affairs of the
Commonwealth; he must be acceptable and absolute in all points of Gravity,
Constancy, Wisdom, Temperance, Courage, Justice, Piety, Integrity, and all
other virtues fit for Magistracy and Government; yet so as the same be seasoned
with Affability, Gentleness, Humanity, Courtesy, without descending or
diminishing himself, but still retaining his Dignity, State, and Honor.
Briefly, he must be a person of such virtue and worthiness (that not only his
Writ may be exemplar to other Assistants) but his Life, and Conversation a
Mirror, and Example to all Magistrates.

7. He performs all matters which appertains to a Speaker of that House,
whereby he may be said to be the Eye, Ear and Tongue of that great Assembly.

8. He is the Inlarger, Explainer, Interpreter, or Pronouncer of the Kings
Commands or Pleasure; and that which is further observable, of 72. Officers
under his Jurisdiction, more than 44. of them are employed in Parliament
concerns; either upon its Summoning, or during its Sitting; (as will be shown
in my Annotations) And as his Warrant is the second Warrant that gives life to
a Parliament, and vivacity to its continuance by Sessions and Recesses; so he
gives the second Fiat to its Dissolution: he has also an appartment near the
Lords House (as will be shown) for himself to retire to, and for his Sergeant
at Arms and others of his Attendants.

Thus having considered the Lord Bishops and Lord Chancellors Writs, I must
observe how exquisitely and harmoniously these two Degrees are interposed;
(both in their sitting in the Lords House, and in the method of their Writs in
Pawns, and in the Act of Precedence) being placed in all of them between the
first and second Rank of the Lords Temporal: (as it were) to show that the
Lords Temporal are always to embrace and maintain Religion and Equity, as the
two chief Supporters of a Parliament.

I have spoken of the first Supporters to Religion and Equity, viz. Princes of
the Blood: and now I shall speak of the other Supporters, ( viz. the Nobles not
of the Blood, distinctly five Titles, viz. Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts,
and Barons) but more especially of their Writs which Summon them to sit in
Parliament, which will guide me into several observations.

CHAP. IX. Of the Fourth Exemplar Writ to the Nobles not of the Bloud-Royal; To
the Lord-Treasurer, etc.
IN the Eighth Chapter I showed the Exemplar Writs to Princes, Dukes, and Earls
of the Bloud-Royal; I am now according to the method of this Pawn, to show the
Exemplar Writs to Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and Barons not of the Blood. I
shall begin with that in Anno 1661. being agreeable to that Exemplar (before
recited) to the Dukes of the Blood, from the word (Salutem) to the end of the
Writ; but the Preambles to that word do afford variety almost in all Writs, and
therefore before I make the Observation upon it, I shall give a view of the
Writ at large (being only abbreviated in the Pawn.)

CArolus Secundus Dei Gratia Angliae Scotiae Franciae and Hiberniae Rex fidei
defensor, etc.
Praecharissimo Consanguineo suo Thomae Comiti Southampton Thesaurario Angliae
Salutem
Quia de Advisamento and assensu Concilii nostri pro quibusdam arduis and
urgentibus negotiis nos statum and defensionem regni nostri Angliae and
Ecclesiae 'Anglicanae concernen' Quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem
nostram Westm' 8. die Maii prox futur' teneri ordinavimus ac ibidem vobiscum ac
cum Magnatibus and Proceribus dicti Regni nostri, Colloquium habere and
tractatum, vobis sub fide and ligeantia quibus nobis tenemini firmiter
injungendo mandamus Quod consideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate and
periculis imminentibus cessante excusatione quacunque dictis die and loco
personaliter intersitis nobiscum ac cum Magnatibus and Proceribus praedictis
supra dictis negotiis tractatur' vestrumque Concilium impensur' Et hoc sicut
Nos and honorem nostrum ac Salvationem and defensionem Regni and Ecclesiae
praedictae expeditionem; dictorum negotiorum diligitis nullatenus omittatis.

Test Rege apud Westm' 18. die Febr. Anno Regni nostri 13.
SECT. II. Observations.
1. ALl Parliamentary Exemplar Writs of this nature which are extant from the
15. of Edward the Second, to the 21. of Henry the Eighth, if they were not
directed to some one of the Heirs of the Crown, or to Princes, Dukes, or Earls
of the Blood, were still directed to an Earl not of the Blood, (except Three to
Three Dukes in Henry the Sixths, and Edward the Fourths time) it being evident
from what has been said, That Earls, called in Latin Comites, was a more
ancient Title in this Kingdom, than Dukes; ( Richard the Eldest Son to Edw. the
Third, being the first that was so created) but Earls long before; and though
Edward the Third did create many Dukes more than his Son, which were of the
Blood; yet still to keep the old Title of Earl, and in veneration thereof, (as
may be supposed) he in the Forty Seventh of his Reign did think sit, as the
King usually appoints the Sword to such a Person as he directs to carry it
before him) to grant the Exemplar Writ to an Earl not of the Blood, for the
Parliament to be holden that year, and so did his Successor, as may be seen in
this following Table, viz.

47. Edw. 3. Richardo Comiti Arundel, who sat one Parliament.

18. Rich. 2. Henrico Comiti Darby, who sat one Parliament.

3. Hen. 5. Radulpho Nevile Comiti Westmerland, and the like Writ in the same
year, so he sat two Prrliaments.

7. Hen. 5. Henrico Percey, Comiti Northumbr. and the like in the same year,
and in the Eighth and Ninth of this King, and Twelfth of Hen. 6. so he sat five
Parliaments; (note that the Christian names and Sirnames of Nevile and Percey
are in this Writ, which is not usual to Earls, only the Christian names.

The three Exemplars to Dukes not of the Blood are in time subsequent to Earls;
for the first Exemplar to a Duke was not till,

28 H. 6. Gulielmo Duci Suffolciae, who sat one Parliament.

38 H. 6. Henrico Duci Oxoniae, who sat one Parliament.

1 Edw. 4. The third Johanni Norfolciae, and the like in the same year, so he
sat two Parliaments.

And then after these Three Dukes, again to an Earl, viz.

3 Edw. 4. Richardo Comiti Warwick, who sat one Parliament; so from the 47. of
Edw. 3. to Rich. the 3. there was Eight not of the Blood, viz. Five Earls and
Three Dukes, who had Exemplars.

From Richard the Third to the 21. of Hen. 8. there is (as I have shown) a want
of Records in the Tower; so as the first Exemplar that appears to us in the
Pettibag, of such as had Exemplar Writs being not of the Blood, do begin at the
36. of H. 8. viz.

36 Hen. 8. Thomae Wriothsley Militi Domino Wriothsley Cancellario, he sat one
Parliament, and was the year before made Baron of Titchfield, and in the first
of Edw. 6. Earl of Southampton.

1 Edw. 6. Gulielmo Pawlet Militi Domino Senescallo magni hospitii nostri ac
Praesidenti Concilii nec non Custodi magni Sigilli: He was then Lord St. John
of Bazing, and afterward created Marquess of Wincester.

6 Edw. 6. Gulielmo Marchioni Winchester, Thesaurario Angliae, ( Thomas
Goodrick Bishop of Ely being Chancellor, and had his distinct Writ) this
Marquess had his several Writs, viz. in the 6 of Edw. 6. and 7 of Edw. 6. and 1
Mariae, and 1 M. 1. and 2 Phil. and M. and 2 and 3 P. and M. and 4 and 5 P. and
M. (in which time the Bishops of Ely, Winchester, and Archbishop of York were
Lord Chancellors and had distinct Writs, it being not proper for them, being
Lords Spiritual, to be Exemplars to the Lords Temporal;) besides he was
Exemplar in the 28. 30. 35. 39. and 43. of Eliz. and Primo Jacobi, (in which
time Sir Thomas Bromley, and Sir Christopher Hatton were Lord Chancellors, and
Sir John Puckering, and Sir Thomas Egerton LordKeepers, and each of them had
distinct Writs) so as it is remarkable, that this William Lord Pawlet Marquess
of Winchester was Exemplar in all the Parliament Pawns which are extant in the
Pettibag, from the first of Edw. the Sixth, to the first of King James
inclusive, which is 55. years, and was in that time Lord Treasurer 22. years,
which was longer than any of his Predecessors continued in that Office, except
Cicil, who continued 27. years.)

1 Car. 1. Georgio Duci Buckingham, for one Parliament, (Sir Thomas Coventry
being then Lord Keeper, and had a distinct Writ, and Sir Richard Weston
Treasurer, who was then in Scotland.)

15 Car. 1. Johanni Marchioni Winchester, for one Parliament (Sir John Finch
being then Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and had a distinct Writ) also Will.
Bishop of London was Lord Treasurer, and had his Writ.

13 Car. 2. Thomae Comiti Southampton, for this Parliament, (Sir Edward Hyde
being then Lord Chancellor, and had his distinct Writ) this Earl was Grandchild
to that Wriotheslly mentioned in the 36. of Hen. 8. and died without Issue
Anno. 166 --

So from the 36. of H. 8. to this Parliament of the 13. of Car. 2. there were
three Exemplars, to Three Barons, (Two of them being Chancellors, and one Lord
Keeper) and to Two Marquesses, to one Duke, and to one Earl; (and all these not
of the Blood) Now as to the three Barons having Exemplars, (which Degree had
not any before the 36. H. 8.) it may be presumed that the Exemplars were given
them in relation to their Offices, as Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, or
President of the Kings Council.

And as to the two Marquesses having Exemplars, (who had not any till the 6. of
Edw. 6.) one was as he was Treasurer, and the other in the 15. of Car. 1. only
as Marquess, because there was no Duke Summoned to that Parliament; (and Sir
John Finch was then Lord Keeper, and William Bishop of London Lord Treasurer,
and both had distinct Writs;) so there was none of the three great Officers of
State remaining to be Exemplars, except Henry Earl of Manchester, then Lord
Privy Seal, who according to the forementioned Act of Precedence is placed in
the Lords House before all Dukes, Marquesses, etc. (not of the Blood) but I
suppose, because there was no President wherein the Lord Privy Seal had been
Exemplar since its first Institution in the 11. of Hen. 4. and being not called
Lord Privy Seal, nor that place in the Lords House allotted to him, till the
31. H. 8. possibly for those reasons it was not given to the Lord Privy Seal,
but to the Marquess singly, or else it was an omission in not minding the Act
of Precedence.

These latter Writs from the 36. of Hen. 8. did seem to break the method of the
former; for before that Pawn of that year, no Dukes or Marquesses were made
Consimilars, where an Earl was made Exemplar; but in the Exemplar of the 36. H.
8. Wriothesly Earl of Southampton was made Exemplar, and the Duke of Norfolk
then Lord Treasurer of England, (and Charles Duke of Suffolk the Great Master
of the Kings Household, and President of the Council, were (besides the Marquess
of Dorchester, and Thirteen Earls, and Twenty eight Barons) made his
Consimilars, so as the precedence of his Exemplarity must be ascribed to his
Chancellorship, which according to the Act of Precedence was to be before all
Dukes, etc. (not of the Blood;) and upon the same reason, Pawlet Lord St. John
in the first Edw. 6. being then Lord Keeper, had the Exemplar Writ, and the
Duke of Somerset (though the Kings Uncle) Governor of the Kings Person, and
Protector of England, (as also the Marquess of Dorchester, and Marquess of
Northampton, and Thirteen Earls and Thirty Barons) were his Consimilars, which
is the only President (which I know of) where the Lord Chancellor or Lord
Keeper had the Exemplar to a Duke of the Blood; and upon the like reason, as (I
conceive in the 6 of Ed. the 6. William Marquess of Winchester, being Lord
Treasurer, (the next in Precedence to the Lord Chancellor, by the Act of 31. H.
8.) had the Exemplar to two Dukes, one Marquess, Fourteen Earls, One Viscount,
and Thirty one Barons, all which were his Consimilars: and it is probable the
reason why this Exemplar was given to the Treasurer and not to the Chancellor,
was, because Thomas Goodrick Bishop of Ely was then Lord Chancellor; and so it
was not proper for that Bishop to be Exemplar, for the reasons before alleged.

Now in the first Car. primi, Thomas Coventry being Lord Keeper, and having a
distinct Writ, the Duke of Buckingham had the Exemplar, who had one Marquess,
Thirty seven Earls, Eleven Viscounts, and Forty seven Barons to his
Consimilars.

Also in the 15. Car. 1. John Marquess of Winchester (Son to the former
Marquess of Winchester) was made Exemplar, (Sir John Finch being Lord Keeper,
who had a distinct Writ, (and William Bishop of London being in Scotland) but
he had no Duke or other Marquess, but Fifty eight Earls, Five Viscounts, and
Forty four Barons his Consimilars, and so reduced the proper Consimilars to its
former method.

But the 14. Car. 2. Thomas Wriothesly Earl of Southampton Lord Treasurer
(Grandchild to the former Earl of Southampton) altered it again: (there being
now also a distinct Writ to Sir Edward Hyde Lord Chancellor) for this Earl had
three Dukes, (one being General) Four Marquesses, Fifty five Earls, Eight
Viscounts, and Sixty eight Barons his Consimilars; (I conceive as Lord
Treasurer) for according to ancient Practice, (as I have shown) an Earl had not
any Dukes entered as his Consimilars.

The number of all the Exemplar Writs extant, from the 15. of Edw. the 2d. in
An. 1322. to the 13. of Car. 2di. An. 1661. are but Twenty, and but Fourteen
Kings from whom they were granted; The number of the Parliaments in which the
Nobles did Sit, to whom such Exemplars were issued, were 107. and these 107.
Parliaments were in the space of 341. Years.

As concerning the years when these Exemplars were first issued to the
respective degrees of Nobles before mentioned, they are in this order of time.

15 Edw. 2. This first Exemplar Writ, as I have shown, was to an Earl, and
(...) was of the Blood, viz. to Edward (...) of Chester, Eldest Son to Edw. 2.
and ^^^ter King Edw. the 3d. for there was then no Duke in England.

3 Edw. 3. The first Exemplar Writ to a Prince of the Blood, was to the same
Earl being then made Prince of Wales.

37 Edw. 3. The first Exemplar Writ to a Duke of the Blood was not till this
year, though the first Duke in England (distinct from that of Earl, (as Mr.
Seldom says) was the Eleventh of Edw. 3d. and then Edward the Kings Eldest Son
was in Parliament created Duke of Cornwall; (yet Speed in his Chronicle of Edw.
3d. makes this Creation in the 3d of Edw. 3d. when (says he) he was created
Prince of Wales, Duke of Aquitain and Cornwall, which agrees with the Records
of the Tower, and therefore I conceive there is some mistake in Mr. Seldom) but
however the mistake be, the first Exemplar Writ to a Duke was not till this
year; for though Edward Prince of Wales was Duke in the Third or Eleventh year
of his Father, and Thomas Earl of Norfolk soon after was created Duke of
Norfolk, and Henry Earl of Lancaster soon after created Duke of Lancaster, yet
they had not any Exemplar Writs as Dukes, but before as Earls; so as John Duke
of Lancaster in this Parliament of the 37. Edw. the 3d. was the first Duke
which had an Exemplar Writ.

47 Edw. 3. As I have shown the first Exemplar to an Earl of the Blood, so this
shows the first Exemplar to an Earl not of the Blood, which was this year to
Richard Earl of Arundel; for though there were many Earls before not of the
Blood, yet they had only Consimilar Writs, but no Exemplars extant to any of
them till this Year.

28 H. 6. And though there were many Dukes not of the Blood since the first
Creation of that Title, yet the first Duke not of the Blood who was thought fit
to be an Exemplar, was not till this Parliament, and the Predecessor of this
Duke was an Earl in Edw. 3ds. time, and even this Duke was Earl in the time of
his Predecessors, before any Duke was created.

6 Edw. 6. Though the first Marquess (created in England) was in the 9th. of
Rich. 2d. yet none were thought fit to be Exemplars, till this 6. of Edw. the
6th. that William Marquess of Winchester was made the first Exemplar in
Parliament of that Dignity, but his Exemplar had the additional Title of Lord
Treasurer, who is the second Officer of State.

36 H. 8. Although a Baron is a more ancient Title with us in England, than any
of the other Degrees of the Nobles, yet we find no Record now extant, wherein a
Baron, singly as Baron, had the Exemplar Writ; for (as I said) Thomas
Wriothesly Baron of Tichfield being Chancellor, William Pawlet Baron of Bazing
being Lord Keeper, were Exemplars in those Parliaments, and had Consimilars
appointed them; but Edward Hyde Baron of Hindon having a distinct Assisting
Writ, had no Consimilar allotted him, either in respect of his Barony or
Assistancy.

Thus we find that Earls, Dukes, Marquesses and Barons have been Exemplars, but
we do not find any Viscounts to be so in any Parliament since the creation of
that Dignity, which was (as I said) in Hen. 6ths. time to John de Beaumont.

And the reason is, because the word Vicecomes does imply a Consimilar to
Comes, so it were improper for Comites to be Consimilars to a Vicecomiti.

Concerning the additionals of the Titles to those Nobles mentioned in their
Exemplars, it may be observed, That in all those Writs to Hen. the 8ths. time,
the words Consanguineo Charissimo Praedilecto Dilecto and Fideli, were not so
positively sixth to the several Degrees in their Writs, but since that time they
have past in a more constant method, viz. to Dukes and Marquesses,
Praecharissimo Consanguineo; to Earls and Viscounts, Charissimo Consanguineo;
to Barons, Praedilecto and Fideli; and to the Lord Chancellor as chief
Assistant, Praedilecto and perquam Fideli; but to all the other Assistants, of
which I shall speak more, only Dilecto and Fideli.

SECT. III. Observations on the Consimilars to the former Exemplars.
WHen Princes of the Blood were made Exemplars, there was ever some Prince of
the Blood in the Consimilars, and then followed in the same Register in every
Clause-Roll or Pawn, the other Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts and Barons,
without interposition of the Lords Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, to the Princes
of the Blood, and the Temporal Lords not of the Blood; so it continued in that
method till the 21. of King James, but then the Exemplar (being to the Prince
of Wales, and no Consimilar to him, there follows the Exemplar and Consimilars
to the Lords Spiritual, (of which I have spoken) and after them follows the
particular Writ to John Bishop of Lincoln, as Lord Keeper, and after that, the
Exemplar to Lodowick Duke of Richmond, who had one Duke, one Marquess, Thirty
eight Earls, nine Viscounts, and Forty seven Chevaliers his Consimilars, and
ever since the 21. Jac. there has been an interposition either of the Lords
Spiritual or Lord Chancellor between the Dukes of the Blood and the Nobles that
were not of the Blood; and so in the 13 Car. 2. though the Bishops were
deprived from that Roll, (as I have shown) yet the Lord Chancellors Writ did
interpose; and it may further be observed, That when Princes or Dukes of the
Blood, or not of the Blood, were Exemplars, other Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
Viscounts and Barons were Consimilars; but when Earls were Exemplars, there
were no other Consimilars admitted of Degrees above them, but still under them,
viz. of Earls, Viscounts and Barons; and yet when the three Dukes
beforementioned were made Exemplars, it is true the Duke of Suffolk and Oxford
had Dukes to their Consimilars, as formerly; (being pari gradu) but the Duke of
Norfolk had no Duke to his Consimilar, for he had only four Earls, one
Viscount, and Thirty one Barons, of which there is no other precedent that I
can find.

2. As to the different Titles of these six Degrees, viz. Princes of the Blood,
Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts and Barons, of whom I have spoke more in
the Fifth Chapter; it is fit to be hinted here, that Prince in English, and
Principi in the Latin Writ, Duke and Duci, Marquess and Marchioni, Viscount and
Vicecomiti, have little difference in their Orthography; but Comiti in all
their Latin Writs, and Earl (which is their general appellation in English)
have very great difference; concerning which and the other Degrees I have writ
more at large before, and in my Annotations, to which I refer the Reader; and
so Baron and Baro have but little variation, yet this may be observed here of
this Title Baro, that in all the Consimilar Writs in Clause Rolls or Pawns
wherein those of that Degree are enumerated from the 15th. of Edw. 2d. to the
13. of Car. 2. neither the Titles or words Baro, nor of Banerettus are
mentioned in the Writs; but either the Articles De or Le or La, or the words
Dominus, Miles, Equies Auratus, or Chevalier are added to the Barons name, viz.
Hugo de Spencer, Johanni de Bello Campo, Johanni de St. John de Bazing, Roberto
de Monte albo, Johanni de Sancto amando, Willielmo de la Souch de mortuo mare,
Nicolao de Cantilupo le Quint, Johanni de Insula de rubro monte, Nicolao de
Sancto Mauro, Michaeli de la Pool, (who was then Banneret) Admirallo Maris,
Johanni de Moubray Mariscallo.

Petro de malo lacu le Quint, Hugo de le Spencer, Willielmo la Zouch de mortuo
mare, Johanni le Strange, Johanni le Shelton, and many more, and some only in
their Christian names and Sirnames, viz. Richardo Gray, Richardo Talbot,
Gulielmo Aincourt, Richardo Percey, Johanni Fitzwater, Radulpho Dacres, yet
these were all Barons or Bannerets, though the Title of Baroni was not in their
respective Writs.

3. Thus they continued without any other adjuncts to their names (than what I
have mentioned) till the first of Richard the Second, and then Willielmo de
Morley, Willielmo de Alborough, Hugo de Dacres were writ Chevaliers; (amongst
48. others that were Entitled as before) After, in the 7th. of Rich. the 2d.
William Botereaux was brought in, and with the other Three written Chevaliers;
and in the second Parliament of that year, that Title of Chevalier increased to
three more, viz. Johanni Falsely, Henry le Scroop, and Thomae Camois Chevaliers;
so there were then seven Chevaliers in all, the rest of the Barons being then
Forty five, were Entitled as before, and so they continued, not exceeding
nine Chevaliers, till the third of H. 6. and for that Parliament there were but
twenty Barons Summoned, whereof eleven were Styled Chevaliers; and in the
fourth of his Reign, all the Barons but two were Styled Chevaliers; and in the
sixth year, all the Barons were Styled Chevaliers; and so to the Twenty third,
wherein all the Barons were written Chevaliers except Thomas de Scales Miles,
(who was then Lord Scalds) and Dominus de Molins, so here came in Dominus for a
Baron; and in the Twenty fifth, there were Twenty six Chevaliers, whereof two
Styled Milites, and three Domini; in the Twenty seventh Henry Percey is Writ
Militi and Domino, and some others, which shows that the words Militi, Domino,
and Chevalier, having Writs to Sit in the Lords House, had one Denotation of a
Baron; and in the third of Edw. 4. almost all the Barons are written Domini and
Chevaliers jointly, yet in the end of these Consimilars, it is writ in the
Record, Milites omnes, except Audley and Clinton, and so in the 3d. of Ed. 4.
all are Chevaliers, but in the Postscript is, Equites aurati omnes praeter
Dominum Scales, by which must be understood, that all the rest which were
Summoned to those Parliaments, and their names not entered in those Rolls, were
Milites or Equites Aurati: Except Audley, Clinton, and Scales, which latter in
the Record of the 23d. of Hen. 6. before mentioned, is written Miles, which
shows there was a distinction then between Miles and Eques Auratus (as may be
seen in Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor) and so in the 7th. and 12. 22. and 23d.
of Ed. 4. all Chevaliers, but two Milites, which do argue some distinction,
though all intended to signify a Baron.

Then passing over other Records to the 21. of Hen. 8. all the Barons are
styled Chevaliers; but in the 36. Hen. 8. the words Domini, and Chevaliers are
mixed, and so they continued to the 28. of Eliz. and then all the Barons are
writ Chevaliers, and so have continued to this time singly, with that Title of
Chevaliers in all their Writs, without adding Dominus miles, or Eques Auratus.

Though the Title of Baro for Baron is not used in these Parliament Writs, no
more is Bannerettus or Banneret; yet it is as evident, that as Dominus does
signify a Baron, so the word Miles and Chevalier did signify a Knight
Banneret, and so I presume it was originally intended. For by comparing the
Writ in the 8th. of Rich. 2d. to William Botereaux, with the Writ to him in the
15th. of Rich. 2d. where in one he is called Chevalier, in the other Miles; it
may be presumed that the Titles are one and the same, the words Chevalier and
Miles being so interchangeably used, and sometimes jointly, yet either being
applicable to Denote a Baron or Banneret.

8. This Identity of Chevalier and Banneret, may be evident from the Writ to
the Sheriff of Surry (hereafter transcribed) Cited by the Learned Mr. Seldom,
where Thomas Camois (beforementioned) sometimes Styled Chevalier, sometimes
Miles (for brevity omitting Bannerettus (being then Lord Camois or Baron) and
being chosen Knight of the Shire for that County to serve in Parliament in the
8th. of Rich. 2. the Sheriff was commanded by this Writ, to make an Election of
another Knight for that County, because his place was in the Lords-House as a
Banneret; which Writ he sets down in these following words.

The Writ to the Sheriff of Surry 8. Rich. the 2d. concerning Thomas Camois
Banneret, his being Elected Knight of the Shire.
REx
Vic' Surr' Salutem
Quia ut accepimus tu Thomam Camois Chevalier qui Bannerettus est sicut quam
plures Antecessorum suorum extiterint ad essendum unum militem venientium ad
proximum Parliamentum nostrum pro Comunitate Comitatus predicti de assensu
ejusdem Comitatus Elegisti Nos advertentes quod hujusmodi Banneretti ante haec
tempora in militis Comitatus ratione alicujus Parliamenti eligi minime
consueverunt ipsum de Officio Militis ad dictum Parliamentum pro Communitate
Comitatus predicti ventur' Exonerari volumus Et Ideo tibi precipimus quod
quendam alium militem idoneum and discretum gladio cinctum loco ipsius Thomae
eligi and eum ad diem and Locum Parliamenti predicti venire facias cum plena
and sufficien' potestate ad consentiend'hijs quae in Parliamento predicto fient
juxta tenorem primi Brevis nostri tibi pro electione hujusmodi milit' directi
and nomen ejus nobis scire facias.

Test Rege apud Westm' octavo die Octobris septimo Regis. 8. R. 2.

Accordingly the Parliament did sit the 3d. of March, and Thomas Camois in the
Lords House: but that which Mr. Seldom observes in this Writ is, that this is
not to be understood of any other Banneret than a Parliament Baron, or a
Banneret of that time. The expressing of hujusmodi Bannoretti shows, that it is
not meant of all Bannerets, but such only as have the Title, either by
inheritance, or in such a kind, that an inheritance might be of it, which is
apparent also by the precedent words in the Writ; Bannerettus est sicut quam
plures Antecessorum suorum extiterint, for it was never conceived, that the
Title of Banneret as it denotes a Knight-Banneret was ever hereditary.

However, another Knight for Surry was Chosen; and this Thomas Camois being
Lord Thomas Camois, did sit that Parliament in the Lords House, as his
Ancestors had done; for I find, that in the 15th. of Ed. 2d, and 4th. of Ed.
3d. Radulphus Camois was Summoned by Writs, and did sit in those two
Parliaments; but I find none in 54 years after, viz. till the 7th. of Rich. 2d.
and then that name continued in 37 successive Parliaments, viz. to the 8th. of
Hen. 6. as may be seen in the Records. I shall make no further use of this Writ
here, than that of the words, Thomas Camois Chevalier qui est Bannerettus, do
make it clear, that Banneret was denoted by the word Chevalier, and that that
word Chevalier amongst the Lords did show the difference between Banneret and
an Ancient or Hereditary Baron. Now in respect it is evident that the Title of
Banneret was first brought into use for some meritorious action, in bearing,
preserving, or retaking the Kings Banner in time of War; whereupon he received
the honor of Knight Banneret, and thereupon as an additional honor was also
thought worthy to sit amongst the hereditary Barons; and in respect many
Martial exploits were about that time done in France (the word Chevalier being
borrowed from the French Tongue) came into so great repute, that such as did
merit it, did justly Challenge it, and those of less merit did Covet it, and by
mere interest and favor obtained it, and so by degrees (as I have formerly
shown the word Chevalier upon the account of merit or favor, did swallow up
the other Titles; and in process of time, and favor of Kings, it grew to be
fixed and hereditary, which was intended at first but Titulary and Temporary,
which has been the fate of most of our Titles of Honor.

Thus having dispatched the BreviaClausa, or Close Writs of Summons, to the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal before the Parliament is sitting (for these are
different from the Writs which are sent out whilst a Parliament is sitting, as
will be shown.) I shall proceed to the Brevia aperta or open Writs, commonly
called Patents, by which (such as are Created) are enabled to sit there; yet
even those Lords, which by their Creations are so priviledg'd, have also Close
Writs of Summons sent them pro forma, lest they should fail of their duties for
want of intimation, and the Writ is and has been anciently Closed, least (as I
conceive) the Writ should contain such private matter, or causes of Summons as
are not fit to be known by the conveyor of them to their Lordships.

CHAP. X. Of Patents of Creation Impowring the Lords Patentees to sit in
Parliament.
HAving shown the Form of the Close Writs of Summons, Sect. 1.
for such as are to sit in the Lords House, either Ratione sanguinis regalis,
or Ratione tenurae, or Ratione Nobilitatis and Honoris, I am now to show how
some of these sit there Ratione Creationis (not Exclusive of the others) viz.
by virtue of their Open Writs, or Patents of Creation; for though Close Writs
of Summoning to a Parliament were thought sufficient to Nobilitate the persons
and their Heirs, who had the benefit of them; yet since Tenures and
Prescriptions, and Writs only, were not found so safe and convenient, the way
of Creation by Patent has much increased.

2. These Lords Patentees having Writs of Summons, as Memoirs of their Duty to
the public, their Patents do not only intile them to sit in Parliament, but
direct them where they shall sit, which their Writs of Summons do not express;
for the Writs do only appoint a place, and time where and when to meet, but not
their distinct places where to sit, both in respect to their own, and to the
other degrees of Nobility.

3. These are called Patents of Creation, signifying something which was not
before; now it is evident by what I have shown, that there were persons called
Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons, both in Foreign parts, and in
this Kingdom, long before those Degrees were Erected by Patent; but till then
(as Mr. Seldom says) they were to be esteemed rather Official than Nobilitated
Dignities, and therefore it must be understood that the Form of making them
Earls, Dukes, etc. by these Letters Patents, were not in use here in England,
till Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, etc. did accept of this instrument or Form; and
thereupon called Dukes, Earls, etc. by Creation.

4. I find these Patents to be of three sorts. First, of Titles Confirmed (
viz. such as were before their Patents.) Secondly, of Titles Revived ( viz.
which were before, but were extinct for want of Issue, or Escheated to the
Crown for Treason, etc. (which often happened in the Barons-wars, and at other
times Thirdly, Titles Created or given where none was before. As to the first,
viz. of such Titles as were before their Patents of Creation, it appears that
Awbry de Vere (as Mr. Cambden says) had the choice of four Earldoms, viz.
Dorset, Wilts, Berks, and Oxfordshire, of which four Shires (there having been
Official Earls both in the Saxons, and afterward in the Normans time) he chose
Oxfordshire, which being granted to him by Henry the 1st. it was confirmed to
him by Patent of Creation by Hen. the 2d. according to this following Patent.

The Patent to Awbry de Vere, Confirming him Earl of Oxford.
HEnricus Secundus Rex Angliae and Dux Normaniae and Aquitaniae and Comes
Andigaviae
Archiepiscopis Episcopis Abbatibus Comitibus Baronibus Justiciarijs
Vicecomitibus Ministris and omnibus Fidelibus suis totius Angliae Franciae and
Angliae Salutem.
Sciatis me dedisse and concessisse Comiti Comitatus Oxenfordscire ut sit inde
Comes quare volo and Firmiter praecipio quop ipse and haeredes sui habeant inde
Comitatum suum ita libere and quiet and honorifice sicut aliquis Comitum
Angliae liberius and quietius and honorificentius habet

Test. 5. H. 2.
Attested by the Chancellor, three Earls, and ten others of Quality.
Mr. Seldom observes, Seldom 1. H. p. 539.
that this Patent was rather a Consirmation than a Creation; and further says,
that in a Chancerystile, a Creation and Confirmation signisie the same; however
though the words in the Patent are not Confirmasse, but only Dedisse, and
Concessisse, yet I conceive it plainly appears to be a Confirmation from the
words in the Patent, viz. habeant inde Comitatum suum, which implies that that
County was his before this Confirmatory Creation.

The second sort of Creation Patents, are the reviving of a Title which had
been before, but lay Dorment as in this following Patent, of Creating Edward
called Edward the Black-Prince, Son to Edward the 3d. to be Duke of Cornwall,
there being Official Dukes of Cornwall before.

The Preamble to the Creation of Edward, Son to Edward the 3d. Duke of Cornwall.
EDwardus Dei gratia, Sect. 6.11. Ed. 3.
etc.

inter caetera Regni insignia illud arbitramur fore potissimum ut ipsum ordinum
dignitatum and Ossiciorum distributione, congrue vallatum sanis fulciatur
consilijs and robustorum potentijs teneatur, plurimis itaque gradibus
haereditarijs in regno nostro cum per descensum haeredetatum secundum legem
regni ejusdem ad cohaeredes and participes tunc deficiente exitu, and alijs
eventibus varijs ad manus regias devolutis passum est a diu in nominibus
honoribus and graduum dignitate defectum multiplicem dictum regnum Nos igitur
ea per quae regnum nostrum decorari idemque regnum ac Sancta ejusdem Ecclesiae
aliae etiam terrae nostro subjectae Dominio contra hostium and adversariorum
conatus securius and decentius defensari paxque nostra inter nostros ubique
subditos conservari illaesa poterint meditatione solicita intuentes ac loca
ejusdem Regni insignia pristmis insigniri honoribus Cupientes nostrae
considerationes intuitus ad personam Dilecti and Fidelis nostri Edwardi Comitis
Cestriae filij nostri primogeniti intimius convertentes volentesque personam
ejusdem honorare eidem filio nostro nomen and honorem Ducis Cornubiae de
Communi assensu and Consilio Praelatorum Comitum Baronum and aliorum de
Consilio nostro in presenti Parliamento nostro apud Westmonasterium die Lunae
proxime post festum Sancti Matthaei Apostoli proxime preterit' convocato
existentium dedimus ipsumque in Ducem Cornubiae prefecimus and Gladio cinximus
sicut decet etc. Dedimus itaque etc. Castra etc. juxta generis (...)
nobilitatem valeat contenere and onera in hac part incumbentia facilius
supportare, viz. ut faciat Vicecomites predicti Comitatus.

7. It is affirmed by our History, that there were Dukes of Cornwall (as I have
shown in the British times) but afterward entitled Earls, but both the
Titles of Dukes, and Earls of that County being long extinct, William the 1st.
raised it to an Earldom, and after Edward the 3d. Erected it to a Dukedom, and
thereupon had a preamble, and this was done also by assent and consent of the
Prelates, Earls, Barons, and others of his Council (which I presume does
include the Commons) but it may be observed, that here was no other Investiture
mentioned than Gladio cinximus, which is the same Ceremony of a Knight
Bachelor; but many great Royalties and privileges were herein granted, as may
be seen in the Patent at large.

That to the Earl of Oxford needed no preamble, or Consent of the Earls and
Commons, or mention of the Form of Investitures, or of particulars of Lands and
Castles granted, being only a Confirmation of that honor which he enjoyed; but
it was convenient, that this to the Duke of Cornwall should have a preamble, in
respect the Title had lain dead for a long time in the Crown, as may be
Collected from the words, ad manus Regias devolutis.

The like Patent of Reviver, was of the Barony of Abergaveny by Richard the 2d.
to John de Beauchamp second Son to the Earl of Warwick, from whom by Marriage
of the Daughter and Heir, it came into the Family of the Nevils, where it yet
continues; but this was a Barony long before, for in the time of King William
the 2d. called Rufus, Hamelius de Balon was Baron of Abergaveny, and from him
it descended to Brian de Jnsula, then to the Bruce's, Cante Lupes, and
Hastings, in which last name it continued many descents, till John Hastings
then Earl of Pembroke, and Baron of Abergaveny died without Issue; and then as
I said, Richard the 2d. Conferred it John Beauchamp according to this following
Patent.

6. Richardus Secundus, 11. R. 2.
etc. Sciatis quod pro bonis and gratuitis servitijs quae Dilectus and Fidelis
Miles noster Johannes de Beauchamp de Holt Senescallus Hospitij nostri nobis
impendit ac loco per ipsum tempore creationis nostrae huc usque impenso and
quem pro Nobis tenere poterit infuturum in nostris Consiliis and Parliamentis
nec non pro nobili and Fideli genere unde descendit ac pro suis magnificis
sensu and Circumspectione ipsum Johannem in unum Parium ac Baronum Regni
Angliae nostri praefecimus volentes quod idem Johannes and haeredes masculi de
corpore suo Exeuntes statum Baronis obtineant ac Domini de Beauchamp and
Barons de Kiderminster nuncupentur in cujus rei, etc. Test, etc.

10. Thus having given instances of Confirming, and Reviving of Titles by
Patents of Creation, I shall speak of the third sort of Creating, or Erecting
of new Titles by Patent of Creation also.

The third sort of Creation Patents, is more properly called a Creation than
the other; and for this, I instance the Patent to the Prince of Wales. 11. Ed.
the 3d. for though Wales had been an ancient Principality in it self, and their
Natives were Princes thereof; and this being the first time that that Title was
transferred to an English man, and a Patent granted by an English King which
had never been done before; it might properly be called a Creation, the
Preamble of the Patent is Transcribed Verbatim; but the Habendum (being very
long) I have only given a short abstract of it.

The Preamble to the Creation of Edward Prince of Wales. Sect. 11.17. Ed. 3.

REx etc.
Archiepiscopis etc. salutem
de serenitate regalis praeeminentiae velut ex Sole radii sic inferiores
prodeunt principatus ut regiae claritatis integritas de Luce Lucem proferens Ex
Lucis distributione minoratae Lucis non sentiat detrimenta Immo tanto magis
Regale Sceptrum extollitur and Solium Regium sublimatur quanto tribunali suo
plures subsunt Proceres eminentiae clarioris Haec autem consideratio condigna
Nos qui nominis and honoris Edwardi ducis Cornubiae and Comitis Cestriae
primogeniti nostri charissimi incrementum appetimus (in quo potius Nos ipsos
conspicimus honorari and domum nostram Regiam and subditum nobis populum
nostrum speramus per Dei gratiam sumpta de gloriosis suis auspiciis conjectura
honorifice roborari) allicit and inducit ut ipsum qui reputatione juris
censetur eadem persona nobiscum digno proveniamus honor and saecunda gratia
persequamur de Consilio itaque and Consensu Praelatorum Comitum Baronum and
Communitatum Regni nostri Angliae in Generali Parliamento nostro apud
Westmonasterium die Lunae in Quindena Pasche proxime praeterita Convocato ipsum
Edwardum Principem Walliae fecimus and creavimus and dictum principatum sibi
dedimus and concessimus and per Chartam nostram confirmavimus ac ipsum de dicto
principatu ut ibidem praeficiendo praesideat and praesidendo dictas parts
derigat and defendat per fertum in Capite and annulum in digito aureum ac
virgam argenteam investivimus juxta morem, habend'and tenend'de nobis sibi and
haeredibus suis Regibus Angliae in perpetuum cum omnibus Dominijs and terris
nostris Northwalliae Westwalliae and Southwalliae, etc.

The like was in Richard the 2ds. time, when the Earldom or County of
Lancashire was Erected into a Duchy Palatine, which was not so before, the
Preamble of which Patent, I shall here insert; as well to show the Latin Style
of the Age, as for other reasons, which I shall hereafter have occasion to
mention.

The Patent of Creation to John Duke of Lancaster. Anno 1389.
INter Gloriosae Reipublicae curas and sollicitudines varias. Sect. 12.13. R. 2.
Regiis humeris incumbentes firmat potissime Regale solium effluens a justitia
condigna premiatio merritorum ibinamque continue virtus crescit and colitur ubi
a debito sibi praemio non frustratur. Cum igitur honor sit virtutis praemium
constat quod virtuosis and strenuis ex Regali justitia debentur fasces honorum
and praemia dignitatum quae utique si dignis conferantur non debent simpliciter
aestimari donum seu exhibitio favorum sed potius debita compensatio meritorum
Quid enim in retroactis saeculis and fesicium Principum temporibus Rempublicam
amplius provexisse comperimusquam quod pie regnantes virtuosos and strenuos sub
se habebant oneris ijs injuncti participes, quos postmodum juxta Exigentiam
meritorum honor and distributionibus dignitatum successive fecerunt ex debito
Regalis Justitiae gloriosos. Quia quod soli non poterant, provida virtuosorum
hujusmodi provisione supplebant.

Hijs igitur considerationibus inducti ad te praecharissimum patruum nostrum
mentis nostrae aciem dirigentes actusque tuos virtuosos and praeclaria merita
quibus te virtutum Dominus insignivit in profundae discussionis liberamine
ponderantes, de assensu Prelatorum Ducum Magnatum and aliorum Procerum and
Communitatis Regni nostri Angliae in instanti Parliamento nostro apud
Westmonasterium convocato existentium Te predilectissimum patruum nostrum in
Ducem Aquitaniae cum titulo stilo and nomine and honor eidem debitis
praefecimus ac inde praesentialiter per appositionem Capae tuo Capiti ac
traditionem virgae aureae investimus in praemium eximiae virtutis tuae and
attinentiae predictarum toto vitae tuae possidendum, etc. Et, etc. Donamus tibi
Ducatum, etc. tenendum de nobis ut de Rege Franciae, etc. ad totum vitae tuae.

Here was a great Merit expressed, and magnificently rewarded, yet not to his
Heirs, but to himself only for life, which he took as a sufficient Recompense
for his Services; and this was Assensu and consensu Praelatorum Ducum Magnat'.
Et aliorum Procerum and Communitatis Regni nostri Angliae. And I observe, That
when the Patents were only for Confirmation, the Assent and Consent of the
Parliament was not inserted, but where they were to Revive, or merely to
Create, then the Assent and Consent was expressed.

The like Patent of mere Creation was that of the Ninth of Richard the Second,
when Robert de Vere, then Earl of Oxford, was Created Marquess of Dublin;
(which, says Mr. Seldom, was in him an English Title:) however, it was the
first that any was Created of that Title here in England.

And also the like Patent of mere Creation was that of 18 H. 6. whereby John de
Beaumount was created Viscount de Beaumount, the Title of Viscount being before
an Official Dignity, but never till this Creation nobilitated. All which may be
more fully seen in the Rolls Chapel, or Patent Office.

13. As I have shown three sorts of Patents of Creation, so, for the clearing
of some subsequent matters, I must show, That these Patents usually consisted
of four parts, (yet subject to variations) First, The King's Style and
Preamble. Secondly, Of Investitures. Thirdly, Of Places in Parliament.
Fourthly, Grants of Lands, Annuities, etc.

As to the Preambles upon New Creations or Revivals, they were usually long,
expressing the Merits of the Person, but commonly they were couched in few
words; and those, viz. in generals, Pro bono and laudabili servitio quod
dilectus and fidelis noster A. B. nobis nuper impendit, etc. particularly Pro
rebels nostros debellando, (according to the particular Services) and in
others, Progratia nostra speciali and certa scientia and mero motu.

As for the Second I shall have occasion to speak of them in the Chapter of
Investitures.

For the Fourth, concerning Grants, Annuities, etc. I shall have little use of
them.

But for the Third, concerning The distinct Places of the Degrees of Nobles, I
can find nothing in ancient Patents, but generals, viz. That his place should
be in loco quem teneri poterit in futurum in nostris Consilijs and
Parliamentis; and so they were generally set down (except in such as I shall
mention) till Edward the Sixth's time (which was soon after that the Act of 31
H. 8. concerning Precedencies was made) and then the whole frame of the Patents
for all the Degrees, from the Habend' or Sciatis, were settled in this following
Method, and have ever since so continued with very little alterations. I begin
first with Dukes.

The Sciatis to a Duke's Patent of Creation, and his Place in Parliament.
14. SCiatis pro consideratione praedicta de ulteriori gratia nostra speciali
ac ex certa scientia and mero motu nostris Praefatum A. in Ducem C. nec non ad
statum, gradum, stilum, titulum, dignitatem, nomen and honorem Ducis C.
ereximus, praefecimus, insignivimus, constituimus and creavimus ipsumque A. in
Ducem C. nec non ad statum, gradum, stilum, titulum, dignitatem, nomen and
honorem Ducis C. tenore praesentium erigimus praeficimus insignimus
constituimus and creavimus per praesentes eidemque A. nomen, stilum, titulum,
statum, gradum, dignitatem and honorem Ducis C. imposuimus dedimus and
praebuimus ac per praesentes imponumus damus and praebemus ac ipsum A.
hujusmodi nomine stilo, titulo, statu, gradu, dignitate and honor Ducis (per
Gladij Cincturum, Capae and Circuli aurei impositionem in Capite and
traditionem aureae virgae) insignimus investimus and realiter nobilitamus per
praesentes. Habend'and tenend'nomen stilum, titulum, statum, gradum, dignitatem
and honorem Ducis C. praedict' cum omnibus singulis praeeminentijs, honoribus,
caeterisque hujumodi nomini, stilo, titulo, statui, gradui, dignitati and
honori Ducis pertinentibus sive spectantibus prefat' A. and heredibus masculis
de Corpore suo exeuntibus in perpetuum Volentes and per presents concedentes
pro nobis heredibus and successoribus nostris quod predictus A. and heredes sui
Masculi predicti nomen, stilum, titulum, statum, gradum, dignitatem and honorem
predict' successive gerant and habeant and eorum quilibet gerat and habeat and
per nomen Ducis C. successive vocitenter and nuncupenter and eorum quilibet
vocitetur and nuncupetur, and quod idem A. and heredes Masculi sui predicti,
successive ut Duces C. teneantur tractentur and reputentur, et eorum quilibet
teneatur tractetur et reputetur habeantque teneant et possideant, etc. ( Then
as to Parliaments,) et successor' nostror' infra regnum nostrum Angliae ut Dux
C. Nec non dictus A. et heredes sui Masculi predicti gaudeant and utantur et
eorum quilibet gaudeat et utatur per nomen Ducis C. omnibus et singulis juribus
privilegijs praeeminentijs et immunitatibus statui Ducis in omibus rite et de
jure pertinentibus quibus Duces hujus Regni Angl'antea haec tempor' melius,
honorificentius et quietius usu sunt et gavisi seu in presenti gaudeant et
utuntur.

There is an addition of most of the latter Patents concerning Annuities
granted, which I shall speak of so soon as I have recited so much as concern
the Places appointed to the several Degrees of Nobles to sit in Parliament
suitable to what is inserted in the Dukes Patent at the Figure B.

Of the Marquess his Place in Parliament by his Patent.
15. AFter the King's Title and Preamble, in the Sciatis, these words are in
the Marquess his Patent: viz. Prefat' R. in Marchionem D. creavimus, etc. per
Gladij cincturam and circuli aurei quo Capiti impositionem investivimus, etc.
Habendum, etc. honorem Marchionis D. etc. prefat' R. and heredibus masculis de
corpore suo exeuntibus, etc. (Then as to Parliaments,) Et quod dictus R. and
heredes sui masculi predicti and eorum quilibet habeat teneat and possideat
sedem locum and vocem in Parliamentis Comitijs and Consilijs nostris heredum
and successorum nostrorum infra Regnum nostrum Angliae, inter Pares Parliament'
in gradu celsiori videl't inter Duces and Comites ut Marchio.

Of the Earls Place in Parliament by his Patent.
16. AFter the Kings Title and the Preamble in the Sciatis, these words are
also in the Earls Patents, viz. Prefat' N. in Comitem A. etc. creavimus per
gladij cincturam and Capae honoris and Circuli aurei impositionem investimus
Habendum, etc. honorem Comitis A. etc. prefat' N. and heredibus masculis de
Corpore suo exeuntibus, etc. (Then as to Parliaments,) Et quod dictus N. and
heredes sui Masculi predicti and eorum quilibet habeat teneat and possideat
sedem locum and vocem in Parliamentis and Consilijs nostris heredum and
successorum nostrorum infra regnum nostrum Angl'inter alios Comites ut Comes A.

Note, It is not here said inter Marchiones and Vicecomites, because they were
Degrees erected after the Earls.

Of the Viscounts Place in Parliament by his Patent.
17. AFter the Kings Title and the Preamble, and the Sciatis, these words are
also in the Viscounts Patents, viz. Prefat' A. in Vicecomit^m N. etc. creavimus
ac ipsum insignijs Vicecomitis investimus, etc. Habendum, etc. honorem
Vicecomitis N. etc. Et quod idem A. and heredes sui Masculi gerant titulum
Vicecomitis N. etc. Et heredes sui Masculi predicti. (Then as to Parliaments,)
Et eorum quilibet habeat teneat and possideat successive sedem locum and vocem
in Parliamentis and publicis Comitijs (in the first Patent to Beaumont it is
Congregationibus nostris) heredum and successorum nostrorum infra Regnum
nostrum Angliae inter alios Vicecomites and ante omnes Barons ut Vicecomes.

Of the Barons Place in Parliament by his Patent.
18. AFter the Kings Title and the Preamble in the Sciatis, these words are in
the Barons Patent, Prefat' A. B. etc. ad honorem Baronis B. etc. creavimus
ipsumque A. B. Baronem B. Creavimus, etc. (no mention of Investitures)
Habendum, etc. honorem A. B. heredibus suis Masculis, etc. per nomen Baronis B.
de C. and heredes sui Masculi predicti. (Then as to Parliaments) Et eorum
quilibet habeat teneat and possideat sedem locum and vocem in Parliamentis
publicis Comitijs and Concilijs nostris heredum and successorum nostrorum infra
Regnum nostrum Angliae inter alios Barons ut Barons Parliamentorum publicorum
Comitiorum and Consiliorum.

Note, That the word Chevalier is in his Writ, but not in his Patent, nor the
word Dominus, which was used in ancient Patents, is also disused in the latter
Patents.

Of the Conciseness of ancient Patents.
19. HEre I must observe how wanton the Penmen of these Patents have been in
latter days, by multiplying words in them, which former ages thought
superfluous, and even the Sages of the Law, who are the most knowing in what is
sufficient, have anciently and do still reject them (as may be seen in the
Thirteenth Chapter) and yet the Jurisdiction and Privileges which are granted
to those Sages are little inferior to what is granted in these, whereas those
Patents do not contain (besides the names from the Sciatis to the Test) above
twelve words, and these by the redundancy of Sentences, at least one Thousand
two Hundred words.

Of Creation-Money.
20. IN the recital of the Sciatis (in Sect. 8.) I did omit the extravagant
slourishes, which are used in many of these Patents about Creation-Money and
Annuities given to the Patentees.

Concerning an Annuity of twenty Marks granted in the Patent of Creation.
21. IMmediately after the words gaudent and utuntur (in the Sciatis at large,
a little before mentioned) these words follow: viz.

Et quoniam aucta status and dignitatis celsitudine necessario crescunt sumptus
and accedunt onera grandiora: ut predictus A. and heredes masculi sui predicti
melius decentius and honorificentius statum honorem and dignitatem predictam
Vicecomiti N. ac Onera ipsi A. and heredibus suis masculis predictis
incumbentia manutenere and supportare valeat, Ideo de uberiori gratia nostra
dedimus and concessimus eidem A. and heredibus masculis de Corpore exeuntibus
feodum sive annualem redditum tresdecim librarum sex solidorum and octo
denariorum legalis monet' Angliae. Habendum and percipiendum annuatim dictum
feodum sive annualem redditum tresdecim librarum sex solidorum and octo
denariorum eidem A. and heredibus suis masculis de Corpore Exeuntibus de
exitibus profituis, et reventionibus magnae and parvae custumae et subsidijs
nostris nobis concessis sive debitis seu imposterum nobis heredibus seu
successoribus nostris concedendis sive debendis provenientibus crescentibus
sive emergentibus infra portum Civitatis nostrae Londini per manus
Custumariorum sive Collectorum nostrorum heredum et successorum nostrorum
custumarumet subsidiorum nostrorum heredum et successorum nostrorum ibidem pro
tempore existentium ad festum Pasche et Sancti Michaelis Archangeli per equales
portiones volumus, etc. absque fine hanaperio, etc. et quod Expressamentio,
etc. and so concludes, in cujus, etc. Test, etc. (too tedious to recite)
making above one Hundred words more: and almost the like is to an Earl for 20
l. per annum, so as the Money given will scarce pay for the words written, or
but little left to support such a Dignity, unless the mere expression of the
uberious munificence of the Donor be sufficient.

Sure it was less chargeable, and as effectual when the words of the whole
Patent of Creating the Earl of Essex, tempore H. 2. and others in other Kings
Reigns was only thus: viz.

Do and concedo G. de M. pro servitio suo, and heredibus suis post eum
hereditabiliter ut sit Comes de Essexia, and habeat tertium denariorum
Vicecomitatus de placitis, sicut Comes habere debet in Comitatu suo. So here
was both the Honor, the Service, and the Reward mentioned in less then thirty
words.

There is nothing alleged for the length of these Patents, but that the latter
Ages (as it is said) are more cautious than the former, and that abundans
cautela (say we) non nocet, which occasions an abundance of words more than
anciently were in use.

As to the sinalness of the Creation-Money, those who have taken pains in
Writing about raising of the price of Money, both Gold and Silver, since Edward
the Third's time, tell us, That there are three ways of raising it; First, By
increasing the Value of it, that is by giving more parts to it than originally
it had, as by ordaining an Angel of Gold to be valued at a 11 s. which was
Coined for 10 s. or a Shilling, to be valued at 14 d. The Second, By
diminishing the Matter, but leaving the same Name and Value to the Money which
it had before, as when Angels or Shillings are Coined by the same Name and
Value as before, but diminished some Grains in the weight; or if new Names be
given to them, and the same Value retained, but the weight diminished, for in
this case there being really less Gold or Silver in weight in the price than
was before, and the value remaining the same, this Silver and Gold which
remains has an high price set upon it. The Third is, When the Value remaining
the same, of the Species of Money, and the Weight the same, the fineness is
abated by putting more Allay to it, so as really then there is less Gold or
Silver in fineness (for it is supplied by Copper (which is usually the Allay to
either) whereby the Weight is made the same as before, but the Fineness so much
less. They further tell us, That the Causes of these Allays, are first the Gain
which the States make by it, the better to supply themselves in their
necessities for Money; the other Cause is an Art which all States do frequently
use (as it were) to rob one another of their Money, by vying one upon another,
who shall raise their Money highest; and this occasions the raise and fall of
Exchanges of Money among our Merchants, which is a Mystery worth the knowing,
by every one that serves in Parliament, thereby to prevent Injuries, and to
maintain the Honor and Profit of our Kingdom.

But whatever uncertainties are in the raise or fall of Money, this is certain,
That 20 l. per Annum, in those days, did go as far (if not farther) in managing
Men's occasions (where Money was to be used) as 200 l. per Annum now; and one
great Reason was, Because in almost all matters of Wars or Peace, the Tenants
were obliged by their Tenures, to supply their Lords, especially in Provisions
for Hospitality and Labor, without Wages, or very little, so as a little Money
was looked on as a great Reward, as may be seen in the Tenure of the Lord of the
Manor of Carlton in Norfolk, who is obliged every year, with himself and his
Servants, to present to the King a certain number of Herrings from the City of
Norwich, (with which the Town of Tarmouth are obliged by their Patent to supply
that City for that purpose) and after three days stay, upon delivery of the
Herrings to the King, the Lord of Carlton is to be presented by the Master of
the Green-Cloth with a Groat, to buy him a pair of Gloves, as a full Recompense
of his Trouble, and this continues to this day.

So as if we look upon the gift of 20 Mark, or 20 l. according to the present
Adequation of Money, to the rates of other things, it may seem a Sum derogatory
to the Honor of the King that gives it, as to him that receives it, and
therefore it must be considered as the Groat, a Gift of Antiquity, Noble and
Liberal in its first Intention; but had the large Encomium to it (before
recited) been as ancient as the Gift, I should not at this time have taken
notice of its exuberancy. However (in pursuance of my Design) these Patents of
Creations do entitle them where to sit in the Lords House, etc.

Thus having done with the Patents which concern the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, I intended to have writ something here concerning the Antiquity and
present Use of Seals and Labels to Patents and Writs, and of various
Superscriptions to the Lords and Commons, etc. as also of Wax, Parchment, etc.
(as necessary Utensils for carrying on the Constitution of a Parliament) but I
shall reserve the Discourse of them till I have past through the
Parliament-Writs, as well concerning the House of Lords as House of Commons,
and Convocation-Houses, and so now proceed to the General Titles given to the
Grandees of the House of Lords, viz. Nobles, Lords, and Peers.

CHAP. XI. Of Nobles, Lords, and Peers.
I Have past through the four first Exemplar Writs in the Pawn, concerning the
Lords Spiritual and Lords Temporal, and given an account also of so much of
their Patents of Creations as relate to Parliaments. But in respect these
Nobles are sometimes called Lords, and sometimes Peers, and thereupon the very
place where they sit in their High Judicatory is called the House of Lords or
House of Peers. I think fit to hint some few Memorials before I proceed to the
Fifth Exemplar of Assistant Writs.

1. It is agreed by all Inspectors of Words, that Lords and Peers are of the
same signification with us, that Domini and Pares had with the old Romans, so
as we and the French are equally beholding to the Latin for them: but when the
word Dominus was changed into the word Lord, (having no more affinity of sound
or Orthography than Comes and Earl) or when Pares into Proceres (of a nearer
sound) may be a question, but it may be sufficiently evident, that the word
Lord was the Abbreviation of Louerd, which the Saxons at their first coming,
about the year 448. used here instead of Dominus.

2. As for the word Peer, we commonly use it as signifying a Defense, as
Dover-Peer and Yarmouth-Peer, etc. which is from Petra, a Rock, which the
French write Pierre, and we Peer, these Artificial Peers being made in
imitation of Rocks, to defend the Land against Inundations, and it may very
aptly allude to the Noble Peers in Parliament, who are the Rocks or Peers of
our Safety.

3. To pass this, it is allowed, That Pares in Latin, Paires in French, and
Peers in our English Dialect, are all three words of the same sense, signifying
Parity or Equality, and as the French had it from the Romans, by whom they were
called Pares Curiae, viz. Qui ab eodem domino feudum retinent, so we had it
from the French, who in the year 778. when Charles the Great (being then King
of France, and soon after Emperor of the West) did put all the Government of
France into the hands of Twelve of the most eminent Nobles, who thereupon were
called by the Title of the Twelve Peers of France, being Pares Gubernatores
Franciae, or in their Language Paires d'France, whereof six were Lords
Spiritual, viz. the Archbishop of Reims, the Bishops of Laon and Langres, (who
also were styled Dukes) the Bishops of Beauvois, Chalois and Noyon, which three
latter were also styled Comtes or Earls, and six were Lords Temporal, viz. the
Duke of Burgundy, Normandy, and Guienne, the Earls of Flanders, Champaigne, and
Tholose; the six Ecclesiastics do continue to this day, but the Territories of
the other six being either united to, or alienated from the Crown, do now
consist of such Princes of the Blood or Favorits (without limitation by number
of six) as the King thinks fit; but those who are, do enjoy the Privileges of
the Original Peers constituted by Charles the Great.

4. From this Constitution it is conceived, we in England, (upon the Normans
coming) did make use of something of that method, and did then also first make
use of the word Peers, although in truth, as I said, both of us had it from the
Romans; we also made use of their number Twelve, as may be observed in the
Ecclesiastical Parliamentary Degrees, viz. first Archbishops, secondly Bishops,
thirdly Archdeacons, fourthly Deans of Chapters, fifthly Proctors of Chapters,
and sixthly Proctors of the Clergy; and six also are of the Temporal Degrees,
viz. first Princes of the Blood, secondly Dukes not of the Blood, thirdly
Marquesses, fourthly Earls, fifthly Viscounts, and sixthly Barons. These being
so proportioned into twelve Degrees, but not into twelve Persons, I shall pass
to what others have spoken concerning the number of our Peers.

5. In respect the Peers of France were anciently confined to a certain number
of six and six, some of our English Writers would also confine ours to a
certain number, some to five and some to fifty. But herein we may trust that
learned Seldom, who says, That the number of Peers with us, was never confined
to any more certainty than the Lords of the Parliament are; for (says he)
whereas only the number of five Peers are mentioned in some Records, that can
be no Rule of certainty; because at this day the number Five does legally
express Seven; (as it does in the Parliament Writ to the Warden of the
Cingqueports or five Ports; There being in truth (says he) Seven of them, and
so consequently returned; whereas there are eight Ports called Cinqueports, and
so returned; (as will be shown in the second Part) but however the mistake be
in that Grave Author, yet with submission to his great Learning, I conceive
this might have been better reconciled: for the old Writers who mentioned five,
might intend the five Degrees of Nobility under the Princes of the Blood, viz.
Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts and Barons, which makes the complete
Temporal Degrees in Parliaments.

And what others write of Fifty, that number without doubt did relate to the
number of which those five Degrees did in those days consist; which were now
increast to Eighty eight, (as may be seen in this Pawn) besides those of the
Blood Royal, and the Lords Spiritual, and Assistants, and have varied in number
almost in every Kings Reign. But I rather believe, that there was some mistake
in making use of this number Five, by applying it Personally and not Virtually;
for anciently, and even to this day, the number five, that is five Lords, do
with that number Constitute the House of Lords for the dispatch of lesser
Affairs, till a greater number come, fit for greater Affairs; and so the number
of forty Members, whether Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses, or some of either,
do Constitute an House of Commons, yet these also do not proceed to weightier
matters, till they be supplied with a greater number; so as the number five may
be well thought to have its relation to the House of Lords, and the number of
fifty to the House of Commons.

6. But not to insist further about the definite number of Lords or Peers, or
about the derivation of the words Lords and Peers; I shall give a touch of the
words Praelati, Magnates and Proceres used in the Latin Writs and Patents; and
herein, if we consider the first Institution of this House, it did and still
does consist of Lords Spiritual and Lords Temporal, (diversified into several
Degrees) as Archbishops, Dukes, etc. yet the Lords Spiritual were known only by
the Title Archiepiscopi and Episcopi, i. e. Archbishops and Bishops; and the
Temporal only by the Titles of Comites and Barons, i. e. Earls and Barons; in
general terms the Lords Spiritual were called Praelati, i. e. Prelates; (in
relation to matters which concern the Soul, which has preference or prelation
to that of the Body) and the Lords Temporal were called in general Magnates and
Proceres, i. e. Lords and Peers, (intimating Persons of the greatest Power and
Domination) and being the chiefest Peers and Supports (as I said) of the King
and Kingdom.

7. But in Henry the thirds time, certain Persons called Abbots and Priors,
(who were the Fathers, Heads and chief Governers of Monasteries, or of such
Houses as were possessed by Monks and Canons living in those Houses, with an
intent or pretense of weaning themselves from the World, and disposing their
minds to a contemplative life) and these being of a mixed nature, partly Regular
and partly Secular, and (in respect of their great access of Territories given
by the charity of others to support them) Baronial did step in between the
Lords Spiritual and the Lords Temporal, and so were called Praelati with the
Bishops, and Magnates and Proceres with the Lords Temporal. But Hen. the Eighth
(as I have shown) did dissolve them, so that the Bishops have ow the single
Title of Praelati; and the Temporal Lords, of Magnates and Proceres, for we see
in the Summoning of this Parliament, (when Bishops were excluded, the words Cum
Praelatis was left out, but being restored, then they were equally Summoned to
sit, inter Praelatos, Magnates and Proceres, and the preposition Inter, is
properly inserted; for however their sitting is, yet the Bishops are called
over, between Viscounts and Barons.

8. Now as Abbots and Priors were thus interposed in Henry the Thirds time; so
in the time of Edw. the Third (as I have shown) Dukes began, and as they
increased, did step in before Earls and Barons; and in Rich. the Seconds time
Marquesses began, and as they increast also stepped in between Dukes and Earls;
and in Hen. the 6ths. time Viscounts began, and as they increast did step in
between Earls and Barons; so as Originally, according to the dates of their
Admissions, these Lords Spiritual and Temporal were all Peers, i. e. Pares,
pari gradu, the Bishops were Pares inter seipsos pari gradu Episcopali, (the
Abbots, etc. in their time, were Pares inter seipsos, and both of those Degrees
were also Pares upon a Baronial account; (so the Dukes and Marquesses being
Earls or Barons before they were created Dukes or Marquesses, in respect of
their Earldoms or Baronies were Peers to the Earls and Barons; and the
Viscounts also, (most of them being Barons before they were created Viscounts)
in respect of their Baronies were Peers also to the Barons; so also upon a
Baronial account they were Pares pari gradu Baroniali: Till Patents of Creation
did more exactly distinguish them, without relation to Baronies; so as now to
speak properly, each Degree are Pares or Prees to their distinct Degrees.

9. I must here again make use of my former observation, viz. That in the Writs
to Dukes they were Summoned to be present in Parliament, Cum Magnatibus and
Proceribus; and so are the Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts and Barons, yet the
Pattents to the Dukes do place them inter Proceres and Magnates, putting
Proceres or Peers before Magnates or Lords; and in the Pattents to Marquesses,
they are placed inter alios Marchiones; and the Earls inter alios Comites; and
the Viscounts inter alios Vicecomites; and the Barons inter alios Barons. But
none of the Lords Patentees (except the Dukes in relation to their places) do
take any notice of the position of the words inter Proceres and Magnates; for
the Earls and Barons Patents have reference only to their own Degrees and not
to the three other Degrees; so as Proceres or Peers is applied only to the
Dukes in their Patents of Creation.

10. This is all that I can satisfy my self in concerning the use of the words
Lords and Peers, Praelati, Magnates, and Proceres; and that this may be the
more satisfactory to others, I shall recite the words of the learned Seldom,
(in his Titles of Honor) whose lasting Credit is beyond exception; (says he,)
Though there be a distinction of Degrees in our Nobility, yet in all public
actions they are Peers or Equals; ( as in the Trials of Noblemen, etc. in which
the Spiritual Lords never did or do concern themselves Personally, because it
is against their Canons to act in any matters which relate to Blood) yet
whatever Acts pass, these words are inserted, viz. We the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, etc. with the Kings Assent, etc. for though the Lords Spiritual
consist of Archbishops and Bishops, and the Lords Temporal of Princes of the
Blood, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts and Barons, yet they are all
included as Peers in the words Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and so in many
cases the word Peers is also generally applied; so that, as the words Lords and
Peers have been of latter times intermixedly used, we cannot well make a
difference between them otherwise than is before expressed.

11. That the words Lords and Peers have been used promiscuously, in relation
to the five Degrees of the Lords Temporal, is evident from the Commissions
issued for the Trials of the Earl of Strafford, 1640. the Lord Morley, Anno
1665. the Lord Cornwallis, Anno 1676. the Earl of Pembroke, Anno 1678. wherein
the words are, Damus autem Vniversis and singulis Ducibus, Marchionibus,
Comitibus, Vicecomitibus and Baronibus, etc. (without mentioning Praelatis, for
reasons before mentioned) and though the Earl of Strafford and Earl of Pembroke
were Earls, yet by the Commission they were triable, per Barons, Viceomites,
Comites Marchiones, and Duces, and not by Earls only; and so though the Lord
Morley and Lord Cornwallis were only Barons, yet they were triable by Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls and Viscounts, and not by Barons only, whereby the word Peers
seems to be a word of eminency, giving no real distinction to those five
Degrees of Nobility; so as all the Degrees of the Temporal Lords are Peers, and
the Peers Lords; to confirm this, I shall cite one passage more from Mr.
Seldom, who says, That though we borrowed the word Peers from the twelve Peers
in France, yet here we apply it to all the Lords in Parliament, and not to any
set number of them; because (says he) the number of our Nobles may be more or
less, as the King pleases: and as Marquesses and Viscounts were (as I said)
interposed to Dukes, Earls and Barons, so he may abstract less, or add more, as
he thinks most fit, for the support of Nobility, for he is Dominus Nobilitatis
and Honoris, or the Fountain of Honor; and that this Prerogative may be more
fully seen herein, in the 21. of Jacobi (it being needless to quote former
precedents) five several Writs were issued after the Pawn was settled; yet
entered in the Margent of the Pawn for that year, to five several persons, viz.
to the Lord Grandison, Sir Robert Chichester, Sir John Sucklin, Knight,
Comptroler of the Kings House, to Sir Thomas Edmunds, Knight, Treasurer of the
Kings Household, and to Sir Richard Weston, Knight, Chancellor of the Exchequer,
to summon and empower them to sit in the Lords House, who otherwise had no
right of Tenure, Prescription or Creation. So in the first of Caroli primi, six
several Writs were issued (and also entered in the Margent of the Pawn for that
year) viz. to Oliver Lord St. John, and again to Sir Thomas Edmunds, Sir John
Sucklin, Sir Richard Weston, and to Sir Robert Nanton, Knight, one of the Kings
Privy Council, and to Sir Humphry May, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster;
and so in 15 Car. primi, two Writs were issued and also entered in the Margent
of the Pawn for that year, viz. to Charles Viscount Wilmot, of the Kings
Privy Council, and to Edward Newburgh, Knight, then Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster, and also of the Kings Privy Council.

12. To sum up all, I apprehend, That those Lords Spiritual which are summoned
by Writ to sit in Parliament are Vital Peers, and the Lords Temporal so
summoned are hereditary Peers, for there are other English Lords, which may be,
but are not summoned, and thereby are no Parliament Peers, yet are Lords, and
upon an hereditary account also; for the King (as I said) can summon or not
summon any of them when he thinks fit, unless any Lord claims a right by Patent
of Creation, or otherwise, and then upon that right he demands his Writ, and it
is seldom denied, if the grounds of their demands be right, if dubious, the
Case is debated in the Lords House, as in the Case of the Lord Abergaveny, etc.

Some are of opinion, That the Lords Temporal are only to be accounted Peers,
and not the Lords Spiritual, first, Because they sit there rather by their
Writs of Summons than Tenures, as anciently they did; secondly, Their Titles of
Lord is but vital at most; thirdly, In case of Treason or Felony committed by a
Spiritual Lord or Lord Temporal, the manner of trying them upon Indictment and
Judgment upon Conviction are clearly different, as will be shown in the Chapter
of Trial by Peers.

13. Notwithstanding these Allegations, it is evident, That the Lords Spiritual
are Pares or Peers, but inter seipsos gradu Episcopali and vitali, but not
Pares to the Temporal Lords, who are Pares gradu haereditario Nobilitatis and
honoris, either Descendent or Created, so that though all the Lords in the
Lords House may be said to be Peers, yet the Lords Temporal being in gradu
celsior is Nobilitatis, are more properly to be accounted so than any other
Degree; in respect that as their Interest is greater than any other Degree, so
they cannot be said to be Pares to any lesser than themselves, and therefore it
may aptly be said, that none but such Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and
Barons as are summoned by Writ to sit in Parliament, are to be accounted Peers
of the Realm, or of Parliament. All other Degrees of Nobility, or Degrees under
these five Degrees, are only Pares sui cujusque ordinis, and not Pares Regni,
and so the House of Commons, in time of Parliament, are Pares minoris
Nobilitatis, and the Lords of the Lords House, Pares majoris Nobilitatis.

The next subject that I am guided to treat of, is concerning Proxees to the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, which may be made either of Lords or Peers, or of
neither Lords nor Peers, yet by this Proximation are, pro hac vice, nobilitated.

CHAP. XII. Of Proxees.
I Am now to speak of such as are substituted by the Lords Spiritual or Lords
Temporal, to sit in the Lords House, and these are called by the name of
Proxees.

1. The Latin word for Proxee is Procurator, which is sometimes Englished
Proxee, and sometimes Proctor, according to the Employment of the Person to
whom it is applied.

Proxee in a Parliamentary sense is constantly applied to such a Deputy or
Substitute as is chosen by any Lord Spiritual or Lord Temporal (by License
first had from the King, in case of just occasion alleged for absence) to
supply his Deputy in the Lords House, and thereupon his Vote to be as
significant to all purposes, as if the absent Lord were present; and therefore
the word Proxee may well be thought to be only the Tachygraphy or short writing
of Proxime, signifying the next in Judgment, Opinion, Degree, or Quality to the
Lord who chooses him for his Proxee.

But Proctor, which is the most literal abbreviation of Procurator, has
several applications, first to such as are in some sort a Limb or Branch of
Parliaments, viz. such as are chosen by the Chapters and Clergy, together with
Archdeacons and Deans, to represent the whole Clergy, as Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses do the Laity or whole Commons of England; but these are more usually
called Representatives, the other constantly Proctors, both being deputed by
distinct Degrees to distinct Purposes, as will be more fully shown.

Secondly, There are also Proctors for the two Universities of Cambridge and
Oxford.

And Thirdly, Proctors of Ecclesiastical Courts, which have no other relation
to Parliaments than according as they are concerned in Elections.

The Proxees which are admitted to the Lords House are like those in the old
Roman Empire, called Procuratores Caesaris, (which were the chief of four sorts
of Procuratores amongst them) because that first and chief of the four were
only employed ad Res publicas administrandas, (the other three for lesser
matters) and so the Proxees of the Lords House being the chief of all other
Proxees, are to be esteemed Publicarum rerum administratores, as fully as the
absent Lords (except in some particulars as to Place, Continuance, etc.)

2 These Noble Proxees are (as I said) lincensed by the King, upon the Petition
or Request of some Lord Spiritual or Lord Temporal, and are not usually made of
Strangers, (who are not Members of the Lords House) nor of the Assistants of
that House.

When the absent Lords occasions of absence have not been just, or his absence
inconvenient to the Public, the King has often denied to License their
Proxees; but when the Allegations have been just, the Proxee has been
sometimes allowed without the Kings License.

Sometimes it has been allowed to the absent Lord, to make a Proxee of such a
person as is otherwise incapacitated to sit in the Lords House, (for by this he
is nobilitated) but there has been none such allowed in this Parliament.

3. Generally the absent Lord does six upon such a Lord as (I said) does sit in
the Lords House, by his own Right and Writ of Summons, whereby the
Proxee-sitting Lord has a double Voice, one for himself, the other for the
absent Lord to whom he is Proxee.

4. These Noble Proxees are made sometimes before the sitting of a Parliament,
(after the Writs are issued) and sometimes in the time of their sitting, and
their Deputations both before and after the sitting have several Forms, as will
be shown.

5. In former times the Lords Spiritual had the privilege to make two or three
Proxees, but since the dissolution of Abbeys, and that Abbots, etc. were
excluded, no Proxor, or absent Lord, does make but one Proxee.

6. The Licenses for Proxees (as I said) were granted by the King, upon the
absent Lords Petition; which Petition from Edward the Third's time was in this
Form:

Serenissimo Principi Domino Edwardo Dei gratia Regi Angliae, Franciae and
Hiberniae Domino, etc. Quia impedimentis varijs and arduis negotijs, etc. sumus
multipliciter impediti quo instante Parliamento vestro apud Westmonasterium in
Quind', etc. proximo futur' personaliter esse non valentes. (And so others, for
other reasons) pray that he may be allowed his Proxee; whereupon License was
granted, as may be seen in ancient Journals, but more lately in Queen
Elizabeth's time, thus:

Right-trusty and well-beloved, We greet you well. Whereas we are informed,
That by reason of Sickness you are not able to make repair hither to this our
Parliament, to be holden at Westminster, We have thought good, by these our
Letters, to dispense with you for your absence, and to License you to remain
still at home for this time, so nevertheless that you send up your Proxee, of
such Personage as may be for you in your Name, to give his Voice and Assent, or
Denial, to such Matters as shall be concluded on in our said Parliament. And
this our Letter shall be your Warrant.

Given under our Signet at our Palace at Westminster, the 20th of November, in
the Eighth Year of Our Reign.

8. These Licenses are usually entered in the Signet or Privy-Seal-Offices, (and
pass no further) but are certified to the Lords when sitting.

9. This regular Method of Licenses continued till about the end of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, but by the kindness (or connivance of her Successors to the
Nobles) there has been of late no more Ceremony used than a Verbal Motion to
the King; and some Nobles by that Indulgence have constituted Proxees without
application to the King, only adding in their Deputations to their Proxees
(viz. per Licentiam Domini Nostri Regis) conceiving that the very mentioning of
the Kings License was a sufficient acknowledgment of his Prerogative herein;
however these following Proxee-Deputations, or derivative Writs (which I cite
as Precedents) were regularly obtained.

The Form of a Proxee-License from one Lord Temporal to another before the
sitting of a Parliament.
10. OMnibus Christi Fidelibus ad quos hoc praesens scriptum pervenerit,
Rupertus Palatinus Rheni, Dux Bavariae and Cumbriae, Comes Holdernes in regno
Angliae salutem Noveritis me praefatum principem (per Licentiam Serenissimi
Domini nostri Regis) a suo Parliamento tenendo and inchoando apud
Westmonasterium in dicto regno Octavo die Mensis Maij proximo futuro
sufficienter excusatum abesse; Nominare ordinare and constituere dilectum mihi
in Christo praenobilem and honoratissimum virum Jacobum Ducem, Marchionem and
Comitem Ormondiae, Comitem Osoriae, Carrickiae and Breconiae Dominum Thurles
Baronem, meum verum certum and indubitatum Factorem, Attornatum and
Procuratorem, eidemque Procuratori meo dare and concedere plenam Authoritatem
and Potestatem pro me and nomine meo, and de super quibuscunque causis
exponendis seu declarandis tractandis, tractatibusque hujusmodi mihi factis seu
faciendis, Concilium nomine meo impendendum. Statutisque etiam and
ordinationibus quae ex maturo and deliberato Judicio Dominorum in eodem
Parliamento Congregatorum, inactitari seu ordinari contigerint nomine meo
consentiendum, eisdemque (si opus fuerit) subscribendum, Caeteraque omnia and
singula quae in praemissis necessaria fuerint, aut quomodolibet requisita
facienda and exercenda, in tam amplo modo and forma prout ego ipse facere
possem, aut deberem si praesens personaliter interessem, ratum and gratum
habens and habiturus totum and quicquid dictus Procurator meus statuerit and
fecerit, in praemissis.

In cujus rei testimonium praesentibus subscripsi, Sigillumque meum apposui
datum apud Westmonasterium decimo sexto die Aprilis Anno Regni dicti Domini
nostri Caroli Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regis
fidei defensoris, etc. decimo tertio Annoque salutis nostrae 1661.
11. This was subscribed (Rupert) and sealed with his Seal at large upon an
annexed Label.

12. All Proxee-Writs of this nature are given into the Clerks of the
Parliament before the Proxees are admitted, and their Licenses either produced
to the Lords (if written) or affirmed by some other Lords that the Kings
consent was thereto.

13. This was the only derivative Proxee-Writ which was made by a Lord Temporal
of this Parliament, 1661. before the Sessions, and though the Foreign Titles of
the Proxor and of his Proxee are mentioned in the Writ Honoris Gratia, yet it
operates nothing in this Case; for as the Proxor could not make a Proxee
without the Kings License, written or vernal, so he could not be a Proxee by
virtue of his Foreign Titles, but only by their English or Welsh Titles, viz.
as Duke of Cumberland he was Proxor, not as Palatine of the Rhine, or Duke of
Bavaria, and the Earl of Brecknock was his Proxee, as Earl of Brecknock, not as
Duke of Ormond.

14. Had there been more of these Derivatives before the Sessions, they must
have been in the same words, differing only in the Titles of the Proxor and
Proxee; and those that were made the Parliament sitting, viz. the 10th of May,
the Earl of Holland (before any Prorogation) made the Earl of Suffolk his
Proxee, and are also in the same words with the other Form, mutato nomine, and
by changing the future to the present, viz. Tenendo and Inchoando, to tento and
inchoato, but after a Prorogation the words are as in the next Writ (at inde
prorogato, etc.) And these two Derivatives are sufficient to show the
difference between Writs made before the Parliament, or before any Prorogation,
and the Writs made after a Prorogation.

15. The recital of Prorogation or Prorogations are not only so in Derivatives,
but in all original Writs which are issued after a Prorogation, by reason of
the death of any Lord, to summon another.

I have entered this Writ to the Archbishop here, though I shall speak more of
it when I come to treat of Writs made in time of Parliament, because it
contains many Clauses different from the Derivatives to the Lords Temporal,
especially in the last Paragraph more observable.

The Form of the Archbishop of Canterbury's derivative Proxee-Writ to the
Bishop of London after a Prorogation.
Gulielmus providentia divina Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus totius Angliae
Primas and Metropolitanus
Salutem in Domino sempiternam,
Cum Serenissimus Dominus noster Rex, quibusdam de causis sublimitati suae
intimatis licentiam a praesenti hoc suo Parliamento tento and inchoato apud
Westmonasterium octavo die Maij Anno regni sui decimo tertio and continuato ad
decimum nonum diem Maij Anno decimo quarto dicti Domini Regis and inde
prorogato ad decimum octavum diem Februarij proxime inde sequentem nobis
absentandi ex suo speciali gratia and favore nuper concesserit dummodo sidelem
aliquem Procuratorem, vice locoque meis ponerem ordinarem and constituerem,
Noveritis Igitur me praefatum Archiepiscopum dilectum mihi in Christo
Reverendum in Christo Patrem Gilbertum eadem divina providentia Dominum London
Episcopum meum verum certum and indubitatum Factorem, Actorem, Procuratorem,
Attornatum, negotiorumque nostrorum Gestorum and Nuntium specialem, nominare
ordinarefacere and constituere per p'sentes, dando and concedendo eidem
Procuratori meo plenam authoritatem and potestatem de and super quibuscunque
causis and negotijs statum and utilitatem dicti Domini nostri Regis Reipublicae
incolumitatem and Ecclesiae Anglicanae quietem concernentibus, quae in praefato
Parliamento qualibet ejusdem sessione per dicti domini Regis statum agitari
contigerint tractandi, tractibusque hujusmodimihi factis seu faciendis
concilium and auxilium nomine meo imponendis etiam and ordinationibus quae
Communi statu praedicta ordinatione ibidem fieri and ordinari contigerint
nomine meo consentiendi, and ijsdem si opus fuerit subscribendi vel
dissentiendi, Caeteraque omnia and singula quae in praemissis aut in aliquo
praemissorum necessaria fuerint seu quomodolibet requisita faciendi expediendi
and exercendi in tam amplis modo and forma prout ego ipse facere possem and
deberem si praesens personaliter interessem, Promittoque me ratum gratum and
firmum perpetuo habiturum totum and quicquid dictus meus Procurator statuerit
aut fecerit in praemissis, and sub Hypotheca and obligatione omnium and
singulorum bonorum meorum in ea part cautionem expono per presents,

In cujus rei Testimonium manum and sigillum meum Apposui.
Dat apud Lambeth' vicesimo primo Novembris Anno regni dicti Domini nostri
Caroli Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regis fidei
defensoris, etc. Annoque Dom. 1662.
17. All derivative Proxee-Writs made either from a Lord Spiritual or Temporal,
to any of their own Degrees, or of other Degrees, do not continue longer than
one Session, without a new Derivative License, or Proxee-Instrument.

18. As to the places of the Proxees in the Lords House, they are not mentioned
in the Act of Precedence, so I shall conclude with Mr. Elsing, That surely they
did not sit in the Lords Seat whose Proxee he was, yet in all Councils and
Dyets beyond the Seas he does.

19. Though they are Nobilitated by sitting as Proxees, yet they are not to be
accounted Peers, unless they were Peers before they were Proxees.

Thus having said as much as I think fit of Writs to the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, both Original and Derivative, I am come to the Fifth Exemplar,
concerning the Assistants to those Lords, Peers, and Proxees.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Assistants to the House of Peers, comprised in the Fifth
Exemplar of the Pawn.
1. HAving done with all the Degrees which are mentioned in the Act of
Precedencies, and given an account by four Exemplars of the Writs to the
Princes of the Blood, of the Writs to the Archbishops and Bishops, of the Writ
to the Lord Chancellor, of the Writs to the Hereditary Nobles of Parliament, (
viz. Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons) as they are mentioned in
the Pawn, and also given an Abstract of such Patents of Creation as Entitle
some of them to be the more capable of Summons, as also of Peers and their
Proxies, I come now to the Degrees which are not mentioned in the Act of
Precedence, but are comprised under the fifth Exemplar-Writ, recited in the
forementioned Pawn, viz. to the Lord Chief Justice of England, and of the
Consimilars to his Writ; and these are different from all the former (except
the Lord Chancellors, of which I have spoken) because these do not sit in the
Lords House by virtue of any Tenure or Patent of Creation, or according to the
Act of Precedence, but only by Writs, as Assistants, (for none do sit there
without Original Writs, except Proxies, and Masters of Chancery, etc.) as will
be shown. But before I treat of them distinctly, I shall set down some
Observations on their Professions.

1. These Assistants do all profess the Study and Knowledge of Laws, and
therefore have their Places allotted in the very heart of the Lords House, that
they may with the more ease give their Advice to that Noble Body, in all
Matters which concern either the Theory or Practice of what is just or fit to
be done.

2. Now there are certain Faculties and Virtues springing from the Profession
of these Assistants ( viz. Jus, or Right; Justitia, or Justice; Judicium, or
Judgment; Ratio, or Reason; Prudentia, or Prudence; Aequitas, or Equity;
Discretio, or Discretion; Sapientia, or Wisdom; and Scientia Legum, or
Knowledge of the Laws:) to whith (it is presumed) they have attained, and are
thereby made fit for Assistants; yet that these Virtues may be the more
distinctly discerned, I shall take the freedom to explain them.

Jus, (the Latin for Right) is the foundation on which Justitia, or Justice, is
built.

Justitia is status, or statio Juris, quia Jus stat vel exercetur per
Justitiam. So that Jus is the principal, Justitia the Efflux of it.

Judicium, or Judgment, is the fixed resolution, determination, or sentence of
what is true, or false, good, or evil, just, or unjust.

Reason is a Ray of Divine Light, which guides a man to judge what is Just or
Justice.

Prudence is in the nature of Providence, (from Providere) to foresee the
conveniences or inconveniences of so doing or not doing right to one man,
that it may do good to one, and not hurt another.

Discretion is also to discern the nature or difference of things represented,
and to manage them to their right end, and by this

Equity is ushered in, which is a conscientious care that all things may be
equally and proportionably done toward those who exspect Justice, when the
matter concerns distinct persons, or interests, and then

Sapientia or Wisdom advances it self, and includes the Scientia Legum, or
Knowledge of the Laws, and that imploys all the Faculties of the Soul, and has
a particular Intellect and Inspiration to see, improve and manage all things to
a just and right end, and teaches the Professors to instruct others in the
principal Rules of perfect Conversation with each other, viz Honest vivere,
neminem laedere, and suum cuique tribuere, which is to live soberly, and
temperately, to offend no man wilfully, and to give tribute to whom tribute
belongs, and to every man what is their right to enjoy, or in our power to
perform.

All these do constitute a wise man, and the Professors of Laws have more
opportunities to demonstrate them to others, and by these Virtues they become
Accomplished Assistants to a Parliament both in Divine and Human Matters.

3. But the Imbecility of our Human Nature is such, that no man is so
universally knowing in all things, as to give a true Judgment of all
particulars, without a light or information from others, whereby to judge of
what is just, right, or fit to be done; especially in the contentions arising
from the Mechanic Arts, or Trades, and some other Sciences, which are a
significant part of the Fabric of any Kingdom, or State; for supposing two
Artificers, professing different Arts, are both employed to the perfecting of
some Public Work, wherein their joint Skills are necessarily required, in
which they are at variance upon some mystical parts in their Trades, and
without determination of their differences and concerns, neither of them can
proceed in the joint Design; and thereupon they refer themselves to one of the
Professors of the Law, to settle the matter between them.

But it is vulgarly thought beneath one of these eminent Professors to dive
into Mechanic Trades or lesser Sciences; yet both of these Artists informing
him of the true state of the mysteries of their respective Trades, the Judge
from thence makes a rational determination of what is fit to be done, as well
for the support of their Trades, as for the common good to others, by
preventing fallacies, or circumventions, or the like contests; and this he
gains from the impartments and arguments of these Artists, and so weighing
their alternate allegations in one balance, and the common good in another, he
makes so peculiar a determination and Sentence, as to convince both parties,
and this from the ground of their different Arts and Impartments.

Now the Judge or Justice, even by these daily accidents, and references, does
daily gain Knowledge, and by justly managing this Knowledge grows to be
generally esteemed a wise Man, not only from these lower particulars (upon
which the Opinion of the Vulgar is founded but from his insight and transacting
in matters of a more transcendent nature, which daily also come before him
(either of Public or Private Concerns.)

But in all Transactions in this World there is a Right and a Wrong, which
latter is termed Unjust, and sometimes it may be positively judged to be so;
yet it may so happen that summum jus may do injury, whereupon there is a
necessity of interposing Equity, lest the Wrong by Custom should prove an
esteemed Right, or that Right by necessary fixed Rules, (which may be safe at
one time and not at another) or an unlimited use or power, should slide into
Wrong; so as the due and critical time of applying this Equity to summum jus
(which is gained by reading Law and Precedents) does still improve and exalt
the Character of a wise Man.

4. But because most men are either negligently or wilfully ignorant in the way
of attaining these excellent Virtues, the wisdom of all Governors has (by the
help of these learned Professors) established certain Rules to direct men
(which the Latin call Regulae, from Regere) intimating the care of Governors
in Exhibiting such Rules for the good of those who are under Tuition, but
generally such Rules are called Laws (which the Latins term Leges, from Legere,
to Read) so as every man, who is not careless of his own Felicity or Justice
toward others, may thereby be instructed to what he ought to perform.

5. In ancient times when People were not dispersed into various Regions, nor
into great Societies of Towns, Cities and Kingdoms, but consisted of some few
Families, or Villages, it was no hard matter to transmit those Rules or Laws to
one another, by singing them in Meeter, or some other ways of Tradition; but
when those lesser Societies grew into the greater forms of Government, their
Legislators invented a more certain way or art of communicating their just
Rules or Laws, by legible Characters, Words, and Sentences, either Writ or
Printed, (containing those Rules) which (as I said) were originally, only
certain tunable unwritten Instructions; and after, when men's dispositions grew
more and more depraved, there was something of Coertion added to those Laws,
which Coertions (or inflicting of Penalties for disobedience to those Laws)
increased with the increase of unconformable tempers: and herein there is
nothing so great an argument of a wise and good disposition, as when he makes
it his study to satisfy himself (and thereby able to inform others) in the
knowledge of such Laws or Rules as may make our Lives in this World happy and
conscientious, which can no ways be obtained, but by knowing and obeying good
Laws.

6. For these are they (as the learned Sir John Davies says) to which all
Kingdoms and Commonwealths are indebted for all their temporal blessings of
Peace, Plenty, Civility, and all moral parts of honesty. By these (says he) we
enjoy our Relations, Lands, Goods, good Names, or what ever is sweet or dear
unto us, for quid sunt Regna nisi magna latrocinia sine Justitia and Legibus;
the Land would be full of Thieves, the Sea of Pirates, the Commons would rise up
against the Nobility, the Nobility against the Crown; without these there would
be nothing certain, no Contracts, no Commerce, no Conversation, but Confusion,
and even Dissolution of Human Society: for good Laws are Comforts to the
Grieved, Counsels to the Perplexed, Reliefs to the Circumvented, Preventions of
Ruin to the Improvident, Preservations to the Innocent, Supports to the
Impotent; they Relieve the Oppressed, protect the Orphan, Widow, and Strangers,
they are Oculi Caecis, and Pedes Claudis; (Cures for lame and blind) To sum up
all, they are the Secular Arms to defend both the Church, True Religion, and
the Commonweal of the Kingdom or State.

7. For these reasons, the Successive Kings of this Island have constantly (as
rewards) set such a mark upon those who are Professors of the Laws, and whose
study and experience in Laws have attained to so great a sagacity, (as to know
how to apply them to the public good) that the chief of them is made Lord
Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England; (of whom I have
spoken, who for the most part has been a Professor of Divinity, Law, or
Equity) the next (of whom I am now to treat) is made Chief Justice of England;
his very Title Justice rendering him in one sense even Superior to the Law it
self; (for the Law it self is but Lex tacens, but he that distributes that Law,
is Lex loquens.

8. This Title of Justice (given also to every one of the twelve Judges or
chief Dispensers of Laws) is so ancient, that in former times they were called
Justitiae, (as containing that virtue not only in the singular, but in the
plural number) and afterward they were called Justitiarii Angliae, and
Justitiarii, (without addition of Angliae) and after Justitiarii Regis, which
last Title was to the four Justices of the Kings Bench; the chief of which four
was anciently called Summus, and at this day Capitalis Justitiarius Angliae;
(which generally we term in English, the Lord Chief Justice of England) there
was also anciently another sort of Justitiarii ad placita, (applied only to the
four Justices of the Common Pleas, (the chief of which was, and is to this day
also called Capitalis Justitiarius, (omitting Angliae) and which we in English
term, the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.

And to ease the People from going for Justice to them, these Justices did go
to the People, to distribute Justice.

These Motions in process of time were called their Circuits, because they did
in a manner go round the Kingdom; and for these Motions they were called
Justitiarii Itinerantes, and Justitiarii ad Assisas, Juratas and
Certificationes. There were also anciently another sort of Justitiarii, (which
it may be for distinction sake were called Barons Scaccarii) consisting also
of four; and this Title is applied only to the Exchequer, where their Justice
was to be shown in the management of the Revenue of the Crown; and these four
also were and are constantly mixed with the other Eight, in their Itineranciis:
in all making Twelve.

9. And for further Honor to these Eminent Professors, as well out of
Parliament as in Parliament, they have peculiar Courts, (as Regalias allotted
to them) wherein they have daily opportunities to manifest their Wisdom.

These Professors I divide into three Orbs, and their Courts accordingly, viz.
to the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper, the Court of Chancery; to the Lord Chief
Justice of England, the Court called the Kings Bench; to the Master of the
Rolls (or Keeper of the most eminent Office of Records) the Rolls Chapel; (in
the nature of a Court) to the other Lord Chief Justice, the Court of Common
Pleas; to the Lord Chief Baron, the Court of Exchequer; and these are the five
Courts or Regalias belonging to five of the first Orb of that Profession; yet
not excluding the other Nine: so as,

The second Orb consists of Nine more, viz. three Justices of the Kings Bench,
three of the Common Pleas, and three other Barons of the Exchequer; and these
have gradual interests in those three Courts, (as will be shown) and with the
other five do make fourteen, of the first and second Orb; and as a further
addition of Honor, twelve of these fourteen (in their Circuits twice every
year) have Courts also provided for them, almost in every County of England (as
will be shown.)

The third Orb of the Professors of Law, are not usually above six in number;
(yet sometimes more, sometimes fewer (as will be shown) I mean of such only as
have Summons to sit in Parliament,) and these have Courts also allotted for
them, viz. the Kings Sergeants at Law, the Kings Attorney General, the Kings
Solicitor General, have the Inns of Courts, (though common also to under
Graduates and Students) and the two principal Secretaries of State have the
Kings Court or Palace for their Regalias; so as the before mentioned five of
the first Orb, and nine of the second Orb, and six of the third Orb, (these
three Orbs being the most eminent of that Profession) have not only the
Jurisdiction and an Interest in the said Courts, but as an higher mark of
Honor and Esteem, though they were no Lords, or Barons of the Realm, yet they
were and are usually Summoned by Writs to the High Court of Parliament, when
ever it Assembled, and there they are also dignified with peculiar Places
appointed for them, and many Privileges of which, with their Number, and the
Causes of Variation of that Number, I shall give an Account in the ensuing
Sections.

10. These (as I said) are employed in the Lords House to be Assistants with
their sage advices, who are perfect knowers both of general and particular
Laws, viz. in the Laws of God and Nature, the Civil Laws, (practiced in most
parts of Europe) the Ecclesiastic Laws of other Nations, but more particularly
of our own, of our Common Statute, Municipal, and Customary, (and Bylaws,
which are alterae Leges) and many others of other Titles, which we derive and
still retain from the old Roman Empire, Saxons, etc. And thus fraught with
knowledge of Laws, they bring them for the most part into the Hive, or compass
of our Common and Statute Law, and their universal knowledge makes them
esteemed Learned, their Learning indues them with Wisdom, their Wisdom enables
them to be Justices or Judges out of Parliament, and in Parliament to be
Assistants there, for the better carrying on of Public Actions and
Consultations; so as the present Laws may be preserved, or such new ones made
as their Wisdoms shall think fit to advise; there being sometimes as much
necessity of making new, or correcting, altering, explaining, or enlarging the
old, as in possitively preserving them; for when a Buttress has sustained an
House many years, and is it self decayed by time, it is to the safety of the
House, to have another Supporter in its room; for tempora mutant mores, and
mores may justly mutare leges, (considered according to the diversity of
circumstances) and herein consists the great Masterpiece of advice, by turning
a nolumus mutare, into a rational volumus.

11. Having now given a short discourse of Law, and the Professors of it in
general, occasioning just grounds for their Assistance, I shall proceed to the
particular Titles of the chiefest Professors of it, and according to my first
proposed Method, go on with the fifth Exemplar, mentioned in the aforesaid
Parliament Pawn, viz. to the Lord chief Justice of England.

The Form of the Fifth Exemplar-Writ to the Lord chief Justice of England.
CArolus Secundus Dei gratia Angl' Scot' Franc' and Hibern' Rex fidei
defensor', etc.
Dilecto and fideli suo Roberto Foster Militi Capitali Justiciario nostro ad
placita coram nobis tenend'assign' salutem.
Quia de advisamento and assensu Consilij nostri pro quibusdam arduis and
urgentibus negotijs nos, statum, and defensionem Regni nostri Angliae and
Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernen' quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem
nostram Westm' octavo die Maij prox' futur' teneri ordinavimus, and ibidem
vobiscum and cum magnatibus and proceribus dicti Regni nostri Colloquium habere
and tractatum, vobis mandamus firmiter injungend', quod omnibus alijs
pretermissis predictis die, and loco personaliter intersitis nobiscum, ac cum
caeteris de Concilio nostro super dictis negotijs tractatur', vestrum Consilium
impensur'. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis

Test me ipso apud Westm' decimo octavo die Februarij Anno regni nostri
tertiodecimo.
The next words in the forementioned Pown are consimilia Brevia diriguntur
personis subscriptis.

But before I speak of those Consimilars, I shall add some few Observations on
this Exemplar.

Observations on the Exemplar and its Consimilars.
I Did think to have made distinct Observations on this and the following
Consimilars, but finding how curiously they, in their Jurisdictions, Power,
Authorities, and Operations are intermixed, separated, and yet united, I shall
speak of them as they spring up from my Recollections, on which others may
graft more, as best suiting to theirs.

1. Neither this chief Assistant, nor any of the following Assistants (which
are called Consimilars in the Pawns) are mentioned in the Kings Warrant to the
Lord Chancellor for summoning a Parliament, otherwise than in these words:

Wherefore We Will and Command you forthwith, upon receipt hereof, and by
warrant of the same, to cause such and so many Writs to be made and sealed
under our great Seal, for the accomplishment of the same, as in like cases has
been used and accustomed, as may be seen in the first Chapter.

And thereupon the Lord Chancellor (according to the ancient Custom, and such
Precedents as I have and shall set down) sends his Warrant to the Clerks of the
Pettibag (in haec verba) as in the first Chapter.

You are hereby required forthwith to prepare for the great Seal of England the
several Writs of Summons for the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, as also for the
Judges and others, to appear at the Parliament to be holden, etc. in such
method and form, and directed to such persons as are and have been usual in
such cases, etc.

Now that the Lord Chief Justice (and the Consimilars, of which I am to speak)
have been anciently and usually summoned, I have and shall show in their
following order.

2. In the Act of Precedence there is no mention made of the Places of these
Assistants, but there having never been any dispute among themselves of their
Places or Precedencies (for they are perfect in their own Regularities and
Seniorities, etc.) it had been but expense of time and Paper to insert them,
and therefore according to the constant order by which they have sat anciently
in the Lords House I shall treat distinctly of them, so soon as I have ruin
through some few mixed Observations.

3. This great Minister of Justice was anciently made by Letters Patents, with
the Clause of Quam diu nobis placuerit, and so it continued till about the end
of Henry the Third, and then, and ever since, he has not been constituted by
Commission or Patent, (as all the other Judges are) but by Writ only, in this
form.

Rex, etc. R. F. Militi salutem Sciatis quod constituimus vos Justitiarium
nostrum Capitalem ad placita coram nobis tenend'durante been placito, etc.
Test, etc. And this Writ makes him capable of his Parliament-Writ before
recited.

4. The Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal (as I said) is
admitted Chancellor or Keeper by delivery only of the Great Seal to him, and
taking his Oath, without Patent or Writ; but this Lord Chief Justice is
admitted to his Office by Writ only, and all the other Assistants (of whom I
shall speak) do enjoy their Offices in their respective Courts by Patent only,
and all of them durante been placito (except the Master of the Rolls, whose
Patent is durante vita) as will be shown.

5. But neither the delivery of the Great Seal to the Lord Chancellor, or Lord
Keeper, nor the aforesaid Official Writ to the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench, nor the respective Patents by which the other Justices enjoy their
respective Offices, do entitle them to sit in the Lords House, without such an
especial Parliament Writ of Assistance, as is shown in the Exemplar before
recited, (to which all the other Assisting Writs have a Consimilitude.)

5. This Parliament, or Assisting Exemplar Writ to the Lord Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench, and all the Consimilars to it (mutato nomine and titulo
Officii) agrees in all parts with the Writ to the Lord Chancellor, (as I have
before shown) except the alteration of the words, Praedilecto and perquam
Fideli, into Dilecto and Fideli, which are in this and in all the Writs to the
following Assistants.

6. The differences between this Writ and that to the Hereditary Lords in
Parliament, are partly shown in the Observations on the Lord Chancellors Writ,
the rest will be shown.

7. This Parliament writ diffeers but in few words from the form of the writ
issued in the 15th. of Edw. 2 d. (from whence I take my rise (nor from the
Successive Writs to this time) which for the satisfaction of others, (whereby
they may see that no new form is obtruded on them) I have set here down
Verbatim.

Rex Dilecto and Fideli suo Willielmo de Bereford salutem Quia super diversis
and arduis negotiis nos and statum Regni nostri specialiter tangentibus in
instante Parliamento nostro die Dominca prox' futur' ante Festum sancti
Laurencii prox' futur' fecimus summoneri, vobiscum and cum caeteris de Concilio
nostro colloquium habere volumus, and tractatum, vobis mandamus firmiter
injungentes quod omnibus aliis pretermissis dictis die and loco personaliter
intersitis nobiscum, and cum ceteris de Consilio nostro super premissis
tractatur' vestrumque Consilium impensuri Et hoc nullatenus omittat' Test, etc.

In this Writ the words after Regni nostri, (viz. and Ecclesiae Anglicanae are
omitted;) for the Church in those days was almost wholly managed by
Ecclesiastic Persons, who were Conversant in the Civil, and Canon Laws, etc.
but in the 26th. of Henry the Eighth, when the power of the Pope was here
abridg'd, those words, and Ecclesiae Anglicanae were entered and continued to
this day.

Also after the word Vobiscum these words, ac cum Praelatis Magnatibus and
Proceribus are omitted; but (as near as I can collect) some of the most eminent
of the Professors of the Law, (as the Lord Chief Justice, and Lord Chief Baron,
etc.) were sometimes Summoned by Peeral Writs, that is by such Writs that were
sent to the Nobles, and then the words ac cum Praelatis, etc. (as in Richard
the Seconds time to Jo. Cavendish Capital'Justic'; and in Henry the Fifths
time, to William Hanckford and many more) were inserted; but when ever they
were Summoned merely as Assistants, the words cum Praelatis, etc. were left
out, and so have been ever since Edward the Fourths time.

8. This Parliament Writ is directed, Capitali Justitiario nostro ad placita,
etc. and so is his Writ by which he enjoys that great Office, yet his common
and general appelation is, Capitali Justitiario Angliae, which we call Lord
Chief Justice of England, and sometimes, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench,
and by some one of those Titles; he is called so in several Acts of Parliament,
and ancient Records; (as I have hinted) and though the word Lord be added to
his appellation, both in his Assistancies and Office, (and so to some other of
the Assistants) yet neither he nor they are to be counted Lords of Parliament;
for his Writ by which he enjoys his Office (which is the Inducement to his
Assisting Writ) is but durante Placito, (and honor Officii) and his Assistance
being but durante Parliamento, neither of them can six the Title further than
the continuance of his Office or Assistance.

And here it may be observed, that the word Vos (a word of great eminency,
always signifying a plural, though sometimes applied to a single Person) is
used in this Official Writ (before mentioned) to the this Lord Chief Justice,
but is not in his Parliament Writ, nor in any of the Patents or
Parliament-Writs to the other Justices, of whom I shall speak in order.

9. The antiquity of this great Minister of Justice, and his Court, is
doubtless more ancient (under various Titles) than from Hen. the Thirds time;
(from whence we vulgarly compute it,) for the Civilians do acknowledge that,
Justitiarii sunt umbrae quaedam illorum qui olim (...) apud Graecos dicebantur,
designati ad Custodiam Juris and aequitatis. However, Sir Edward Coke to prove
its antiquity, tells us of an Epitaph in Ramsy Abbey, engraven on Stone in these
words, Alvinus incliti Regis Edgari Cognatus, totius Angliae Aldermannus,
(says, that by Aldermannus is meant, Capitalis Justitiarius Angliae, and
consequently his Assistance in all Councils before the name of Parliament, (and
since that name) has always been esteemed necessary, and (as he says) all
these Courts of Justice are so ancient, that they seem to have their Originals
from Custom, rather than by Commission.

10. His Jurisdiction is so great, as well out of Parliament as in Parliament,
that often times the Lords do wave their own Power and Privileges of using
their own Officers, and do direct the Chief Justice to send out his single
Warrant to Seize on Persons in case of Treason, or Suspicion of it, or for
other high Crimes or Misdemeanors; and the House of Commons have likewise sent
to him to come to their House upon the like occasions, as happened when by
their directions his Lordship sent out Warrants to Seize the five Lords, of
whom I shall speak in the Chapter of Trials.

11. Other uses are also made of him, and some other of the Assistants in
Parliament; for when the Lords have any matter of importance to impart to the
House of Commons, then the Lord Chief Justice with the other Chief Justice, or
Lord Chief Baron, or some other of the Judges (but always one of them, and no
more) is joined with him in delivering the same; but in matters of less
importance, two Masters of Chancery are employed (as will be shown.)

12. When any Writs of Error, or Writs of Habeas Corpus, or Trials of Peers, or
when any Pleas of the Crown, or other cases Criminal, Civil, and sometimes
Ecclesiastic, or indeed any matters of Law are to be heard and determined in
Parliament; as also in the penning of new, and altering, explaining or
repealing of former Statutes, their assistances are required, and more
especially the Chief Justice.

13. The number of Assistants Summoned by Writ to appear in Parliament, (Cum
caeteris de Consilio) from the time of Henry the Third, to the 21. of Henry the
Eighth, consisted of an uncertain number, sometimes above forty, sometimes
under; but from the 21 of Henry the Eighth, (from which time the extant Pawns
do give an exact account of them) they never exceeded 27. and sometimes were
not above 13. or 14. But in all Parliaments since Edw. the Firsts time, some of
them were Summoned, and very likely before; For Mr. Prin, (though in his
Breviary of Parliament Writs, page 36. he tells us of Twenty four Parliaments,
(from the 49. of Hen. the Third, to the 49. of Edw. the Third) and many more
which he says he omits; of which Parliaments, he says, there is no mention of
Writs of Summons to any of the Kings Council, Justices, Officers, or others in
the Rolls of these Parliaments; yet he kindly ascribes it to the negligence or
slothfulness of Clerks, in omitting the entries of their Writs. This he says,
but he had done much better for his own justification and others satisfaction,
(being entrusted by his Majesty with the Records of the Tower) if those Records
which he cites, (both in his Breviary, and many others montion'd by him in Sir
Robert Cottons Abridgment) now wanting, might have been restored by him to
their ancient Repositories there.

14. As to the Lord Chief Justice, and the Assistants Places in the Lords
House, none of them, as I have said, have their Places there by the Act of
Precedency's, but rather by custom and favor; of which I shall speak more,
when I come to the actual Sitting of the Parliament, as also of their
Privileges and Employments there.

15. As to the Officers which are under the Lord Chief Justice his
Jurisdiction, none of them are employed about the Summoning of a Parliament,
but many of them are employed in other matters in time of Parliaments, as in
cases of Errors, etc. but more chiefly upon Trials of Peers, (when only the
chief Clerk of the Crown in the Kings Bench is the principal Manager of them)
as will be shown.

16. Regularly no Officer or Court, either in Parliament or out of Parliament,
have greater Power or Jurisdiction, or more public affairs to manage; (except
the Lord Chancellor in Chancery) and yet in some cases above it: For all
appeals from the Chancery and other Courts, are determined in this Court, and
no appeal from this Court, but to the High Court of Parliament, and all Records
which are brought from other Courts into this, are never returned back into
those Courts from whence they were brought, and many others which might be
instanc't.

17. To conclude, his Lordship, or the other Lord Chief Justice, or one of
them, are constantly appointed to be Speaker of the House of Lords, Pro
tempore, when the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper is absent, which is usually
done by a particular Writ, which I shall enter amongst emergent Writs, Chap. 14.

Thus having said as much as I think convenient concerning this Exemplar, with
some intermixtures of some of the Consimilars, I proceed to give a short touch
of each of the Consimilars more distinctly; and first of the Master of the
Rolls.

Of the Consimilar Writ to the Master of the Rolls.
1. THE Office of Master of the Rolls is granted by Patent under several
Titles, viz. Clericus parvae Bugae and Custos Rotulorum and Magister Domus
Conversorum, and he Sits in the Rolls to hear Causes, etc. by virtue of a
Commission to that purpose.

2. But his Writ of Summons to a Parliament is directed as in this Pawn, viz.
Harbotello Grimston Baronetto Magistro Rotulorum Cancellariae suae, and then
the remaining part of his Consimilar, as also the rest of the following
Consimilar Writs, agree in the same words with the Exemplar to the Lord Chief
Justice, as in Sect. the Eleventh.

3. This Magister Rotulorum, or Custos Rotulorum, or Clericus parvae bugae, is
the same which we call in English Master of the Rolls, anciently called Clerk
of the Rolls; but from Henry the Sevenths time, when the Clergy did decline in
their Temporal Employments, he was and is still called Master of the Rolls.

4. In the absence of the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper, he Sits as Judge in
the Chancery, and therefore by Sir Edward Coke is called his Assistant, and at
other times he Sits as Judge of Causes in the Chapel of that House, which in
Henry the Thirds time, was employed as a place of Charity to such Jews as
should turn to the Christian Religion; but those Jews being Banished, Edward
the Third did dispose of it for the keeping of Records, and joined it to the
Office of Custos Rotulorum, and of the Pettibag, (which Office of Pettibag
seems to be a lesser Bag or place of Records.)

5. So that he has three Titles, viz. Clericus Pettibagae, or Clerk of the
Pettibag; (he being the chief of three Clerks more of that Office) Secondly,
Magister Rotulorum, or Master of the Rolls, (or Clerk or Preserver of such
Records as do at any time pass the Great Seal, and are sent to his Custody,
either in the Office of the Rolls, called the Rolls Office, or to the Pettibag
Office) where his under Clerks do attend on purpose to produce them as
occasions require.

Thirdly, His third Title is Master of the Chancery, which Title is given to
twelve Persons, of which twelve he is te chief.

5. Formerly, and even to this day, the greatest part of these Twelve were
Constituted of Doctors of the Civil Law; however Eleven of those are so
constantly disposed of, as that some of them do Sit in the Lords House in time
of Parliament, and at other times with the Lord Chancellor in the Court of
Chancery upon hearing of Cases, others with the Master of the Rolls, when he
Sits in the Chancery, or at the Rolls, where he has a Jurisdiction to hear or
determine Causes, yet appealable to the Lord Chancellor.

5. There are other Masters of Chancery, called Extraordinary, and six Clerks
of eminent Quality, and other Clerks employed both in the Chancery and Rolls;
but these are not Summoned to Parliaments, (of whom I shall speak more) but in
in those capacities which I have mentioned, the Master of the Rolls, as Master
of the Rolls, or chief Clerk of the Pettibag, or both, or chief Master of
Chancery, or in all three Capacities, he is very Assisting to a Parliament,
especially in the business of Summons, etc.

For as I have shown in Cap. 2. whenever the Kings Warrant is sent to the Lord
Chancellor to issue out Writs for a Parliament, his Lordship either sends it,
or a like Warrant, to the Master of the Rolls, who as chief Clerk of the
Pettibag causes the other Clerks of the Office to ingross all the Writs, (both
for the House of Lords and House of Commons) so as they may be fit for the
Great Seal; and these being thus done, and fairly abstracted and ingross't into
a Roll, (which is called the Parliament Pawn, and lies there as a Memorial and
Record of what they have done, and as a President for the future) all the
particular Writs mentioned or intimated in that Pawn (being fitted) are carried
to the Lord Chancellor; and being in his presence Sealed, they are immediately
delivered to Messengers belonging to the Chancellor, who do take care to
dispose some to the Persons to be Summoned for the Lords House, and others to
the respective Sheriffs of all Counties, and Comitated Cities, for Elections of
such as are to sit in the House of Commons, and so the Master of the Rolls and
the Clerks of the Pettibag having done all their parts, and the Messengers and
Sheriffs theirs, the same Writs which concern the Lords House are or ought to
be returned to the Clerk of the Lords House at the first Sitting, and the Writs
for Elections are to be returned by the respective Sheriffs to the Clerk of the
Chancery Crown Office, and not to the Pettibag, (as has and will be shown) for
they come no more there till some time after Dissolution of a Parliament; and
then for ease of that Office, and more safely preserving them, they are ordered
to be carried to the Rolls, and from thence to the Tower, all which will be
more fully shown; which method I often repeat in this Treatise, because I find
it so much neglected.

As to the Employment of the other Eleven Masters of the Chancery in time of
Parliament, I shall show it in a distinct Chapter.

This Master of the Rolls doubtless has been anciently Summoned to Sit in the
Lords House; yet I find no Writs issued to him till the 36th. of Henry the
Eighth, and then as Master of the Rolls, not as chief Master of Chancery; and
after that he was Summoned to all Parliaments except the 39th. of Eliz. and
first of King James; and in this very Parliament a Writ was prepared for him,
but being Elected a Member of the House of Commons, his attendance was not
required in the House of Lords, for what reason I know not; but he has his
place whenever he Sits there, next to the Lord Chief Justice of England, upon
the second Woolsack, as will be shown in the Chapter of Places.

The Consimilar Writ to the Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.
THE Patent which invests this Chief Justice to his Employment in this Office,
is in haec verba. -- Carolus, etc.
Omnibus ad quos Patentes Litterae nostrae pervenerint salutem
Sciatis quod Constituimus dilectum and fidelem Orlandum Bridgman Militem
Capital'Justitiarium nostrum de Banco suo, Duran' been placito

Test, etc.


Observations.
HIS Writ of Summons to Sit in Parliament, is also Capitali Justitiario nostro
de Banco, ( mutato nomine, in all other words agreeing with the Exemplar) and
here it may be again observed, to prevent vulgar misunderstandings, That the
Lord Chief Justice of England is Chief Justice of the Kings Bench or upper
Bench, and this is Chief Justice of the Common Bench; and sometimes one is
called Chief Justice of the Pleas of the Crown, as in the Latin words, De
placitis Coronae, and this Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, or Communia
Placita, yet in the Latin Writ it is de Banco; so as both Courts are called
Bancks or Benches, and both called also Courts of Pleas, in respect of Pleas or
Pleadings; one properly concerns the King in matters Criminal; the other
concerns the Pleas or Pleadings of the Commonalty or Common People among
themselves in matters Civil, and one also is called the Upper Bench, the other
the Common Bench, and therefore (what ever the Patent or Writs are, yet for an
easier distinction) I here entitle one, the Chief Justice of the Kings Bench,
the other Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.

2. As for the names Bench or Banc, Pleas or Placita, I refer them to my
Annotations.

3. The Chief Justice has three more Justices to assist him in this Court.

4. That which makes the eminency of this Court is, That only the learned
Sergeants of the Coife (of whom I shall speak in order, being the next Degree
to Judges) do Plead in this Court, (yet not prohibited from Pleading in all
other Courts) but all other Graduans of Law have the liberty to Plead in all
other Courts, but not in this.

5. The Pleas of this Court cannot be so well ascertained, as that of the Kings
Bench, because the Pleas held by Common Persons, or between Subject and
Subject, are divided into as many Branches as Actions, and the Actions into as
many Causes as there are variety of Contests in the Kingdom; yet all these
Actions, Causes and Contests, are included under three notions, Real, Personal,
and Mixed, which are here tried as they happen according to the strict Rules of
Law. As for Personal and Mixed Actions they are tried in other Courts, but Real
Actions are only Pleadable here, nor are any Fines of Concord (which is
observable) levied in any Court but this, so that (as Sir Edward Coke says)
the Motto of this Court may be, Haec est finalis Concordia.

6. Upon these and other considerations, the necessity of requiring Assistances
from the Justices of this Court may appear: For as the Justices of the Kings
Bench may acquaint the Lords with what concerns the King; so the Justices of
the Common Pleas may most properly acquaint them with what concerns the People,
whereby Laws for either may be corrected, repealed, or made de novo, as shall
be thought most expedient.

7. The Justices of this Court are not concerned in the managing of any Summons
to a Parliament, as the Lord Chancellor and Master of the Rolls are.

Of the Consimilar Writ to the Chief Baron of the Exchequer.
THE Title of this is different from the two Chief Justices, for his Pattent is
thus.

Carolus, etc. Omnibus ad quos Patentes Litterae nostrae pervenerint Sciatis
quod constituimus Matthaeum Hale Militem Capitalem Baronem Scaccarij nostri
duran' been placito Test, etc. ( Scaccarius being that which we call
Exchequer.)

But his Writ of Summons to a Parliament is (with this addition, Dilecto and
Fideli Matthaeo Hale, (then as in the Exemplar Writ omitting Durante hene
placito) and so in all the Assisting Writs, because the continuance of a
Parliament (as I said) is but Durante Placito Regis, therefore needless to
insert it.

Observations.
THIS Chief Baron has four more Barons to assist him in his proper Court of
the Exchequer, whereof the puisne, or youngest made Baron of the four, is not
an Itinerant Justice, nor accounted in the number of the Twelve Judges.

2. These Barons are not such as are before mentioned of the next Degree to
Viscounts in the Lords House, nor such as are merely Barons by Courtesy, or
Barons of Court Barons, or Barons of the Cinqueports, (of whom I shall speak
more, when I treat of them in the House of Commons) but are great Officers of
Justice; and so his Writ calls him Baro Scaccarij, or Baron of an Officiate
Place; but the Writ to the noble Baron before mentioned, is to an Hereditary
Place, viz. Johan Nevil, Baro de Abergaveny, and so to others of that Degree.

3. Some think they were called Barons, because the Court of Exchequer was
anciently managed by noble Barons; but as Okham says, that these Barons were
to be Majores and Discretiores, etc. being either culled out of the Clergy or
Laity, or the Kings Court; and for many ages, the chief of these five Barons
was called as now, (both in his Patent and Writ) Capitalis Baro, and generally
is Entitled the Lord Chief Baron: the other four Barons do assist him in all
matters between the King and his Subjects, in cases properly appertaining to
Assize, Exchequer, or the Kings Revenue.

4. He is the chief Judge of that Court in matters of Law, as also of
Informations of any abuses therein, and of Pleas upon them, and solely gives
order for Judgment, (wherein the Lord Treasurer thinks not fit to concern
himself.)

5. He alone without other Barons in Term time, Sits in Afternoons at
Guildhall, upon Nisi prius, (upon cases which arise in London, and cannot be
dispatched in the Mornings) he takes Recognizances of Debt, Appearances, and
Observances of Orders, he takes the Presentations of all Offices unto himself,
and causes an Oath to be given to the Lord Mayor of London. He takes Audits,
Accounts, etc. in his absence, and sometimes to ease him, the second and third
Baron has the like power, and the fourth takes the Oath of Sheriffs; and as I
said, the three first of the five have constantly their Writs of Summons to a
Parliament, yet the fifth is also of good use in that Office, but has no Writ
of Summons as the other.

6. That which is most observable of this Court is, that all Cases of great
difficulty in the Kings Bench or Common Pleas, are still Adjourned to the
Exchequer Chamber, and there with the Barons Debated, Argued, and Resolved by
all the Twelve Judges, (whereof the four first Barons make four of the Twelve.)

7. This Court consists of two parts, the upper Exchequer and the lower; the
upper is that wherein these Barons do execute their Justice: but herein the
Lord Treasurer, as Supervisor, may Sit as often as he pleases, however once in
every Term he seldom fails to Sit, and hear Matters; but the lower Exchequer is
chiefly under the care of the Lord Treasurer, (the Offices of upper and lower
being distinct) yet both of them (considered jointly under the Title of the
Exchequer) do include eight Courts or Offices, viz. A Court of Pleas; (in some
manner like the Kings Bench and Common Pleas) Secondly, The Court of Accounts;
Thirdly, The Court of Receipts; Fourthly, The Court of the Exchequer Chamber;
(being for the Assembly of all the Judges of England (as I said) for Matters in
Law for special Verdict; Fifthly, The Court of Exchequer Chamber, for Errors in
the Court of Exchequer; Sixthly, The Court of Exchequer Chamber, for Errors in
the Court of Kings Bench; Seventhly, The Court of Equity, in the Exchequer
Chamber; Eighthly, That which was, but is not now called a Court, yet is an
Office much of the same nature, (and of as great concern as some of the other)
Entitled the Remembrancers Office of the first Fruits and Tenths, who takes
all Compositions, and makes out all process for such as do not pay the same; so
that the business of this Court and inclusive Courts and Offices does employ
above 200. Officers and Clerks.

8. From which may be computed what variety of business this Court does afford
to a Parliament, though not in the troubles of Summoning it, yet by bringing in
and issuing out of Money, (which are the Nerves of a Kingdom, and Arteries of a
Parliament) so as the Progresses of this (and the inclusive Courts) do occasion
more Debates in Parliament, than what ever do arise from the Chancery, Rolls,
Kings Bench, or Common Pleas.

Having done with the first Orb or Rank of Degrees of such Professors of the
Law as are Summond to Parliaments, consisting of five, viz. Lord Chancellor,
Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, Master of the Rolls, Lord Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas, and Lord Chief Baron; I shall proceed to the second Orb or
Rank of Degrees usually Summoned; and these are three Justices of the Kings
Bench, three Justices of the Common Pleas, and three Barons of the Exchequer,
whose Writs are also Consimilary to that of the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench.

The Consimilar Writ to the three Justices of the Kings Bench.
EACH of these Justices have their distinct Patents in these words.

1. Carolus, etc. Omnibus, etc. Sciatis quod constituimus, etc. Tho. Mallet
Militem unum Justitiariorum suorum ad placita coram, etc. Test, etc.

2. His Parliament Writ has also the same words in the Dative Case, Vni
Justitiariorum suorum.

3. Tho. Twisden Miles, had his Patent and Parliament Writ in the same words,
Vnum and Vni.

4. Wodham Windham, had also his Pattent and Writ in the same words, Vnum and
Vni.

Of the Consimilar Writs to the three Justices of the Common Pleas.
1. ROB. Hide Mil. had his Patent of Constituting him, Vnum Justiciarium
suorum, and his Parliament Writ, Vni Justitiariorum.

2. Tho. Tyrrill Mil. had the like Patent of Constituting him, Vnum, and his
Parliament Writ, Vni.

3. Samuel Brown Mil. had the like Patent of Constituting him, Vnum, and his
Parliament Writ, Vni.

Of the Consimilar Writs to the three Barons of the Exchequer.
1. EDward Atkins Mil. had his Patent of Constituting him, Vnum Baronum de
Scaccario, and in his Parliament Writ, Vni Baronum de Scaccario.

2. Christopher Turner Mil. had the like Patent of Constituting him, Vnum, and
his Parliament Writ, Vni.

3. This place was vacant, so but eight of the nine Judges were Summoned to
this Parliament at the time of Summoning.

Observations.
1. ALL their Patents and Writs (except the mutation of their Names and Titles)
are verbatim the same, especially in the words, Vnum and Vni, viz. one of the
Justices, signifying that they were all so equally presumed to be just, that
they are rendered to us rather by an Unity than a Priority, viz. by one and
one, and not by 1 st. 2 d. 3 d. and 4th. yet in the 30th. and 39th. of Eliz.
and 1. Jacob. I find the word alter, next to Capitalis, and Vnus, in the Kings
Bench and Common Pleas only, but in the Exchequer, in the 43. Eliz. next
Capitalis Baro, is Secundus and tertius Baro.

2. Of these fourteen which are of the first and second Rank of the Professors
of the Law, two of them are properly Judges of matters of Equity, viz. the Lord
Chancellor, and Master of the Rolls, the other Twelve are called the Twelve
Judges of the Common Law; the two Judges of Equity have been constantly
Summoned to Parliaments; (except as I have shown) but as to the Twelve,
sometimes all, and sometimes but some of them are Summoned, according to the
Kings Pleasure, or the vacancy of their Places, or employed in their
Itinerances. I need not begin higher than Henry the 8. and then there were nine
Summoned, and the 30th. of Henry the Eighth, twelve; the 36th. of Henry the
Eighth, but six; the first of Edward 6th. nine; the 6th. of Edward the Sixth,
nine; the 7th. of Edw. 6th. but seven; the first of Mary, but eight; the first
of Mary, but five; the first and second of Phil. and Mary, but 6. the second
and third of Phil. and Mary, 8. the 4th. and 5th. of Phil. and Mary, but eight;
the 28th. of Eliz. eleven; the 30th. Eliz. eleven; the 35th. Eliz. twelve; the
39. Eliz. eleven; the 43. Eliz. ten; the first of James, the full number of 12.
(but in respect of the changing of them before the Parliament sat, there were
two Writs made for the several Judges before the Parliament sat;) the 21. Jac.
eleven; the first Car. primi, twelve; the 15th. Caroli primi, eleven; and the
13th. Caroli Secundi, also eleven; as I said, accounting the two Chief Justices
and chief Barons in all these years.

3. In all these Writs, I do not so much trust to the several Pawns, as to the
Writs themselves, where I doubt of any mistakes in the Clerks.

4. To conclude this Section; as in all the Judicial and Equitable Courts,
(before mentioned) there are distinct Jurisdictions and methods of managing the
concerns of their respective Courts; so in many things, there are also
excellent intermixtures and concurring Authorities of their Courts and Powers,
whereby they make up the Harmony of Justice, (as in cases of Consult in the
Chequer Chamber, Writs of Error, and other matters which I have hinted) and
whoever will take a full survey, not only of their Jurisdictions, but of the
number of their Clerks, Attorneys, or other Officers of various Appellations,
belonging to their respective Courts; may think that they are so many
Principalities within our Kingdom, and thereby see how necessary it is for
these Assistants (who have so great influence over the whole Kingdom) to be
Summoned to this Supreme Judicatory, to Advise either the Corroborating the old
Laws, or altering them or making new, where there is just occasion (as I have
shown) of Reviving, Correcting, or enlarging them, according to the
fluctuations of Affairs, which not only happens in this Kingdom, but in all
other Kingdoms and States, so as Laws are still suited to the tempers and
dispositions of those who are to be governed; for Tempora mutantur, and nos
mutamur in illis, there being a secret confederacy between time and human
affairs, which can scarce be discovered; the time was, is, and to come, being
so nice, that the future reverts into a Prae-existence, that to an existence,
and so into a circular perpetuity of notional gradations.

And thus having, as briefly as I could, dispatched the first and second Orb of
Professors of Law; I proceed to the third, which consists of the Kings
Sergeants at Law, the Kings Attorney General, his Solicitor General, and his
Secretaries.

Of the Consimilar Writs to the Kings Sergeants, etc.
I Am now to treat of the third Orb or Degrees of the Professors of the Law,
viz. the Kings Sergeants at Law, the Kings Attorney General, the Kings
Solicitor General, and the Kings Secretaries, (and some others of the Kings
Council upon emergent occasions.)

These Sergeants at Law in the Latin appelation are called, Servientes ad
Legem, for Sergeant and Servant are the same, only differing by a vulgar
Pronunciation, or the Idiom of our Language, which often renders an A. for an
E; for properly Servant ought to be writ Servient, from Servio to Serve, or
from Servare to Keep, so as they may be said to be as well Keepers of the Laws,
as Servients to the Law.

As these are Servientes ad Legem, so there are another sort, (of which I shall
speak) who are Attendants in the Lords House, called Servientes ad Arma, but
Cedant Arma togae; therefore I proceed to Sergeants at Law.

The Gradations to this Title are thus attained, viz. After the young Students
of the Law have continued Seven Years in the Inns of Courts, and have done
their Moots, or Motus ad Literarum, and other exercises, they are called or
admitted to plead at the Bar of any Court, (except the Common Pleas) and are
thereupon called Barresters, and thereby also gain the Title of Esquire. And
after that, they are promoted to be Readers of Law in the Inns of Chancery,
whereof there are eight, viz. Cliffords-Inn, Lions, Clements, Barnards, Staple,
Furnivals, Davis, and New-Inn, which are dependent on the four Inns of Court,
viz. the Inner Temple, Gray's-Inn, Lincoln's Inn, and the Middle Temple, in some
one of which they are to be Benchers and Readers also; and thus they are to
pass seventeen Years in their Studies, before they can arrive to the dignity of
a Sergeant, or Serviens ad Legem; but after they have performed their Readings,
the King taking notice of their Proficiencies, does by his Writ call a certain
number of them to take upon them that Dignity; and the reason of making a
number of ten or more (at one time) is because the charge to each may be the
less, because almost no Dignity in any Profession (especially of Law) is
ushered in with greater State, Ceremony, and Charge than this Degree, as may be
read in Fortiscue de legibus Angliae, Crooks Reports, etc. The Form of which
Writ for Electing of a Sergeant is in haec verba.

CArolus Secundus Dei gratia (as in other Writs)
Fideli nostro I. M. Mil. Salutem,
Quia de advisamento concilij nostri ordinavimus vos ad statum and gradum
Servient' ad Legem immediate post receptionem hujus Brevis nostri
Suscipiend'Vobis Mandamus firmiter injungend'quod vos ad statum and gradum
predict in forma predict Suscipiend'Ordinatis preparatis and hoc sub paena
mill Librarum nullatenus omittatis,

Test, etc. Barker.

These Sergeants at Law are of two sorts, viz. Sergeants at Law considered in
their General Appellation, and the Kings Sergeants at Law; that is, when the
King selects some out of the rest, and appropriates their Service to his
occasions; (which he constantly does at every Call) thereupon they have two
Writs, one at the general Call of Sergeants, (which I have showed) the other as
a particular Sergeant (or Servant) to the King, the Form of which Writ also is
as follows.

CArolus Secundus, etc. (as in other Writs)
omnibus ad quos, etc.
Sciatis quod nos de gratia nostra speciali, ex certa scientia and mero motu
nostro constituimus dilectum and fidelem nostrum, J. M. servientem ad legem,
unum Servientem nostrorum ad legem, nec non concessimus eidem, J. M. Officium
unius Servient' nostror, ad legem habendum occupandum and exercend'dict'
officium nec non ad essendum unum' Servient' nostrorum ad legem quamdiu nobis
placuerit, capiendum and percipiend anuatim in and pro officio illo
exercend'eidem J. M. vad'fead'vestur' and regard'dict' officio debito sive
pertinend'pro ut aliquis Servient' nostrorum ad legem pro hujus modi officio
exercend'percepit, sive habere, and precipere debeat eo quod express a mentio
non fit, etc.

In cujus rei testimonium, etc. Test, etc. Per ipsum Regem. Barker.

And being thus made the Kings Sergeants by a distinct Writ, they are
capacitated to have a Writ of Summons to sit in the Lords House in Parliament,
and though none sit this Parliament, yet Writs were provided for two of them,
in this Form following, viz.

Carolus, etc. dilecto and fideli suo Johanni Glin Militi Servienti domino Regi
ad legem Quia, etc. and so verbatim according to the Exemplar before recited to
the Lord Chief Justice.

The other was Johanni Maynard militi, who had the like Writ prepared for him.

Observations.
1. THESE Professors of Law are called Servientes ad Legem in all Writs, (which
are generally Writ in Latin) but in English (as I said) they are called
Sergeants or Servants at Law, also Sergeant of the Coif, (from the white Coif
which they wear uppermost at the Solemnization of their Order) but at other
times under a black Cap, like the Twelve Judges, because having past this
Order, they are then capable of being made one of the Twelve Judges, and to
exercise the employment of a Judge upon emergent occasions.

2. None of all the three Orbs of Professors have a Writ for their Office and
Employment, but the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, (as I have shown)
and these Sergeants at Law. The difference in the Writs are, that in the Writ
to the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, (as to his Office) and so in the
Patents to the other Justices, (as to their Offices) there is nothing but a
Constituimus, without any adjunct of Compliment, but in this Writ to the
Sergeants at Law, it is Fideli nostro; yet in both of their Writs of Summons to
a Parliament, they have equal words, viz. Dilecto and Fideli.

3. In the Writ of the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, there is no
Advice of Council mentioned; but in the Writ to every Sergeant at Law, the
words are as in Parliament Writs, Quia de advisamento concilij nostri, and so
in the Mandatory part of it, Vobis Mandamus firmiter injungend', and then under
the penalty of a 1000 l. to take upon them that Degree; and in their second
Writ to be the Kings Sergeant at Law, they have Vadage, Feodage, Vesturage, and
Regardage, of which I shall speak in my Annotations; yet I shall give this hint
here, That the word Investitura is used only in the Patents of Creation of the
Lords Temporal, and Vestura only used in the Patents to the Sergeants at Law,
and to no other Degree that sit in the Lords House as Peers, or Assistants.

4. That which makes this Degree more eminent is, that by virtue of the first
Writ, (to be a Sergeant at Law in general) they continue their Title of
Sergeant at Law, Durante vita; (though not expressed in the Writ) the other to be
the Kings Sergeant at Law is equal with that Writ to the Lord Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench, and to the other Eleven Justices, viz. Durante beneplacito;
the 3d. Writ gives him an interest in Parliament.

5. It is to be noted, That all the twelve Judges before they can take upon
them those Offices of Judges, are made Sergeants at Law; so that though they
quit those Offices of Judges, and thereby loose the dignity of their Office,
yet the dignity of their Serjeantship still remains during life.

6. It may be here pertinently observed, That though Writs were prepared and
enrolled in the Pettibag for these two Sergeants, yet whether the Writs were
delivered to them, I cannot inform my self, or whether the delivery was
declined in respect both of them were chosen Burgesses of the House of Commons,
(where Sir John Glyn did sit during his lise, and Sir John Maynard during the
continuance of this Parliament) or whether they were connived at, as being more
ueful in the House of Commons, (or to themselves) for being once admitted to
sit in the Lords House, they might not Plead in other inferior Courts, which
had been much to their prejudice.

7. The Kings Attorney is placed in this Pawn before the two Sergeants, which
was some mistake in the Clerks; and so I find the like misplacings of others in
many other Pawns; and therefore in this my method, I pursue the order of all
such other Solemnities as they usually attend, and of their precedent sitting
in the House of Lords, (as will be shown) and so place them here, as they are
placed there.

8. As to the Antiquity and number of Sergeants which were formerly Summoned to
Parliaments, it is manifest that more or less of them were Summond in most
Parliaments of former Kings, viz. in the Reign of Edw. 3d. Rich. 2d. Hen. 5th.
and Hen. 6th. (as appears in the Clause Rolls of those Parliaments) and more
easily seen in Mr. Prinns Breviary, or in the Rolls Chapel; (for it were too
great a diversion to recite them here) but those of latter days do appear thus
in the Pettibag, viz. in the 21. Hen. 8th. there were three Summoned; but in
the 30th. none; in the 36th. of Hen. 8th. four; in the first of Edw. the 6th.
three; in the 6. of Edw. 6th. four; in the 7th. of Edw. 6th. four; in the first
of Mary, two; and also in the first of Mary, two; and in the first and second
of Phil. and Mary, one; in the second and third of Philip and Mary, one; and in
the 4th. and 5th. of Philip and Mary, two; in the 28th. of Eliz. two; in the
30th. of Eliz. one; in the 35th. of Eliz. three; in the 39th. of Eliz. one; in
the first of Jacob. three; in the 21. of Jac. five; in the first Car. prim.
four; in the 15. Car. 1. three; in the 13th. Car. 2d. the two before mentioned;
for whom Writs were ordered, but not actually Summond, (as I have shown.)

9. In the 39th. Eliz. the Writs to the three Sergeants are directed
distinctly, Vni, Vni, and Vni, but in all the rest, Servienti ad Legem, without
the addition of Vni, nor do I find Vni added in any former Writs, before Henry
the Eighth, but only this, viz. 4 Hen. 5th. Johanni Stranguayes, Vno Servienti
Regis ad Legem.

10. And as a peculiar distinction, the Kings eldest Sergeants have the
Privilege to Plead in all Courts of Westminster within the Bar, but only in
the Common Pleas, (where no other Graduats of Law but themselves can Plead, as
I have shown) and there all the Sergeants stand without the Bar.

11. They are also sometimes Assistants to the Judges, and to the Lord
Chancellor and Master of the Rolls, and many times in case of age or infirmness
of the Judges, they do supply their places, both in the Courts of Westminster,
and in their Itinerances and Circuits, Pro hac vice, and upon death of any of
them, if the King think fitting, they are Constituted Judges in their
Vacancies, and this by Commission.

12. As to their places in Parliament, they are next the Judges, as shall be
shown in the local part of this Treatise, as also of their Imploymens, sedente
Parliamento.

Thus having brought the Servientes ad Legem, to be Judices and Magistros
legum, I pass to the second Degree of the third Orb or Rank, viz. the Kings
Attorney General.

The Consimilar Writ to the Kings Attorney General.
THis appellation of Attorney is derived from Turn so called in Magna Charta,
SECT. 17
which anciently was called the Sheriffs Moot, or view of Frankpledge, and to
this day is called the Sheriffs Turn from Turris, signifying a Tower or
Castle where these Courts were kept, and where inquiry is made upon Oath of all
things done contrary to the peace of the Country, etc. as will be shown when I
come to the House of Commons, and then those who did practice to those ends in
those and other Courts, were called Ad Tourny's or Attourny's; generally the
word does signify a Person entrusted to manage other men's Concerns. And this
being the most Eminent Trust in managing the Kings Concerns, his Duty, Care and
Pains is the greater and more Eminent; he has also his Patent, In haec verba.

CArolus Secundus, etc.
Omnibus ad quos, etc. Salutem.
Sciatis quod nos de fidelitate and Circumspectione dilecti and fidelis nostri,
G. P. Mil. plurimum confidentes ipsum G. F. Constituimus Ordinavimus
deputavimus and assignavimus nostrum Generalem Attornatum in omnibus curijs
nostris de Record'in Regno nostro Angliae Habendum and occupand'officium
hujusmodi Generalis Attornat' nostri prefat' G. F. quamdiu nobis placuerit
percipiend'in and pro officio illo exercend'Vad'Feod'Profic' and Regard'eidem
officio pretinend'sive consuet' Dedimus etiam ac tenore presentium damus
prefat' G. F. plenam potestatem and authoritatem faciend'ordinand'and
deputand'tales clericos and officiar' sub seipso in quolibet Cur' nostra quales
aliquis alius officium illud proantea habens nomine occupans habuit fecit
ordinavit seu deputavit aut facere ordinare seu deputare consuevit eo quod
expressa mentio, etc.

In cujus rei, etc, Test, etc.
And he has his Writ of Summons to a Parliament also, In haec verba, Carolus,
etc. Dilecto and fideli Galfrido ( which we in English call Jeffery). Palmer
Militi, Attornato suo generali salutem, and so verbatim according to the
Exemplar.

Observations.
1. THat which makes this Assistant the more eminent and remarkable is, That as
there is but one Lord Chancellor or Keeper, one Lord Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench, one Master of the Rolls, one Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and one
chief Baron of the Exchequer; so there is but one Attorney General: and though
those five have Judges and Masters of Chancery to assist them; this has no
proper Officer under him, yet has power to depute Clerks and other Officers to
assist him, and is Singulus in omnibus and omnis in singulis.

2. Neither these nor any of the Assistants to the Lords House before named,
have the privilege of making Proxies either before or in time of Parliament;
yet I remember something Equivalent in in the case of Valentine Elliot, etc.
when upon a Writ of Error brought into the Lords House, for reversing of a
Judgment given in the Kings Bench against the said Elliot, Sir Jeffrey Palmer
being then Attorney General, and indisposed in his health, and thereby finding
himself unfit to manage that Case, Mr. North, then a young Professor of the
Law, was permitted to appear for the Attorney General, and Plead the Case: only
here was the difference, had Mr. Attorney been there in Person, he had stood
within the Bar and Pleaded; but Mr North Pleaded without the Bar, which he
managed with so much Law, Eloquence, and Dexterity, that his Abilities being
known, (by usual Degrees in few years) he was advanced to his present Station
of Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.

3. This Title of Attorney General began in Eward the Firsts time, but I cannot
be positive when they had their first Writs of Summons; but in the 21.30. and
39. of Hen. 8. he had a Writ, and so the 1.6.7. Edw. the 6. also the 1. and 1.
of Mary, and 2.3.4. and 5. Phil. and Mary, (and in those two last Writs he is
termed, Attornat' Dominorum Regis and Reginae General') and then in the
28.30.39. and 43. Eliz. Attornato Generali; and so also the 1. and 21. of King
James; also the 1. and 15. Carol. primi; and now 13. Caroli Secundi, Sir
Geffrey Palmer, Attornato, and after him none did sit in the House of Lords
during this Parliament, except Sir William Jones Knt. the Attorneys intervening
those two, being still chosen in the House of Commons, as will be shown.

Of the Consimilar Writ to the Kings Solicitor General.
THe words Attornatus and Solicitator are used in the Civil Laws, SECT. 18
as here at the Common Law, for such as do take care to manage or tend other
men's Affairs, and there is but one of that Profession (as is before shown of
the Attorney General) but because the Title should be distinguished from the
common sort of such Practisers, as the Kings Attorney has his Patent and Writ
from the King, so has this, thereupon called the Kings Solicitor General, his
Patent is, In haec verba.

CArolus Secundus, etc.
Omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem.
Sciatis quod nos de gratia nostra speciali ac ex certa scientia and mero motu
nostris ordinavimus fecimus and constituimus dilectum and fidelem nostrum, H.
F. Mil. Solicitatorem nostrum Generalem ac ipsum, H. F. Solicitatorem Generalem
nostrum per presents ordinavimus fecimus and constituimus Habendum gaudend
occupand and exercend officium illud quamdiu nobis placuerit Percipiend
annuatim eidem, H. F. pro occupatione and exercic' officij predicti tal'and
tant' Vad. Feod. Profic' and commoditat' qual'and quanta dicto officio debito
sive pertinend prout aliquis alius sive aliqui alij officium predict' proantea
habens sive occupans habuit vel percepit habuerunt sive preceperunt in and pro
exercitio ejusdem officij eo quod expressa mentio, etc.

In Cujus rei, etc. Test, etc.
Observations.
THough this Employment was granted by Patent in Edward the Fourths time, yet
for want of time I shall also begin his Writ of Summons, the 21. of Henry the
Eight; and then Edward Griffin being Attorney General, Gosnold was Solicitor,
and the Writ was, Hen. Rex, etc. Dilecto and fideli suo Johanni Gosnold
Solicitatori suo Salutem Quia, and so verbatim according to the Exemplar; in
the 36 Hen. 8. William Whorwood was Attorney General, and Henry Bradshaw
Solicitor, and had his Writ the first of Edw. the Sixth, Bradshaw was made
Attorney General, and Edward Griffin Solicitor, and had his Writ; and the 6. of
Edw. 6. Griffith was made Attorney, and Jo. Gosnold Solicitor, and had his
Writ, and both continued so till the first of Mary; and then William Cordel, in
the room of Gosnold was made Solicitor, and had his Writ, also in another
Parliament of that year both had their Writs; in the 1. and 2, 3, and 4. of
Phil. and Mary, and in the 4. and 5. Phil. and Mary, Griffith being Attorney
General, Rich. Weston (afterward Lord Treasurer) was made Solicitor, Dominorum
Regis and Reginae, and had his Writ; in the 38. of Eliz. Jo. Popham, afterward
Lord Chief Justice, was Attorney, and Thomas Egerton (afterward Lord
Chancellor) was Solicitor, and had his Writ, and so they continued to the 39.
Eliz. and then Edw. Coke (after one of the Justices of the Common Pleas) was
made Attorney, and Tho. Flemins Solicitor, and had his Writ; and in the 43. Sir
Edw. Coke was put back to be Solicitor, and had his Writ; and Thomas Egerton
was Attorney; and in the first of James, Edw. Coke (then Knighted) was again
made Attorney General, and Tho. Flemins (then Knighted also) again made
Solicitor, and had his Writ; and in the 21 Jacobi, Thomas Coventry Miles (after
Lord Keeper) was made Attorney, and Robert Heath Knt. Solicitor, (after Chief
Justice) and had his Writ; and both had Writs again the first Car. primi; and
the 15th. Jo. Banks Knt. was made Attorney, and Edward Harbert Solicitor, and
had his Writ.

But at the Summoning of this Parliament, no Writ was sent to Sir Heneage Finch
then the Kings Solicitor, being chosen for the House of Commons, and being
after made Attorney General, still he continued in the House of Commons, till
he was made Lord Keeper, and then he was removed to the Lords House by Writ, as
Lord Keeper; and so Sir Francis North (being the Kings Solicitor) did sit in
the House of Commons this Parliament, and was not removed thence till he was
made Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; so that during this Parliament, none
(whilst actually the Kings Solicitors) were Summoned or did sit in the Lords
House; yet I thought fit to insert this Degree here, (though he be not
mentioned in this Pawn) because there are so many Precedents of his Summons, as
are before recited in former Kings Reigns.

Of the Consimilar Writ to the Kings Principal Secretaries.
THis Officer of State and Assistant is placed the last in most of the Pawns,
SECT. 19
and brings up the Rear of all the forementioned Assistants; which posture is a
place of great Honor, both in Civil Solemnities and Martial Employments; and
that it may so appear, in the aforesaid Act of the 31. of Hen. the Eighth, none
of the other Assistants before recited (except the Lord Chancellor) are so much
as mentioned therein, (their precedencies being known in their own Courts from
a greater antiquity) but the Secretaries Place is fixed by that Act, viz. if he
be under the Degree of a Noble Baron, yet it is above all the Assistants and
next the Lord Chancellor; if he be of the Degree of a Baron, then above all
Barons, or if an Earl, (as in the case of the Lord Arlington) then above all of
that Degree, unless any of the Superior Officers of State be of that Degree,
and then next to him and above the rest.

He has his Office as Secretary not by Patent, but by delivery of the Privy
Signet to him; and so if there be more than one, (as now there are two) each
considered as Principal, has also a Privy Signet delivered to him.

His Parliament Writ in this Pawn was thus,

Carolus, etc. Dilecto and fideli Edwardo Nicolas Militi uno primariorum
Secretariorum suorum salutem Quia, etc. and so verbatim according to the last
mentioned Exemplar, as an Assistant, and the Title in the Label is like the
Title of his Writ.

Observations.
1. THis Writ agrees with all the former, except in the word Vni, and so if
there be more; (as I have shown in the Writ to the Judges) yet commonly in
Superscriptions, he that is made Chief is Styled Principal without the word
one; and the other One of the Principal Secretaries of State.

2. The word Capitalis is used in the Writs to the two Chief Justices and Chief
Baron; but to the chief Secretary the word Principali is used, not only
signifying the Capital, First, or Chief, but intimating his more immediate
Employment on his Prince, for Principali is properly from Principe.

3. If there be more Secretaries than one, (as there are seldom less than two)
they divide their negotiations into the Title of Provinces, both in relation to
this Kingdom, or Foreign Kingdoms or States; and so each of them give an
account to the King accordingly, and they have an Office appertaining to them,
called the Signet Office, Signet.
where they have four Clerks as their Substitutes to perform their Directions,
for all Dispatches both Foreign and Domestic, and generally they are of his
Majesty's Privy Council.

4. Their Employments in Parliament are either in the House of Lords or House
of Commons, according as they are Summoned to one, or Elected to the other, and
as the King thinks them in either place most useful for his occasions.

5. I need not go back to find the Antiquity of their Summons, for it may be
presumed to be ancient from the Eminency and nature of their Employments; so it
may suffice only to instance here, that in the 36 Hen. 8. William Packet Mil.
had his Writ, Secretario suo, Secretario.
and at the same Parliament, William Petre Mil. had his Writ, Secretario suo,
without other addition; in the first of Edw. the Sixth, William Petre Mil. had
his Writ only Secretario suo; but in the 6. of Edw. the 6th. the Title altered,
viz. Willielmo Petro Mil. Uni.
Vni primariorum Secretariorum suorum; and to Willielmo Cecil alt' primariorum
Secretariorum, Alteri.
and Jo. Cheke Mil. alt' primariorum Secretariorum, (so here were three
Secretaries Summoned to this Parliament) and the same three were Summoned in
the 7th. of Edw. 6. and in the first of Mary, and 1st. of Mary, the same Petre
was Summoned, Vn' Primariorum Secretariorum Domini Regis, and Jo. Bourne Militi
alt' Primariorum Secretariorum Domini Regis; and so the 1st. and 2d. and 2d.
and 3d. of Philip and Mary, the same Petre and Brown had Writs by the words,
Vni and alteri primariorum Secretariorum Domini Regis; the 4th. and 5th. Phil.
and Mary, Writs were to Jo. Broxal, Vni primariorum Secretariorum Regis and
Reginae; the like to the said Jo. Bourne, Militi alt' primariorum, etc.
Principali.
the 25th. Eliz. Francisco Walsingham, Militi Principali Secretariorum suorum,
and no other Secretary; the 30th. Eliz. Consiliario suo Roberto Cicil Militi
Primario Secretario, Primario.
and no other; the 35th. Eliz. to the same Francisco Walsingham, Militi
principali, etc. and no other; the 39th. Eliz. Consiliario Roberto Cicil
Primario, and no other; 43. Eliz. none Summoned; the 1 Jacobi, Johanni Herbert
Militi vni Primariorum; and no other; 21 Jacobi, Georgio Calvert, Militi vni
Primariorum, and Edwardo Conway, Militi vni Primariorum; the 1 Car. primi,
Olivero Vicecomiti Grandison vni Primariorum Secretariorum, and Johanni Cook,
Militi vn' Primariorum, etc. 15 Caroli primi, Francisco Windibanck vni
Primariorum, and Henr. Vane, Militi uni Primariorum; and so in this 13 Car.
2di. the Writ was Edwardo Nicolas, Militi, uni Primariorum Secretariorum
suorum; and no other Secretary was Summoned during this Parliament, the rest
being Elected, and accordingly did sit in the House of Commons, except the Lord
Arlington, who sat as Earl and Secretary in the Lords House; and though the
word Primario is more generally used in Writs, yet in Superscriptions, etc. the
word Principal is altogether used, as more agreeable (I conceive) to the Idiom
of our Language.

6. The dignity of this Office is shown in their Summons and Place in the Lords
House according to the Act of Precedence; but I must say something more of the
antiquity of the Office, and of the nature of such are employed in it.

If he be taken for a Scribe, because they write the Kings literal Dispatches;
it had the same esteem among the Hebrews that the Magi had with the Chaldeans,
and the Quindecemviri among the Romans, (which latter were the Expounders of
the Secrets of Sybills Oracles) These Scribes were usually selected out of the
Clergy, and not out of the Laity, so that such as were used out of the Laics
were called Notarij, and not Scribes; and such as were used by the Clergy were
called Clerks from Cleros, because the Clergy by reason of their learning did
for the most part Guide both Secular and Spiritual Affairs; but the word
Secretary (in which Office the Clergy in former times were more commonly
employed than Laymen) does import something of another nature, being derived
from Secretum, and that from Cretum the Supine of Cerno, to see or discern; so
by adding Se to Cretum, it makes Secretum, and renders the Person employed in
that Office to be one who knows Se (id est) himself, and can also Judiciously
discern and judge of other men's matters, and yet reserve the Determination or
Execution of them in his own breast; and for this tenacity of mind, he is
properly called a Secretary, and the Kings Secretary, or Secretary of State, as
a preserver of the Secrets of the King and Kingdom for public and private use,
till just occasion require their impartments to others; and indeed considering
the perpetual Designs of Princes toward each other, and the Discontents and
Seditious Humors which are in every Kingdom; there is no quality more requisite
to a Minister of State, than a secret and reserved mind, and more particularly
to this Officer, his very Title intimating his Duty, in which he ought to be
master of three Properties; Lord Verulam.
a Prudent Dispatch, Exquisite Intelligence, and Secrecy in all; for by these
(especially the last) all Minings and underminings are still disappointed by
the rules of Politic Secrecy; by which Art, Kingdoms are kept in quiet, by
quenching fires before they flame; and because this requires not only a great
skill but as great a vigilance, which few are capable to perform; Bocalini
tells us in his pleasant Chapter of reforming the World, that to ease it of
this indifatigable trouble, without using so many Meanders; Apollo resolved to
make a Window in every man's breast, so as at first view, each man might see the
thoughts and intentions of each other, and thereby prevent the prejudices which
daily arise for want thereof; but before Apollo did execute his Resolves, he
caused the Wise Men of Greece with some others of the Literati to be Summoned,
and to give their Opinions therein, where Thales was the first that press't for
it with such Arguments, that Apollo was almost confirmed; but at last he was
dissuaded by many other Lawyers, Poets, Physicians and Theologicks by more
convincing Arguments, showing that nothing caused a greater reverence to those
and other Professions, than the mysteries which were contained in them, which
would make them contemptible, if they should be seen or known by every vulgar
Eye, whereupon the Windows were not made.

7. Now the same reasons which were used against making these Windows in the
Bodies of Men, may serve to oppose the Windows too often made in the Bodies of
such Councils or Parliaments as are to support a Kingdom, where every Member or
Counselor indeed should be a Secretary of State; because the publishing of
Consultations commonly meets with Seditious Tempers, who think nothing is well
done but what is done by themselves, looking merely on the Fact and Success,
not on the Deliberations, Grounds and debated Reasons of that Fact; for it is
not the event which makes the reason of managing that Fact to be the less
Reason; for let the event be good or bad, the reason is still the same; if the
Reason be good and solid, yet the Event bad, it may be said, that it meets with
an ill constellation; but if the Reason be bad and the Event as ill, the
discovery of these do still raise a worse constellation; and if the Reason be
bad and the Event good, (if the bad Reason be kept secret) the glory of the
Event would quickly drown the censure of the bad Reason, and make the
Counselors stand fair; but if divulged, they are sure not only to lose the
credit of the Event, but double the disrepute, if both be bad.

Herein some men are naturally of a more reserved temper than others; however
those are only fit to be Counselors and Secretaries of State, who have no
Windows in their Breast; that is, no such transparent Eyes, as men may easily
see their disposures of Affairs, but can wisely keep the Secrets of State from
other men's Inspections: and in Parliaments I conceive such Tempers are very
useful, for if the People Trust them, they do well in performing their Trust;
but appealing again to the People, shows a diffidence in their own Judgments.

Thus having shown the Kings Warrant in the Front, and the Secretaries Writ in
the Rear, and fixed the Noble Lords betwixt those who manage the Laws Divine,
and those who are Assistants in Human Laws, and run through the most constant
Writs which are used for Summoning such as are to fit in a Parliament, either
as Essential, or Assisting Members thereof; I should now proceed to the House
of Commons, but I shall crave leave; First, To speak of some accidental Writs
for Assistants; Secondly, Of the manner of return of all the aforesaid Writs;
Thirdly, Of such as sit there without Writ or Patent; Fourthly, Of such as sit
there only by Patent; and Fifthly, Of some other Officers who are employed
there by virtue of Patents.

CHAP. XIV. Of Consimilar Writs and Patents upon Emergent occasions.
1. I Find in Mr. Prins Breviary, That he cites many Records long before Henry
the Eighth; (which I shall not examine, because some of them have been so long
disused) Of Knights, Justices of North Wales, Treasurer of Carnarvan, Treasurer
of the Kings House, Chancellor of the Exchequer, Deans, Archdeacons,
Escheators, (and one Magister Thomas Young, which he takes to be a Master of
Chancery) that have been Summoned by Writ to sit in Parliaments in the Lords
House;) but since Henry the Eighth in the Pettibag, several Writs of Assistants
were issued, as I have shown in the 11th. Chap. Sect. 9. to show the Kings
Power, some of which were Professors of the Law, and some not.

2. There was another Writ, viz. to the Warden of the Cinqueports; (which was
not constant, but occasional) for sometimes it was directed to an Earl, and
sometimes to some one Person under the Degree of a Baron; yet by virtue of the
Writ, he was empowered to sit in the Lords House; but since Henry the Fourths
time, when that Office was supplied by the Prince of Wales, (after called Henry
the Fifth) who had a Writ with the addition of Guardian' Quinque Portuum) that
Trust has been committed to some one of the Blood Royal, and from that Writ
other Writs are derived to all the Cinqueports.

But in respect this Writ (as to a Parliament) is mostly concerned about
Election of 16. Members to serve in the House of Commons; I shall refer the
Discourse of it to the second part, in that Chapter which particularly treats
of the Cinqueports.

3. If at any time the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper be absent upon just
occasion, as when the Lord Keeper Bridgman in this Parliament was Sick; a
Patent was made for Sir John Vaughan, then Lord Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas, to supply his place, and the like to Sir Francis North, Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas also, etc. and though for the most part this happens in time
of Parliament; yet, because it may happen between the time of Summons and the
Sitting of a Parliament, (which is the chief design of this part of this
Treatise) I have thought fit to enter the form of that Patent in this place,
rather than defer it, viz.

CHARLES, etc.
To Our Right Trusty and Welbeloved, Sir Francis North Knt. Chief Justice of
Our Court of Common Pleas, Greeting;
Whereas Our Right Trusty and Welboved Councellor, Heneage Lord Finch,Our Lord
High Chancellor of England, is often so infirm, that he is not able constantly
to attend in the upper House of this Our present Parliament now holden at
Westminster, nor there to supply the room and place in the said upper House,
amongst the Lords Spiritual and Temporal there Assembled, as to the Office of
the Lord Chancellor of England has been accustomed: We minding the same place
and room to be supplied in all things as appertains for and during every time
of his absence, have named and appointed you: And by these Presents do Name,
Constitute, and Appoint and Authorize you, from day to day, and from time to
time, when and so often as the said Lord Chancellor shall happen at any time or
times during this present Parliament to be absent from his accustomed place in
the said upper House, to Occupy, Use and Supply the said room and place of the
said Lord Chancellor, in the said upper House, amongst the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal there Assembled, at every such day and time of his absence, and then
and there at every such time to do and execute all such things as the said Lord
Chancellor of England should or might do, if if he were there personally
present, Using and Supplying the same room; Wherefore, We Will and Command you
the said Sir Francis North to attend to the doing and execution of the
premises with Effect: and these Our Letters Patents shall be your sufficient
Warrant and Discharge for the same in every respect.

In Witness whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents,
Witness our Self at Westminster the Nineteenth day of March, in the Nine and
twentieth Year of our Reign. Per ipsum Regem propria manu Signat.

And having now dispatched all the Writs and Patents which concern the
Summoning of such as sit in the Lords House, it is proper to show the manner of
returning of those Writs, which is usual in all Courts, and ought to be
strictly observed here.

CHAP. XV. Of Returns of Writs relating to the Summoning of such as are to Sit
in the Lords House.
IN all Judicial Courts from whence Writs do issue, there is care taken for
their due Returns, as may be seen in Fitz Herbert, and such Authors who have
treated of the nature of Writs and their Returns; but none of them giving a
full account of Parliament Writs and Returns, gives me occasion to insert this
Chapter.

As to the Return of the Writs to the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal and
Assistants, they ought (by every individual Person who had a Writ) to be
delivered to the Clerk of the Parliament before the House Sit, or immediately
upon their Entrance into the House, at the Table, and by the said Clerk they
are to be kept with the Records of that House.

By the omission of this method many inconveniences have and may happen to
their Successors or Posterity, and therefore it is wished there were more care
taken in their due Returns; to which they may be encouraged, being of so little
trouble in the performance. But as to the return of Writs concerning the House
of Commons, the method consists of much trouble and perplexity, not only from
the time of the executing the Writs, but in undue returns, as will be shown in
their proper place.

This Chapter concluding all the Patents and Writs of Summons, and Returns
which concern the Lords House, (by virtue of which the Persons so Summoned by
Writ do sit there) now I must speak of such as sit there without Patent or Writ
of Summons; and first of the Masters of Chancery.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Masters of Chancery.
Chancery do bring up the Rear of the Assistants; and though I have spoke
something of the Master of the Rolls, partly as chief of the twelve Masters of
Chancery; yet, there he was considered as Master of the Rolls, (or Records)
rather than one of the twelve Masters of Chancery, whereof (as I said) he is
the chief; and these twelve are called Masters in Ordinary.

2. For there are also other Masters in Chancery, called Extraordinary, which
are of an uncertain number, according to the businesses of the respective
Counties wherein they are employed.

3. As for the twelve, they usually are chosen out of Barresters of the Common
Law, or Doctors of the Civil Law, and eleven of them do sit in the Chancery, or
in the Rolls as Assistants, says Sir Edward Coke) to the Lord Chancellor and
to the Master of the Rolls, every day throughout each Term of the year, and to
them are committed Interlocutory Reports, and stating of Accounts, and
sometimes (by way of reference to them) they are empowered with a final
Determination of Causes there depending.

4. These twelve have time out of mind, sat in the Lords House; yet have
neither Writs nor Patents (for many Ages past) impowering them so to do; but I
conceive, as the Master of the Rolls is (as is said by that Institutor) an
Assistant to the Lord Chancellor, the remaining eleven may fairly be said to be
Assistants both to the Lord Chancellor and Master of the Rolls, in all or most
Matters, depending in both or either Courts, and so Virtute Officij, they are
inclusively capacitated, (by the Writs to the Lord Chancellor, or Master of the
Rolls) to be Assistants to them in the Lords House, as they are in Chancery,
without any particular Writ or Patent to them.

5. Anciently this Title was higher than what Sir Edw. Coke affords them; for I
find in an old Manuscript in the hands of Sir J. C. one of the Masters, (but I
have not the opportunity of searching the Records therein mentioned)
Intitutled, De Cancellario Angliae and ejus Cojudicibus, and de authoritate
eorum, and then follows, viz. In dicta Curia Cancellarij sunt ordinati duodecem
Cojudices, viz. Magistri sive Clerici de prima forma ad Robas, (which in the
13. Chap. I call the first Orb) pro Arduis negotis Regis and Regni, and
Reipublicae expediendis, (which agree verbatim (and it is observable) with the
very words of all Writs of Summons to Parliaments) eidem Cancellario omnino
assistentes and secum continuo consedentes, (which in a manner Intitles them to
sit in the Lords House with him and many other matters are mentioned therein,
which I shall refer to my Annotations, because I cannot now warrantably insert
them; but I find in other Books, that anciently they had the care of inspecting
all Writs of Summons to Parliaments committed to them, which is now (as I have
shown) performed by the Clerks of the Pettibag.

6. As to the Title of Master, (from Magister, and from Magus a Wiseman) it is
as ancient as most of our borrowed words from the Latin, and was still applied
to Persons of Knowledge and other Abilities above the Degrees of Yeomandry.

Amongst the old Romans (as may be read in Livy, Pomponius, Aurelius, and
others) they had twelve great Officers, to whom that Title was given, viz.
Magister Populi, or Dictator, Magister Equitum, Magistri Census, Magister in
Auctionibus, Magistri Epistolarum, Magistri Memoriae, Magistri Militum,
Magister Navis, Magistri Officiorum, Magistri Scriniorum, Magister Curiae,
Magistri Aeris, and many more of a lesser Rank; for I speak not of Magistri
Familiae or Privatae, (or as the word is vulgarly applied to its relative word
Servant) but as a Title applied to Persons of Eminency, for their Integrity and
Learning; and of these there are also twelve sorts with us, (which are found in
the Law Books) whereof the first we meet with in the Statutes, is the Master of
the Mint, in 2 H. 6. c. 14. (2.) the Master of the Rolls in the first of H. 7.
Cap. 20. (for till then he was called Clerk of the Rolls, or Custos Archivorum,
and chief Clerk of the Chancery, (of which there are twelve, as I said, since
which, six chief Clerks, and a greater number of a lesser Form, are there
Constituted, whereby they are distinguished from the ancient Clerks, (now the
12. Masters of Chancery) which may be accounted (the Third) sort in point of
time mentioned in the Statutes; (the Fourth,) The Master of the Horse in the
first of Edw. the Sixth; (the Fifth) The Master of the Postern in 2 Edw. 6.
(the Sixth) The Master of the Kings Household in the 32 H. 8. (changed to the
Lord Stuard of the Kings Household, ( Charles Duke of Brandon being the first of
that Title mentioned in any Statute) (the 7th.) The Master of the Court of
Wards in the 33 of Hen. the 8. (now of no use) (the Eighth) The Master of the
Musters, after in the 33 Eliz. called Muster Master General; (the 9.10.11.12.)
viz. The Master of the Armory, the Master of the Kings Jewels, the Master of
the Ordinance, (and Master of the Kings Wardrop) are mentioned in the Statute
of 39 Eliz. not but these Officers were before, but the Statutes (as I said) do
not take notice of them till the times that they are quoted in the said
Statutes.

7. Now as the old Romans had others which had the Titles of Magistri, viz.
Magistri Vniversitatis vel Societatis; so we in imitation, at Cambridge have
the Title of Magister fixed at the head of every College in that University,
(which is an argument of their Antiquity, of which I shall speak more) whereas
Oxford has but three which bear that Title.

8. It is also applied to the Heads of Halls of Companies in London, and other
Cities; and it has been formerly applied to all the Members of the House of
Commons, who were not actually Knights, or Esquires, or of higher Degrees; but
in the House of Lords, I do not find it used to any, to whom Writs of Summons
were sent to sit there, except to some Priors and Deacons who were sometimes
called Magistri in their Writs, and others of Religious Orders, called also in
their Writs Magistri, as also to Officers in Chancery, viz. 49 Edw. 3. Magistro
Thomae Young, Officiario Curiae Cancellariae; but whether it was the same Office
which is now executed by the Masters of the Chancery, Non Constat; however they
were then under the notion of Clerks in an Ecclesiastical sense; but as Writs
were sent to Clerks or Ecclesiastics, with the Title of Magister; so in Henry
the Fourths time, and not before, there were Writs sent to Laics with that
Title, and those were Persons of high Quality, viz. in the 2.3. and 6. Hen. the
4th. Magistro Thomae de la Ware, (sometimes called Ware and War) to attend
those Parliaments, and the same Thomas was also Summoned to the Parliaments of
the 1.2.3.4.5.7.8. and and 9. of Hen. the 5th. Magistro Tho. de la Ware, and so
to the 1.2. and 3. of Hen. the Sixth; but in the second Parliament of that
year, Mr. De la Ware was not Summoned, but one Writ was Magistro Johanni
Stafford These. Angliae, and another Writ, Magistro Willielmo Alremith Custod.
privati Sigilli. But in the 4th. and 6. of Hen. the Sixth, both those were left
out, and the same Magistro Tho. de la Ware Summond again, and for brevity
passing to the 36. of Hen. the Eighth; and then it was expressly Roberto Bows
Mil. Magistro sive Custod. Rotulorum Cancellariae, being then also chief of the
twelve Masters of Chancery; However Sir Edw. Coke says they are Assistants to
the Lord Chancellor, or as the Manuscript says, Cojudices, and thereupon ex
Officio do sit in the Lords House, and the antiquity of the Places allotted
them there, (as will be shown) and their Employments in every Parliament makes
their attendance a kind of Praescription.

And now I proceed to such as sit in the Lords House by Patent only, without
Tenure, Writ or Praescription.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Clerks of the Lords House.
HEre I am to speak of such as have places allowed them in the House of Lords
by virtue of Patents only, and first of the Clerks; This Title of Clerk from
Cleros, when the Clergy had (by reason of their great learning) the guidance of
Civil Offices, was given as an honor to them; and most of the great Offices,
as the Privy Seal, Master of the Rolls, etc. had the Titles of Clerks; but now
that Title remains to a lower sort, of which there are 26. in number who still
retain that Title.

The first, (as to the Progresses of Parliament) is the Clerk of the Pettibag,
which is under the Conduct and within the Patent of the Master of the Rolls;
(who is the chief of all the Clerks in the Lords House, of which Office I have
spoke in that Section of the Rolls, and in other places.)

2. The Clerk of the Crown in the Chancery, (called Clericus Coronae in
Cancellario, in his Patent) of whom I have also spoke cursorily in several
places) is an Officer to whose care many great things are committed, (which may
be read in Compton and others) but as to what concerns this Subject, I must
again remind, that all Parliament Writs which are sent from the Pettibag, are
returned and kept by the Officer, so that the Pettibag gives (as it were) the
beginning, this the continuance and ending to a Parliament.

So as this Clerk of the Crown has three Capacities. Before the Sitting of a
Parliament, to receive returns of Writs which were issued from the Pettibag.

And in Parliament to take care according to directions for the issuing of
Writs in case of change or mortality; And in the Lords House he first reads the
Titles of all Bills to be presented to his Majesty, of which and other parts of
his Duty I shall speak more.

3. The third Clerk is termed in his Patent, Clericus Parliamentorum, because
he is Clerk in all Parliaments during his life; his employment here being only
conversant about the Affairs of Parliament.

Now in respect that all Bills and Matters of State have here their result in
the Lords House, he is the proper Keeper of such Records, (for the Lords House
is a Court of Record) and to that end his Books are fairly writ, exactly
composed, according to the very words and sense of that House, and constantly
perused by some Lords appointed for that purpose, as well for his own
justification as others satisfaction.

He has also an Assisting Clerk allowed him, who is of great use and ease to
him, both of them being well grounded in learning, experience and ability, in
the safe expediting the concerns of that House, which has both an Ocean of
Wisdom, and curious Rivolets of Honorary punctilios, (not to be omitted by
them, somewhat different from all other Courts) he has also a Reading Clerk
allowed him, who likewise attends the Lords Committees; and these are all the
Clerks which constantly attend in the Lords House, and are within the Bar.

4. Of the Clerks of the House of Commons I shall speak in the second part.

5. As I have shown the Employments of the Clerks of the Crown Office in
Chancery, so (to prevent misapplications) it is fit to show the Employments
also of the Clerk of the Crown Office in the King's Bench, who is no constant
attendant in this House or in the House of Commons, but only upon
contingencies, and then by Order; but more especially in the Lords House, for
producing, reading, and managing Records concerning Writs of Error, Habeas
Corpus, etc. (of which I shall speak in order) but his most eminent Employment
is upon the Trial of Peers, as will be shown.

Of the 26. Clerks before mentioned, (who still retain that Title) these five
which I have named are the chief which are employed in Parliamentary Matters;
but of the other 21. (which may be seen in Lambert, Fitz Herbert, etc.) neither
the six Clerks in Chancery, (being Officers of Eminency employed in that Court
bearing that Title, nor are the other Clerks (which are employed also in that
Court) in the least (as I know of) engaged in the Fabric of Parliaments. Note
that those five Clerks (whom I first mentioned) have places allotted them
within the Bar of either House, as I said.

And now I must speak of other Attendants of another nature, viz. the Gentleman
Usher of the Black Rod, and the Sergeant at Arms.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod.
THere are but three ways by which the House of Lords do send any Message to
the Commons, of two of them I have spoken, viz. by some of the Judges, or by
some of the Masters of Chancery, and the King also uses two ways, viz. by his
Secretaries, or some of the Privy Council, (when they are Members of the House
of Commons) both upon ordinary and extraordinary occasions, or for attending
his Person upon Addresses, etc. But when he has occasion to Command the House
of Commons to attend him in the House of Lords, he only sends this Officer, the
manner of which Ceremony I shall show in order.

He is called the Black Rod, from the Black Staff or Rod (about three foot long
tipped with Silver, and guilt with the Kings Arms at one end, and a Lion Couchant
at the other end, and a guilt Knob in the middle) which he carries in his hand;
he is always a Person of Quality, and born the Kings Subject; and if not a
Knight, is made one upon admission to this Office, and has his Office by
Patent; the first Grant of it beginning in Hen. the 8. time.

1. Before the Sitting of Parliament, he observes the Lord Chamberlains
directions, in taking care that the House be fitted with all things for the
Reception of the King, and those who are to sit there.

2. His Employment also is to introduce Lords into that House.

3. And after that House is Sat, he has Employments concerning the Commitment
of Delinquents, etc.

4. He has a Seat allowed him, but without the Bar; and to ease him more in
these and many other Employments, he has an Usher to assist him, called the
Yeoman Usher, also Door Keeper, etc. as will be shown.

And so I am come to the last Attendant Officer of Note in that House, viz. the
Kings Sergeant at Arms.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Kings Sergeant at Arms, Attendant in the House of Lords.
I Have spoken of the Servientes ad legem or Sergeants at Law; Now I come to
the Servientes ad arma, Sergeants at Arms; these were such as amongst the
Romans were called Satellites Caesaris, or a Guard to the Emperor, and
sometimes they were called Macerones, (from whence probably the word Mace might
be used) which these Sergeant at Arms use to carry before the King, etc.

Of these Sergeants at Arms (for I meddle not with the lower degree in
Corporations, sometimes called Sergeants of the Mace, or only Sergeants) there
are twenty in number, which are called the Kings Sergeants at Arms, and these
are Created with great Ceremony; for the Person who is to be Created kneeling
before the King, the King himself lays the Mace on the Sergeants Right
Shoulder, and says these words, Rise up Sergeant at Arms, and Esquire for ever:
He has his Patent for the Office besides; (of which and of the particulars of
his Employments, Segar in his Book of Nobility gives a full account) but of
these twenty the King appropriates sixteen to his Personal Service, whereof
four wait on him every Quarter; the other four are thus distributed, viz. in
time of Parliament one is to attend the Speaker of the House of Lords, in case
he is not Lord Chancellor, another to attend the Speaker of the House of
Commons; one other to attend the Lord Chancellor, and another the Lord
Treasurer, as well in as out of Parliament.

But in respect the Lord Chancellor and Speaker of the Lords House is usually
the same Person, there were but three of the twenty used in this time of
Parliament, and but two out of Parliament, so as the other one or two are
reserved for accidental occasions.

The Sergeant at Arms who attends the House of Lords has the privilege of
carrying the Mace before the Speaker (whether he be the Lord Chancellor or not)
within the Lords House up to the very Chair of State, and after he has made
his Obeysances, he lays it down on the first Woolsack by the Speaker, and so
departs till the Speaker has occasion to use him again upon the Rising of the
House.

And herein methinks the Sergeant at Arms of the House of Commons has more
respect afforded him than the Sergeant at Arms to the House of Lords; for the
Commons Sergeant has the freedom to stand at the Bar, and hear all Debates,
and when weary of standing, has an easy seat by the door; but the Lords
Sergeant is not permitted to be in the Lords House whilst it is Sitting, nor
has any Station within the Bar, nor Seat without the Bar, as the Gentleman
Usher has: and yet this Office is more ancient than that, and is not only
Sergeant at Arms to the Speaker, and Chancellor (the Parliament not sitting)
but is the chief of the twenty of the Kings Sergeants at Arms; he has his
Duputy, so as if there should be occasion of two, viz. for a Speaker and
Chancellor, he may supply one, and his Deputy the other; and besides his Deputy
he has also other Agents under him, and has use for them; For upon
Commitments of Delinquents without door, he is to see them forth coming, and in
bringing them to the Bar; but upon consmements or Commitment of any Member
within doors, that peculiarly belongs to the Gentleman of the Black Rod.

So as these 2 Officers set the first wheel of a Parliament in motion; for the
Sergeant at Arms conducts the Chancellor or Speaker into the House of Lords,
the King sends the Black Rod to the Commons to bring up their Speaker, who
being confirmed by the King, goes to his Chair in the Commons, ushered with the
other Sergeants at Arms, and so when each Speaker retires from each House, each
Sergeant is to each a Conducter.

A Corollary to this First Part.
I Have now shown the General Warrants for Summoning a Parliament, and the
particular Writs and Patents impowring those who are to sit in the Lords House;
as also the Act of Precedence to prevent Disorders of Places when they meet
there, and given a touch of Proxies, and of the words Lords and Peers, and of
other Accidental Writs, and of the Returns of their Writs, and of some who sit
there without Writs or Patents, and of others who are employed there merely by
virtue of Patents. And of all these I have made some Discourses, as well to
revive the notions of those who need no other information, as to inform others
who have little knowledge therein, but what they gain from the short Memorials
of Writers, or from the imperfect Discourses which they glean from such as know
some things in part, but have not the true Concatenation of the Grandeur of a
Parliament.

These discourses (and those intended) will (I hope) contain the whole System
of this Constitution. This part has applied it self wholly to the Offices,
Degrees and Qualities pertinent to the House of Lords in general; but as to the
particular Persons owning those Offices, Degrees, and Qualities; I reserve them
for the Subsequent Parts of this Treatise; that is after I have discoursed of
the seven remaining Exemplar Writs in the Pawn, which particularly concerns the
House of Commons.

Viz. To Cornwall. To Cambridge, To London, To Dover, To Lancaster, To Chester,
To Carnarvan in Wales.

And also shown the Writs or Precepts derivative of those seven Exemplars, and
the manner of Elections and Returns of Writs and Precepts, the Discourse of
which will comprehend all the County Shires, Cities and Buroughs; (which have
power of Electing Members for Parliaments) I shall then show you the Places
adapted for both Houses to meet in; as also of the Members Summoned and
employed in both Houses in this Parliament.

After these I shall speak of such Ceremonies as are used before any Members be
admitted into either Houses; and when they are fixed in both Houses, I shall
give an account of the most material passages, as to the renewing of Writs for
supply of Members, and other distinct Operations considered as an House of
Lords, or an House of Commons, and in their joint Operations as Lords and
Commons Assembled in Parliament, and then of their complete Operations as an
entire Parliament, consifting of the King and the three Estates, viz. the Lords
Spiritual the Lords Temporal, and the Commons; and this is more particularly
evident, when by passing of Acts, the King confirms what those three Estates do
jointly Operate. And so I conclude with the Kings power of Summoning,
Adjourning, Proroguing and and Dissolving of this and all other Parliaments,
and what is to be done with Records, Laws, etc. after Dissolution of any
Parliament.

And because I could not well reduce the copious matters of so large a Subject
into my Discourses, or observations, I shall hereafter add some Annotations, as
Explanitories and Enlargements to many things which are necessary or convenient
to be enlarged or explained.

AN APPENDIX Being A Diary of the several Sessions of the public Adjournments,
Prorogations, and Proclamations relating to the Parliament which was Summoned
the 18th. of Feb. 1660/1, and Disloved the 24th. of Jan. 1668/9.
THE Kings Warrant, and Writs of Summons for that Parliament were dated the
18th. of Feb. 13 Car. 2d. 1660. Proclamation contained in those Writs, 1660.
to meet at Westminster the 8th. of May, following. Session the 8th. of May 13
Car. 2d. 1661 at Westminster, continued to the 30th. of July following. Acts
Public 19. Private 21. 1661.
Adjourned the 30th. of July 13 Car. 2d. 1661 to the 20th. of November
following. Session the 20th. of November. 13 Car. 2d. 1661 continued to the 19th.
of May 14 Car. 2d. 1662. Acts Public 33, Private 39. Prorogued the 19th. of
May 14 Car. 2d. 1662 to the 18th. of Feb. 15 Car. 2d. 1662/3. The King present.
Session the 18th. of February. 15 Car. 2d. 1662/3. continued to the 27th. July
15 Car. 2d. 1663. Acts Public 17, 19, Prorogued the 27th. of July 15 Car. 2d.
1663 to the 16th. of March 16 Car 2d. 1663/4.
The King Present. Session the 16th. March 16 Car. 2d. 1663/4. May 16 Car. 2d.
1664. Acts Public 8, 10, Prorogued the 17th. of May 16 Car. 2d. 1664 to the
20th. of August following.
The King Present. Prorogued the 20th. of Aug. 16 Car. 2d. 1664 to the 24th. of
November. following.
By Commission. Session the 24th. of November. 16 Car. 2d. 1664 continued to the
2d. of March 17 Car. 2d. 1664/5. Acts Public 12, 17, Prorogued the 2d. of
March 17 Car. 2d. 1664/5. to the 21st. of June 17 Car. 2d. 1665.
The King Present. Proclamation dated the 24th. of May 17 Car. 2d. for the
further Proroguing the Parliament from the 21st. of June to a day that shall be
fixed at the actual Prorogation thereof Accordingly. Prorogued the 21st. of June
17 Car. 2d. 1665 to the 1st. of August following.
By Commission. Proclamation dated the 9th. of July 17 Car. 2d. 1665 for
further Proroguing the Parliament from the 1st. of Aug. to the 3d. of October.
following Accordingly. Prorogued the 1st. of Aug. 17 Car. 2d. 1665 to the 3d.
of October following.
By Commission. Proclamation dated the 10th. of August 17 Car. 2d. 1665
appointing the meeting of the Parliament at Oxford in respect the Plague was
then at London, Accordingly. Prorogued the 3d. of October. 17 Car. 2d. 1665. at
Oxford, to the 9th. of the same month and place.
By Commission. Session at Oxford the 9th. of October. 17 Car 2d. 1665 continued
to the 21st. of the same month. Acts Public 9, Private 1, Prorogued the 31st.
of October. 17 Car. 2d. 1665 to meet at Westminster the 20th. of Feb. 18 Car. 2d.
1665/6.
The King Present. Prorogued the 20th of Feb. 18 Car. 2d. 1661 at Westminster
to the 23d. of April 1666. Proclamation dated the 23d. of April 18 Car. 2d.
1666 for Proroguing the Parliament to the 18th. Sep. following accordingly.
Prorogued the 23d. of April 18 Car 2d. 1666 to the 18 of Sep. following.
By Commission. Session the 18th. of September. 18 Car. 2d. 1666 continued to the
8th. of Feb. following. Acts Public 5, Private 5, Prorogued the 8th. of Feb.
19 Car 2d. 1666/7. to the 10th. of October 1667.
The King Present. Proclamation dated the 26th. of June 19 Car. 2d. 1667 to
reassemble the Parliament back from the 10th. of October to the 25th. of July
19 Car. 2d. 1667. Adjourned the 25th. of July 19 Car. 2d. 1667 to the 10th. of
October following. Session the 10th. of Oct. 19 Car. 2d. continued to the 9th.
of May 20 Car. 2d. 1668. Acts Public 15, Private 24, Adjourned the 9th. May 20
Car. 2d. 1668 to the 11th. of August following. Proclamation dated the 3d. of
July 20 Car. 2d. 1668 for the Parliament to meet the 11th. of Aug. and that
they shall and may Adjourn to the 10th. of Nov. following accordingly.
Adjourned the 11th. of August 20 Car. 2d. 1668. to the 10th. of Nov. following.
Proclamation dated the 19th. of Sept. 20 Car. 2d. 1668. to meet the 10th. of
Nov. as many of both Houses as may Adjourn themselves to the 1st. of March 21
Car. 2d. 1668/9. Adjourned the 10th. of Nov. 20 Car. 2d. 1668. to the 1st. of
March 21 Car. 2d. 1668/6. Proclamation dated the 18th. Dec. 20 Car. 2d. 1668.
reciting, that whereas the two Houses of Parliament had Adjourned by the Kings
directions from the 10th. of Nov. to the 1st. of March the King Declares that
he will Prorogue them on the said 1st. of March to the 9th. of October 21 Car.
2d. 1669 accordingly. Prorogued the 1st. of March 21 Car. 2d. 1668/9. to the
19th. of October 21 Car. 2d. 1669. Session the 19th. of Oct. 21 Car. 2d. 1669.
continued to the 11th. of December following. In this Session no bill past the
Royal assent. Prorogued the 11th. December 21 Car. 2d. 1669 to the 14th.
February 22 Car. 2d. 1669/10.
By Commission. Proclamation dated the 23d. of December. 21 Car. 2d. 1669
requiring the Members of both Houses to attend at the time prefixed at the last
prorogation, viz. the 14th. Feb. 22 Car. 2d. 1669/70. accordingly. Session the
14th. Feb. 22 Car. 2d. 1669/70. April 22 Car. 2d. 1670. Acts Public 8, 16,
Adjourned the 11th. of April 22 Car. 2d. to the 24th. of October following.
Proclamation dated the 21st. of April 22 Car. 2d. 1670 requiring the Members of
both Houses to attend the prefixed time, viz. the 24th. of October 22 Car. 2d.
1670. Session the 24th. Oct. 22 Car. 2d. 1670 continued to the 22d. April 23
Car. 2d. 1671. Acts Public 26, 30, Prorogued the 22d. April 23 Car. 2d. 1671
to the 16th. of April 24 Car. 2d. 1671.
The King Present. Proclamation dated the 27th. Sept. 23 Car. 2d. 1671
declaring the Kings resolution to Prorogue the Parliament from the said 16 of
April to the 30th. of October following Accordingly. Prorogued the 16th. of
April 24 Car. 2d. 1672 to the 30th. of October following.
By Commission. Prorogued the 30th. of Dec. 24 Car. 2d. 1672 to the 4th. of
Feb. 25 Car. 2d. 1672/3.
By Commission. Session the 4th. Feb. 25 Car. 2d. 1672/3. March 1673. Acts
Public 10, Private 11, Adjourned the 29th. of March 25 Car. 2d. 1673 to the
20th. of October following. Prorogued the 20th. of Oct. 25 Car. 2d. 1673 to the
27th. of the same Month.
By Commission. Session the 27th. of Oct. 25 Car. 2d. 1673 to the 4th. of
November following.
No Bills past this Session. Prorogued the 4th. of Nov. 25 Car. 2d. 1673 to the
7th. of January 1673/4.
The King Present. Proclamation dated the 10th. of December. 25 Car. 2d. to
require the Members of both Houses to attend the 7th. of Jan. following.
Session the 7th. of Jan. 25 Car. 2d. 1673/4. Feb. 26 Car. 2d. 1673/4.
No Bills past this Session. Prorogued the 24th. of Feb. 26 Car. 2d. 1673/4. to
the 10th. of Novem. 26 Car. 2d. 1674.
The King Present. Proclamation dated the 1st. of July 26 Car. 2d. 1674
declaring the Kings pleasure to prorogue the Parliament to the 13th. of April
1675. Proclamation dated the 3d. Septem. 26 Car. 2d. 1674 for Proroguing the
Parliament from the 10th. of Nov. to the 13th. of April 1675 27 Car. 2d.
Prorogued the 10th. of Nov. 26 Car. 2d. 1674 to the 13th. of April 1675 27 Car.
2d.
By Commission. Session the 13th. of April 27 Car. 2d. 1675 continued to the
27th. of June following. Acts Private 5, Prorogued the 4th. of June 27 Car. 2d.
1675 to the 13th. of October following.
The King Present. Session the 13th. of October 27 Car. 2d. 1675 continued to
the 22d. of November following.
No Bills past. Prorogued the 22d. of Nov. 27 Car. 2d. to the 15th. of Feb. 28
Car. 2d. 1675/6. Proclamation dated the 20th. of Dec. 28 Car. 2d. 1676
requiring both Houses to give their attendance on the 15th. Feb. next. Session
the 15th. Feb. 28 Car. 2d. 1676 continued to the 16th. of April 29 Car. 2d.
1677. Acts Public 10, Private 14, Adjourned the 16th. of April 29 Car. 2d.
1677 to the 21st. of May following.
The King Present. Acts Public 10, Private 14, Proclamation dated the 2d. of
May 29. Car. 2d. 1677 requiring both Houses to give their attendance the 21st.
of May. Session the 21st. May 29 Car. 2d. 1677 continued to the 28th. of the
same Month. Adourn'd the 28th. of May 29 Car. 2d. 1677 to the 16th. of July
following. Adjourned the 16th. of July 29 Car. 2d. 1667 to the 3d. of December
following. Proclamation dated the 26th. of Octo. 29 Car. 2d. 1677 for
Adjourning the two Houses of Parliament from the 3d. of Dec. to the 4th. of
April 30 Car. 2d. 1678. Proclamation dated the 7th. of December. 29 Car. 2d. for
Adjourning both Houses back from the 4th. of April 30 Car. 2d. 1678 to the
15th. Janu. 29 Car. 2d. 1677/8. requiring the Members of both Houses to attend
that day. Adjourned the 15th. of Jan. 29 Car. 2d. 1677/8. to the 28th. of the
same Month. Session the 28th. of January 29 Car. 2d. 1677/8. March 30 Car. 2d.
1678. Acts Public 2, Private 13, Adjourned the 27th. of March 30 Car. 2d. 1678
to the 11th. of April 30 Car. 2d. 1678. Adjourned the 11th. of April 30 Car.
2d. 1678 to the 15th. of the same Month. Adjourned the 15th. of April 30 Car.
2d. 1678 to the 29th. of the same Month. Session the 29th. of April 30 Car. 2d.
1678 continued to the 3d. of May following. Prorogued the 13th. of May 30 Car.
2d. 1678 to the 23d. of the same Month.
By Commission. Session the 23d. of May 30 Car. 2d. 1678 continued to the 15th.
July following. Acts Public 9, Private 12, Prorogued the 15th. of July 30 Car.
2d. 1678 to the 1st. of August following.
By Commission. Prorogued the 1st. of August 30 Car. 2d. 1678 to the 29th. of
the same Month.
By Commission. Proclamation dated the 2d. of August 30 Car. 2d. 1678 requiring
the Members of both Houses to give attendance on the 29th. of August.
Proclamation dated the 8th. of August 1678 declaring that the Parliament shall
be prorogued the said 29th. of Aug. to the 1st. of Oct. 30 Car. 2d. 1678.
Prorogued the 29th. of August 30 Car. 2d. 1678 to the 1st. of Oct. following.
By Commission. Proclamation dated the 25th. Sept. 30 Car. 2d. 1678 for the
further Proroguing the Parliament to the 21st. of Oct. in the same Month.
By Commission. Session the 21st. of Oct. 30 Car. 2d. 1678 continued to the
30th. of Dec. following. Acts Public 1, Private 0, Prorogued the 30th. of Dec.
30 Car. 2d. 1678 to the 4th of Feb. 31 Car. 2d. 1678. Proclamation dated the
24th. of Jan. 30 Car. 2d. 1678/9. wherein the King discharges the Members of
both Houses from meeting the 4th. of Feb. 31 Car. 2d. 1678 and declare the
Parliament Dissolved. Dissolution the 24th. Jan. 30 Car. 2d. 1678/9. but in the
Proclamation His Majesty further Publishes his pleasure that Writs should be
issued for another Parliament to meet the 6th. of March following, viz. 31 Car.
2d. 1678/9.

I did design to deferr the Printing of this Diary till I publish some
discourses of the nature of Sessions, Proclamations, Adjournments, Recesses,
Prorogations, and Dissolutions, but because it will take long time before I
shall publish them, some friends did persuad me to add this Appendix as very
useful to all such as may have any recourse in point of times to matters
transacted in this Parliament (of which I chiefly treat) Summoned the 18th. of
Feb. 1660/1. 13 Car. 2d. and ended the 14th. January Car. 2d. 1678/9. and
though the dates of Session etc. are repeated in several Paragraphs, yet it is
so ordered for the case and advantage of him that desires to satisfy himself
in the Chronological questions of that Parliament, without looking on the
Antecedent or Subsequent Paragraphs.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS, Printed for Tho. Bassett at the George in Fleet Street.
AN Institution of General History, or the History of the World in two volumns
in folio by Dr. William Howel Chancellor of Lincoln. Printed 1680.

Historical Collections, being an exact Account of the Proceedings of the four
last Parliaments of the Renowned Princess Queen Elizabeth, containing the
Journals of Both Houses with their several Speeches, Arguments, Motions etc. in
folio, writ by Hayward Townshend then Esquire Member of Parliament, Printed 1680.

The Ancient Right of the Commons of England Asserted, or a Discourse Proving
by Records, and the best Historians that the Commons of England were ever an
Essential part of Parliament, By William Petyt of the Inner Temple Esquire

Of the French Monarchy, and Absolute Power and also a Treatise of the three
States and their power deduced from the most Authentic Histories, for above
1200 years, and digested this latter, by Mat. Zampini de Recanati. L. L. D.

The Politics of France, by Monsieur P. H. Marquis of C. with Reflections on
the 4th. and 5th. Chapters: wherein he censures the Roman Clergy, and the
Hugonots; by the Sr. l'Ormegregny.

Le Bean Pleadeur, a book of Entries containing Declarations, Informations, and
other select and approved pleadings with Special Verdicts, and Demurrers, in
most Actions real, Personal, and mixed which have been argued, and adjudged in
the Courts at Westminster, together with faithful references to the most
Authentic printed Law books now extant, where the Cases of these Entries are
reported, and a more Copious and useful Table than has been hitherto printed
in any book of Entries, by the Reverend Sr. Humphrey Winch Knight sometime one
of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas.

A Display of Heraldry, manifesting a more easy access to the knowledge
thereof than has been hitherto published by any, through the benefit of
Method; whereunto it is now reduced by the study and industry of John Guillim;
late Pursuivant at Arms. the 5th. Edition much enlarged with great variety of
bearings, to which is added a Treatise of Honor Military, and Civil, according
to the Laws and Customs of England, collected out of the most Authentic
Authors both Ancient and Modern, by Capt. John Logan, illustrated with Variety
of Sculptures suitable to the several subjects, to which is added a Catalogue
of the Atcheivments of the Nobility of England, with diverse of the Gentry for
Examples of Bearings.

Now in the Press Dr. Heylins help to the English History with very large
Additions.


