THE DECLARATION OF THE Lord Petre UPON HIS DEATH, TOUCHING THE PLOT, In a
LETTER to his Most Sacred MAJESTY.
May it please your Majesty,
I Give my self the hopes that your Majesty will Pardon this Presumption of a
Dying but Dutiful Subject, in giving you the trouble of this short Account and
Declaration of my self, by which in the first place I offer to God my Hearty
Prayers for your Majesty's long Life and happy Reign, with all the Blessings of
this Life, and Eternal Happiness of the next; I having been now above Five
Years in Prison, and what is more Grievous to me, lain so long under a false
and injurious Calumny of a horrid Plot and Design against your Majesty's Person
and Government, and am now by the Disposition of Gods Providence called into
another World, before I could by a Public Trial make my Innocence appear; I
conceived it necessary for me, as an Incumbent Duty I owe to Truth, and my own
Innocence, to make this Ensuing Protestation to your Majesty and the whole
World. That whereas one Titus Oats has maliciously and falsely Sworn that he
saw me receive a Commission directed to me from Joannes Paulus de Oliva,
constituting me Lieutenant General of an Army, which he pretended was to come
into England; I declare in the Presence of the All-seeing God, before whose
just Tribunal I am shortly to Appear, that I never saw any such Commission
directed to me or any other Person whatsoever, and do firmly believe there
never was any such; But of the Folly as well as the Falsehood of the
Information, the sober Part of Mankind, as I conceive, sufficiently e're this
Convinced.

And as for those Aspersions which the Ignorant and Malicious have thrown upon
the Roman Catholic Church (of which I am, and by the Grace of God do Dye a
Member) as if Murdering of Kings, and taking up Arms against our Sovereigns
were an Authorized Principle of that Religion: I do knowingly affirm there is
nothing with more Horror Detested by the Catholic Church, as being expressly
contrary to the Command of our Savior and Christian Doctrine, and as such I
Renounce and Detest it, as I do all Plots and Conspiracies against your Sacred
Person. Having thus Briefly, and with all Sincerity of a Dying Man discharged
my Conscience, I shall end where I began, and with my last Breath beg of God to
Defend your Majesty from all your Enemies, and to Forgive those, who by their
Perjuries have endeavored to make me appear to be One, who Living and Dying am
(as in Duty bound, etc.)

Your Most Obedient and Loyal Subject W. PETRE.

London, Printed by T. B. for R. Mead. 1684.


