A DISCOURSE CONCERNING LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE, In which are Contained
PROPOSALLS.

About what Liberty in this kind is now Politically Expedient to be given, and
several Reasons to show how much the Peace and Welfare of the Nation is
concerned therein.

By R. T.

LONDON,

Printed for Nathaniel Brook, and are to be sold at his shop at the Angel in
Cornhill. 1661.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Liberty of Conscience, etc.

I Am not ignorant that it is the fate of those who propound modells concerning
Affairs of State or Religion, to be usually looked on as knaves or fools, and
as such who either do not know the incurable defects of humane nature, or by
pretending to cure them, would only mend their own fortunes.

Leaving therefore the makers of plat-forms about moral things to such
censures as attend them, I shall not here in this following discourse of
Liberty of Conscience, so much resemble him that draws the model of an house,
as one that applies an Engine to quench one a fire. And indeed the security of
the Nation is so concerned in the granting of this Liberty, that any who shall
by the contrary practice pretend to promote that, will most truly deserve the
name of a projector.

Moreover, I know that in nothing more then about Liberty of Conscience
querulous persons have shown a childishness in their complaints, without
telling what the very thing is that troubles them, and how far they would have
it removed; and so complaining for want of Liberty of Conscience in general,
have been as ridiculous as a Plaintiff would be, that brought his Action about
another owing him money in general, or a Judge that accordingly ordered some
money in general to be paid. When therefore any subjects have expressed the due
Liberty their Consciences need, then is a King in a capacity to show a God-like
benignity and power in granting the things they ask, as far as they conduce to
his honor and the peoples good. Nor is it rational that this Liberty should
be granted on other terms: For a King that gives to all men all the Liberty of
Conscience they beg from Him this day, will be forced to beg it from them the
next. As I shall therefore decline such an offer of the ways of securing
Liberty to the Consciences of the several parties among us, as might amount to
the exactness of a model, and seem to impose upon the Magistrate, and tempt
other men into an opposition of those methods whereof they were not the
Inventors, so shall I likewise avoid the error of those who cry out for want of
Liberty, before they know their own minds fully in this affair, or take care
that the Magistrate shall know them otherwise then by inspiration. Nor shall I
at all in these papers consider what Liberty to the Consciences of others
Religion, but purely what political interest prompts us to give. It is, I
confess, none of the most renowned principles for Nations to preserve a fair
intercourse with one another, and with their respective Members, because it is
their interest so to do; but it is a thing much more shameful for a people to
be so infatuated, as not to see their interest when it is most obvious to them;
as in this case of the due Liberty of Conscience it so eminently is, that it
can be the real Concernment of none but Soldiers of fortune to oppose it.
It Is pity but those miseries which some men's pedantick incivilities to the
Consciences of others have formerly overwhelmed the Nation with, should be so
instructive to us, as to convince us of the necessity of setting out the true
bounds of Liberty of Conscience, as the Egyptians of old by the overflowing of
their Nile were forced upon the study of Geometry, that so the certain bounds
and proprieties of Lands might afterward be retrived.

I shall therefore without any more Prefatory words address my self to the
proposalls about the freedom that is now fit to be given to the several
Protestant parties, differing in lesser matters of Religion among us; whose
persuasions being different from those owned by the Reverend Divines of our old
Hierarchy, do put them in a present necessity of having some liberty granted to
them.

First then I shall propound, that (if there be not a coalition of those that
are called the Presbyterians, and the Assertors of the former Hierarchy among
us, into the same form of Church Government, and thereby the Presbyterians so
called be put in a capacity to divide the highest preferments of the Church
with others,) however no Ministers may be divested of their present Livings, or
be made incapable of being presented to other, merely because they have been
ordained by Presbyters without Bishops.

Secondly, that any public Preachers of the Independent persuasion, may not
merely because of that discriminating opinion of theirs, be rendered incapable
of being Lecturers in any Parish where the major part of the Parish, and the
Minister shall desire them so to be. More liberty is not desired in their
behalf, because, according to their principles, it is not lawful for them to
take Tithes, and to do the usual Offices of a Minister in a Parish.

The Reasons why I judge it convenient that the Pastors and Teachers of
Independent Churches should thus (if nothing be alleged against them but their
particular opinion) be permitted to preach publicly, are, because as to the
Doctrinall part of Religion, they concur with the 39. Articles of the Church of
England, and they are generally men of strict lives, and are such as have been
bred up in the Universities; and if they have not the liberty allowed them to
preach publicly, it will necessarily occasion their preaching to their
Churches in private meetings, which may be of worse consequence to the
Magistrate then their public preaching can be. And again, their opinions about
Church Government, though possibly not true, are not unworthy of good and
Learned men; for by such they have been owned, as namely by Ames, Ainsworth,
and Cotton of New England.

Thirdly, that those of these persuasions that are not Ministers, I mean
Gentlemen and Tradesmen, Presbyterian or Independent, may not for their
opinions sake as to Church Government be debarred of any civil employment in the
Nation they are otherwise capable of.

Fourthly, that Anabaptists may not be punished merely for their opinion of
Administering Baptism as they do, and their meeting to pray and preach, and take
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper together. For though those of that persuasion
were in Germany as so many fireships among the States of the Empire, it does
not follow that others here must necessarily prove incendiaries in the same
manner: (...) the acts of reasonable creatures may much more vary in several
places, then Lightning and Thunder happen to be more hurtful in some Countries
then other, and some plants more or less poisonous in several places.

Fifthly, that the Quakers may for a while be tolerated, till we have seen what
effects their light within them will produce. A present and a speedy punishing
so numerous a party would not be prudent, because the persecution of one party
would alarm all the others, and make them fear that their turns would be
next. This is a party that none have reason to fear as longliv'd according to
the course of nature; for it does not cherish the hopes of its followers by any
sensual pleasures in this World, nor can its principles assure men of any
reward in the World to come; because the Quakers having degenerated from the
light of the Scripture to that within them, they can have no grounded assurance
of any good terms in another World.

Those of them that are idle, and go from Town to Town, neglecting their
callings, may without any injury or provocation to the rest of the parties he
compelled to work. And I am confident that these poor Enthusiastic people, by
hard labor and diligence in their callings, might be at once curd of their
melancholy and errors, and be thus induced no longer to call a bad spleen a
good Conscience. Undoubtedly any Enthusiast that had been tired in some
Mechanical Trade by very hard labor in the day, would find little gusto in
reading Jacob Behmon's works at night.

Sixthly, that those who profess the belief of a fifth Monarchy, that is, of
Christ's Reigning personally on the Earth a thousand years, and draw no
consequences from thence about their duty in promoting that fifth Kingdom, by
being active in dethroning any Magistrates, or devesting Bishops and Ministers
of their places, because they are said to be of the fourth, may not for that
opinion be liable to any punishment. For as ill uses as this opinion has been
put to in our days, it was believed by almost all the Fathers of the Church
before the first Nicene Council.

And therefore I do so state this sixth proposal, that only those now that
believe a Millennium, and draw no more consequences of Rebellion and Sedition
from it then its Primitive assertors did, may have the benefit of liberty.

As for those who by this innocent opinion would occasionally disturb civil
Societies, it is fit they should be dealt with as enemies of mankind, and as
such who would found the fifth Monarchy in a colluvies of more vile people then
Romulus did the fourth, and would multiply Confusions and Disorders in the
World, by destroying propriety, and producing innumerable swarms of
Hypocrites; in so much that if the Devil were to reign personally on the Earth,
he would not fill the World with more prodigious impieties. For it is likely
that he would not take away more men's lives then they, but rather be willing
that several generations of men should still succeed one another; and that he
would account the most provoking indignities that could be offered God in the
World, were only to be shown by those men who would advance their temporal
designs by Religion; it being a greater affront to a King to be put to servile
and ignominious uses in his Kingdom, then to be banished from it.

Till any factious assertors of the fifth Monarchy can show Gods warrant for
their having Donations from him of our Estates, as the Israelites could for
their seizing on those of the Egyptians, we have reason to look on them as the
Nations exterminated by Ioshuah out of their Countries did on him, who, as
Procopius says in the second book of his Vandalics, caused Pillars to be
erected with words on them in the Phanician Language, which he thus renders,
(...). i.e. We fly from the face of Ioshuah the thief, the Son of Nun. But
without doubt these men's design is not to claim our goods by such a right as
Gods people, the Israelites, (who yet were weary of the Theocracy they lived
under) did the Egyptians first of all, but as the Mammelucs did since, whose
Government is the true example of theirs who would rule us by a Nation within a
Nation.

And indeed those men may be ashamed to ask Liberty of Conscience, who in their
principles proclaim they will never give it; from whom all the favor such as
are not of their opinions can hope is to be kept so well in heart, as to be
able to hew their wood and draw their water for them. Moreover, their abusing
those words of the Saints inheriting the Earth, or, which is all one, founding
dominion in grace, would leave us still in a state of war. For every man
pretending to have grace, nothing can decide the controversy but the Sword
where there is no infallible judge. Among the Papists there is a pretended one,
and so the opinion of giving the balance of Land to the party preponderating
in grace, where there is a steady hand to hold the scales, is not among them so
mischievous as here it would be.

Seventhly, that neither the old Discipline, nor the Ceremonies of the Church
of England, nor an acknowledgment of the lawfulness or expediency thereof be
obtruded on any of the forementioned parties; nor that any censures from
Ecclesiastical Courts, by Fines or Excommunication may be extended against
them for Nonconformity. For though Excommunication from a Church which a man
does not own as true, or having Authority over him; does terrify him no more
then predictions of Thunder from Almanacks, yet it makes that tremendous
punishment of the the Gospel, that judgment precursory of the last, cease to
be formidable. But truly according to the Custom of our Church, and much more
according to the Church of Scoland, an Excommunicate person is some way
obnoxious to outward punishments. And as our barbarous custom is for the Lord
of a manor to seize upon all the goods of any shipwrack'd persons that were
thrown up by the Sea on his ground, so in Scotland often the goods of those men
who fall as wrecks on the shore of the Church, accrue to it. And thus
accidentally trouble is created to the Magistrate about tempering the rigor of
the Church by his power: As one not many years since Excommunicated in
Scotland, procured his Excommunication to be taken off by a Counsel of War;
and so it was reversed errante gladio, as laid on possibly errante clave.

Having thus presented the proposalls to be considered, and therein
occasionally given some Reasons for Liberty of Conscience, as it concerns some
of the respective parties among us; it remains now that more general Reasons
be produced, and such as are comprehensive of the concernments of all or most
of the parties differing in lesser matters of Religion: To prove how much a due
liberty granted to them will conduce to the peace and safety of the Nation, and
what public inconveniences will follow from the contrary.

The first Reason shall be taken from the necessary connection between Civil
liberty, and that which is Spiritual; and therefore they that would divest any
of their spiritual liberties, do alarm them with just causes of fear about
their losing civil liberties by the same hands.

For, first, it must necessarily be presumed that such persons intend to be
judges how far men's civil and spiritual liberties reach, and what are the
frontires of both. Nothing we see is more common among the Romish Priests, then
to pick the pockets of the people, in ordine ad spiritualla. And it is most
certain that he who does impose any thing upon the people under the species of
Religion, would not leave them a power to judge whether it be in order to it or
no. For if they are the Judges of it, they will say that any thing in Religion
which displeases them opposes their civil liberty, and so nothing at all will
therein be enjoined.

Secondly, those that take away from others their spiritual liberties, show
that they can take away part of their civil at least, or else the whole of
them, accordingly as they valued their spiritual liberty. If it be said that
men's civil liberties are thought more important then their spiritual, yet it
may be replied, that in the thoughts of very many men their spiritual
liberties are as considerable as part of their civil: So that the total
destroyers of spiritual liberty show that part of the civil is at their
mercy. And if they are able to take away one part of men's civil liberties,
they are by that means in a better capacity to take away another; just as he
that is able to take away one limb from a man's body, is the more able to take
away another, because by the loss of that a man has the less strength to
defend himself against a further assault.

But although in some parts of the World men have not the same high esteem for
spiritual liberty as for civil, just as the par or proportion of Silver to
Gold in several Countries does differ, it may be affirmed that in this Nation
generally they have. It Is true that broken-fortun'd men do not value civil
liberty, nor men of debauched Consciences spiritual; but neither of these
qualifications has produced a general undervaluing of either sort of liberty
among us. As to what may be objected concerning some Popish Countries, as
Venice, etc. where they have not a proportion of esteem for spiritual liberty
equal to their civil; I answer, that their Religion obliges them to perform a
servile obedience to the Bishop of Rome in things sacred, and they looking on
him as infallible, have no reason to prize a liberty of not obeying him: Yet
even in those places obedience to the Roman Catholic Religion is not
maintained by the severe Discipline of an Inquisition. The policy of the French
Nation is in this respect exactly good, the liberty of the Gallican Church
being so cautiously asserted in order to the liberty of the Gallican Kingdom,
where their Courts of Parliament in case of Appeals do declare void and null
the Popes Bulls and Excommunications; and forbid the execution of them when
they are found contrary to the liberty of the French Church, and the Kings
Prerogative. Nor without cause were the several European Princes jealous of
the Popes designs to invade their civil liberties, when, as Mr. Seldom observes
in his Dissertatio ad Fletam, Innocent the second being very earnest with them
to admit the Canon Law into their Territories, they received the Civil Law, to
keep out the Canon.

In which Law the Bishops of Rome have several Titles, De emptione and
venditione, De locato and conducto, and several other Titles that concern
Temporal affairs between man and man.

Thirdly, they engage themselves to be in readiness by Temporal power to
maintain their conquests over men's spiritual liberties: For he that takes away
a feather out of a man's hat, is obliged in interest to take away his sword from
his side. If it be said that a man may think himself bound in Conscience to
oppress people in spiritual things, but not in civil; I answer, most certainly
then his Conscience will lead him to put them out of a condition to assert
their spiritual liberties so oppressed. It is with restraining the freedom of
Conscience as the denying a mare liberum to neigbouring nations, which any
Prince that does must not trust to prescription of long time, or imaginary
lines in the heavens whereby the compass of his dominion of the Sea may be
determined, but to powerful Fleets.

Fourthly, they give men just cause to think that they will be willing to
invade their civil liberties, whenever their Consciences or their interests
shall prompt them to it.

From what has been said in this first Reason about the connection of civil and
spiritual liberty, and men's concernednesse in the valuation of both, I shall
occasionally affirm, that the next best way to Liberty of Conscience for the
preservation of the public peace of a Country, where spiritual liberty is
regarded in any high measure by the people, is an Inquisition. But he has much
to learn in Politics, who thinks that an Inquisition is practicable among us
as it is in Spain, where one Religion has had quiet possession in the Country
so many years.

The second Reason to prove that the Peace and Safety of the Nation will be
very considerably advanced by the allowance of freedom to men's Consciences,
shall be this;

As long as there is such a due Liberty of Conscience granted, it is hardly
possible for any civil Wars to happen on the account of Religion, which for
want of this freedom may. If there are but two parties in a Nation that differ
from one another in Religion, it is not unlikely but that a civil War may arise
on the account of Religion, though the one does tolerate the other; because
either of them that thinks its share in the chief Magistrates savor least, may
for that reason attempt a forcible suppression of the other: But any such War
can hardly be where the parties differing in Religion are many; For they are
not likely to know the exact strength of one another, and their several
animosities will keep them from joining together against any one that does not
invade their liberty in general. Nothing but extreme necessity can bring them
to meet amicably and consult together. For the nearer they seem to one another
in opinion, the sharper their mutual hatreds are; just as people of several
Countries that live in the frontires of each, do hate one another with a
greater vehemence then those more remotely situated do.

Besides, it is probable that if any one of the parties tolerated should go
about to make it self uppermost, (which design only could make it fly out into
a civil War) the rest would immediately Join to suppress it. For they are not
sure they shall have that from the conquering party, after all the horrors of
War, which they already possess, to wit, a fair liberty. Which if it be
competently allowed to the several parties, seditious persons at home, and the
Ministers of State to our enemies abroad, will be deprived of their old benefit
from our Divisions in Religion, which they accidentally made use of as a handle
to draw us into civil War; just as by the Spanish Counsels formerly the Kings
of France have been excited to persecute the Huguenots sometimes, and the
Huguenots been fed with money and advice to resist their persecutors; and as in
like manner Richelieu is thought to have encouraged the last Archbishop of
Canterbury to increase his severity toward the Puritans, and to have animated
the Scotch and English Puritans to do as they did.

I grant that in respect of foreign invasion it is somewhat dangerous for a
Prince to tolerate any Religion in His Country that his neighbors are of, and
those potent, and likely to invade him. For then such an invader would expect
assistance from those of his opinion in Religion, who would promise to
themselves the advantage of having their opinions the Paramount StateReligion
upon the invaders success.

And for this reason we are obliged to be wary in the toleration we allow
Papists. We have no reason to be afraid of the toleration of Calvinists,
because the united Provinces in the Low Countries are of that persuasion, for
they are not a Commonwealth of increase by Arms but Trade. Nor would they
take our Country if we should offer it them, for they would not know what to
do with it, as their affairs at present are, and likely to be.

In this second reason I consider, that as there is hardly a possibility of a
civil War arising on the account of Religion, if there be a fair Liberty of
Conscience established; so there is danger in this particular from the several
parties if there be no such liberty. I grant that it is the principle and
practice of some of these parties, and especially those called Presbyterian (by
far the most considerable of them) to suffer for Religion, rather then to
resist merely for it; and therefore we have no reason to charge them with
taking up of Arms purely for Religion. But yet I think, had it not been for
Religions sake, and for the greater freedom of their Consciences, they would
not formerly have pretended that necessity or lawfulness to take up Arms on a
civil account as they did. For though their right in civil things was, as they
pretended, the Constituent cause of the War, yet Religion was the impulsive, or
that which inclined them to make use of the other; of which though they thought
lawfully they could, yet but for this impulsive cause they would not have made
use. And truly any man that considers the addictednesse of the English Nation
to Religion in general, will not wonder at men's being stimulated thereby to do
what in civil things they think they lawfully may. Of this propension of the
English not only to Religion, but vehemence in it, Barclay in the 4th. book of
his Euphormio.
Barclay does well take notice, who says of them, Nec quicquam in numinis
cultu modicum possunt; and afterward speaking how ridiculously narrow in their
principles our several Sects were, says, they thought unos se coelestium
rerum participes, exortes caeteros omnes esse. i. e. Nor can they in the
worship of God do any thing without excess, they think themselves the only
sharers of Heavenly things, and all other persons to be no way concerned in
partaking of them. Nor is the strong and passionate inclination of this Kingdom
to Religion, a humor bred lately among us since the introduction of
Protestancy; for the greatest part of the Decretal Epistles in the books of the
CanonLaw were sent to the English as rescripts occasioned by their addresses to
the Pope, for his determination in several matters of Religion. Besides, it may
be attributed much to the efficacy of Religion in general among us, that no
Epidemical vice is charged upon our Nation, as upon others.

But that which is most important in the confirmation of the tendency that the
liberty propounded has to promote the safety and peace of the Nation, is the
consideration of the prevalent interest these several parties have therein,
and consequently ability to do harm or good; which I shall make use of as a
THIRD REASON of the abovementioned assertion.

Now here I shall begin with the sort of Divines called Presbyterian, (though
more truly meriting to be styled those that are for moderate Episcopacy) and
shall consider their interest and strength.

And first, the whole Kingdom of Scotland is united in a solemn League with
them: Nor is the federall union likely to be dissolved between that Nation and
them, because they have submitted to the form of Primitive Episcopacy described
by the Bishop of Armagh, their Covenant binding them only against that high
Prelacy formerly in use among us.

Secondly, the way of their preaching being very practical, and accompanied
with zeal and vehemence, does leave generally deep impressions on the minds of
men, and consequently creates among the people a reverentiall esteem for their
persons. And indeed so many Preachers as there are of the moderate Episcopal
or Presbyterian way, there are so many Orators, whereby they influence the
people more then if they were so many Postillers. Every one of them almost
does, as Tully says, aculeos relinquere in animis audientium. Their way of
Preaching is not whining, like that of the Sectaries; and though far from being
in most of them conformable to the Rules of Rhetoric, yet I count it suitable
to Oratory, because it does persuade. It Is beyond dispute, that this way of
Puritanicall preaching has insinuated it self much into the affections of
many, by that civility and emendation of manners it has proselyted them into,
and so has obtained respect both from them and their relations. Nor can it but
be supposed that the common sort of men, I mean such as live by Trade, whose
being either rich or beggars depends much on the honesty of their servants,
should like that sort of Preachers best, who are most passionate and loud
against Vice, and the appearances of it. And the impressions of this practical
way of Preaching are the more permanent in their hearers, because these
Preachers do propagate the belief of the morality of the Sabbath, and do oblige
their hearers to discourse on that day chiefly of Religious things, and to pass
their time in Prayer, and Repetition of the Sermons then preached.

Thirdly, they are highly esteemed by a great part of the people for the
strictness and austority of their lives. And by nothing more then unstained
lives can Ministers attract reverence for their persons and Doctrines.

How much men's affections cool toward a Religion many of the Teachers whereof
are debauched, appears by that common observation of Travelers, that the
people who live at a great distance from Rome are more superstitious then those
who live in Rome, where they see so much profaneness among the Grandees of
the Church.

Fourthly, being for the most part of them not much immerst in the Studies of
School Divinity, and indeed more Polite Literature, as Philology, etc. they are
enabled to preach oftener, and have more Sermons of Practical Divinity to
Print, then the Reverend Divines of the old Hierarchy; and by this means to
add to their repute and credit with the people.

Fifthly, they converse more generally with one another, and with the common
people, then the Reverend Divines that are for the former Prelacy do. And
indeed men that are resolved Students, and habitually Bookish, have regrets
against conversation, especially that of those men they can gain no knowledge
by. Nor indeed is the company of illiterate Laymen ordinarily acceptable to
any Scholars, but such as pursue knowledge in mechanics. Now so great and
general is the conversation of the Divines called Presbyterian with one
another, that not one of them can come to live in any Country, but in a few
weeks is known to all the Ministers of that party there, whom he meets at
Lectures, or public Fasts. On the other side, it is usual for the Divines of
the former Prelatical persuasion, to admit only those to a freedom of converse
with them that are in Ecclesiastical or Civil Dignity equal to them. Moreover,
the Divines called Presbyterian do more then the others converse with their
hearers, and by this means have the interest of Confessors among Lay People,
from whom they hear related the most secret passages of their Lives and
Consciences, and of the spiritual Maladies and Desertions they languish under.

And here it may be observed how the nonconforming Divines were heretofore
necessarily more then the other obliged to be much in the company of their
Lay-hearers; for by being so, most of them got those Church-preferments they
had: Their opinions causing them to be put by from Fellowships of Colleges in
the Universities, they betook themselves for shelter to the Lay-Puritans in
several parts of the Nation, and so compassed the being Lecturers in
Corporations and Market-Townes. And hereby they became of more active tempers,
saw more of the World, were more hardened, either for the resisting what
troubles they could, and bearing what they could not resist, then others that
in quest of knowledge and the highest dignities of the Church, had been long in
Universities accustomed to private and sedentary lives.

Sixthly, by their dis-esteem of Ceremonies and external pomp in the Worship of
God, they are the more endeared to Corporations, and the greater part of
persons engaged in Trade and Traffic, who hate Ceremonies in general, that
is, forms and set behaviors that are not necessary, as being not at leisure
for them, and as they are expenceful, and as contrary to their Genius and
Education. And indeed men that live amidst the continual dispatches of business
in a way of Trade, do naturally grow into a hatred of what does unnecessarily
take up time. We see therefore in Holland, that Funerals (the last solemn
Offices the dead can have paid them, and of which the observation in less
Trading Countries does with its Ceremonies devour so much time) are there to
be celebrated before two in the afternoon; and for every hour that a Hearse is
kept in a house after that time, somewhat what is paid to the State. Nor can it
otherwise be, but that the same persons who nauseate Ceremonies in Civil
things, will loath them likewise in Religious: Just as a man that has an
antipathy against Muskadine in his Parlour, cannot love it at the Sacrament.

The Fathers, upon whose writings those that would now recommend Ceremonies to
the Church do build their assertions of them, were such as did live in the
Southern parts of the World, where Ceremonies are more loved in Civil and
Religious things, then by us Northern people they are. And besides, the people
there being of sharper wits then among us they are, the Artifices of Ceremonies
are requisite to raise mists before their understanding faculties, and to
detain them from as much knowledge as they can by admiration, lest they should
become the less obedient by being the more knowing. The eminency of the
Southern wits above the Northern appears to us from the constant and just
complaints of Northern Nations, that the Southern have still over-reached them
in Treaties, after they had defeated their Armies in the field. And what I here
observe concerning these Nations, is attested by Bodin in his fifth Book De
Republica: Where he shows what his observation of the Genius and subtle
understandings of Southern people was, and how it was fit they should be awed
into the doing of things by a solemn and pompous managery of Religion.

It Is further observable concerning Northern Nations, that they are more
addicted to Trade then Southern; which they are necessitated to be, because the
things that of their own accord, that is, without industry, grow out of the
Earth, are fewer among them then Southern; and because they are more populous:
and while they are more then the other Nations addicted to Trade, they must
needs be less addicted to Ceremonies. The Hollanders may serve as an instance
to evince the truth of this, who having scarce any native commodities, and
being a populous Country, for their quantity of ground, and being forced to
advance Trade, can hardly abstain from Markets on the Lords Day, and do account
it a piece of Devotion to cover their Wares in Sermon time. Much less could
they, or indeed any Trading Country, admit so many Holy Days as our Church of
England did abound with. The Lutheran Religion being professed chiefly in
Countries that subsist by Trade, though it owns an Episcopal form of
Church Government, has annexed to it but few Ceremonies; and I think except
bowing at the name of Jesus, and standing up at the Creed, none considerable.
Nor are there in any Church of Calvin's persuasion Responsalls to be used by
the people in their Liturgies, as in ours: Nor in the Lutheran Churches, do any
but the Chatechis'd boys mind them much. And in Holland the Lutheran Church
does admit men to the Sacrament without private Confession and Absolution,
which in less Trading places it strictly requires. While I am now inquiring
into the disposition of Trading Countries, I shall by the way observe, that the
interest which the Protestant Religion has in them, is its greatest visible
security and defense. For though Princes of the Popish Religion do command a
greater quantity of ground then Protestant Princes, yet they have not an
interest in Maritime Towns and Trading places equal to them. And and as the
present State of Christendom is, he that commands the Sea commands the shore,
and the Dominion of the Sea through Gods mercy is in Protestant hands. But to
return from whence I digrest. If we reflect on those that did most love
Ceremonies heretofore in our Nation, we shall find them to have been persons of
the greatest Rank and Quality among us, who did affect Ceremonies in Civil
things; or of the poorest sort, who did get their daily bread by the Charity of
the other. The midling sort of men, and especially the substantial Tradesmen
of Corporations, did generally disgust them. So natural is it for men to paint
God in colors suitable to their own fancies, that I do not wonder at Trading
persons who hate Ceremonies, that they thus think God in respect of this hatred
altogether such as themselves. And therefore Almighty God designing his Worship
from the Jewish Church to be full of Ceremonies, and such as were Typical of
his Son, did divert that Nation from the utmost promoting of Trade. To this end
they were not planted, except a few of them by the Seaside, but in Inland
places, and thereby were the better enabled to advance shepherdry, and the
multiplying of various kinds of Cattle in order to their Sacrifices. They were
forbid to take use money of one another, not that there was any real evil or
Injustice in Usury, but that it would have drawn them on to the advancement of
Trade, and consequently have interrupted the course of their solemn Rites and
Ceremonies: Religion would then have suffered by Trade, whereas the contrary
thing has since happened from it. For beside those Vices that are concomitant
of Idleness, which Trade repels, the increase of Navigation must necessarily
propagate the knowledge of Christian Religion, as well as humane Arts and
Sciences. Thus, Multi pertransibunt, and augebitur Scientia.

If in opposition to what has been said about Trading persons, being generally
disaffected to Ceremonies in Religion; any shall urge, that in the Popish
Republics Trade and Ceremonies are both used: It may be answer d, that the
many Ceremonies there are rather endured then loved, and that if men's
understandings were not there mis-guided by a belief of their being necessary
to salvation, the practice of them would quickly be abated; just as we see the
motion of a lock to be altered when the hand is removed that held back the
spring. Let but the Protestant Religion get ground there, and so consequently
the Tributes of their time be no more demanded for their present Ceremonies,
and we shall soon find how unwilling they will be to pay them.

I shall now briefly speak of the other parties, as the Independents, etc. and
take notice of their considerableness, and hopes of bidding fair for an
interest in the hearts of any of the people.

And here I shall observe, that if these Sects had got no ground in the Nation,
that yet they want not their likelyhoods of doing it; and that first by reason
of the ready inclination of many among us to mutability, in nothing more then
their opinions about controverted things in Religion. For opinions held by the
English are held by Islanders; And therefore Bodin in his Methodus ad facilem
historiarum cognitionem, and fifth chapter of it, does very judiciously show
how people are to be moderated by different Laws, according to their Climates
and Situations, which he confirms by mentioning the several Vices and Virtues
of Countries remotely distant from one another; saying, how that Ventosa loca
ferociores homines and mobiliores reddunt, quieta vero humaniores and
constantiores. i. e. Countries disturbed with frequent winds make men more
fierce and mutable; but Countries that are free from such, do make men more
civil and constant.

And secondly, because the Protestant Religion does indemnifie us in the Court
of Conscience, for believing in matters of Religion according to the Dictates
of our private Judgments, or rather oblige us to it. Doubtless, if it be not
lawful for every man to be guided by his private judgment in things of
Religion, it will be hardly possible to acquit our separation from the Romish
Church from the guilt of schism. The Genius of the Protestant Religion does
make it as natural to us to weigh and consider any notions, though recommended
to us by our Ministers, as it is to tell money after our spiritual Fathers,
which we shall be as ready to do as after our natural. Nor can the decisions
of Synods and General Councils terminate our inquiries in Religion, or keep
single Divines from recommending notions de fide. And therefore as any Judge is
concerned to be wary how he gives sentence in a cause, or inforceth the
Execution of it, when there lie appeals from his to several other
Judicatories; so does it likewise import Synods or Conventions of Divines to be
cautious in their deciding matters of Faith, since every such cause is to be
carried from their Bar to the examination of more then ten thousand
Chancellours, as many being Judges of the cause as there are rational men. It
has been long since observed by many, that Christian Religion has moderated
the extremity of servitude as to civil things in the places where it has been
received. And certainly it is much more consonant to that Religion, and
especially that form of it which has asserted its spiritual freedom from the
impositions of others, to allow spiritual liberty to others. Nor does it seem
worthy of Christ, who has left us a Religion full of Mysteries, and not any
visible Judge of them, to have designed about those any visible Executioners.
If any man thinks otherwise let him say so. I might further show how these
Sects caresse the vulgar, in giving the power of the keys to the people in
their gathered Churches; and how likely it is that many busy men, and of good
natural parts, who have not Learning enough to procure any good
Church-preferment from the old or modern Episcopal men, and it may be any such
Learned men as have been repulsed by them as to preferment, will be gathering
Churches.

But this present inquiry concerning the interest the several Sects among us
have in the hearts of many, needs no further prosecution. We find too many
places swarming with them: And such is the peculiar temper and complexion of
most people of these persuasions, and the melancholy of them more fixed and
sharp then that of any other party, that this concurring with Religion (of
which I doubt not but very many of them have a true sense) will incline them to
persist in their present practices. Of the height and setledness of these men's
discontents we had experience, in their voluntary removal out of the Nation,
carrying their Estates with them, some to Holland, and others to New England;
when the other more sagacious party of non-Conformists, since called
Presbyterians, chose to weather out the storm at home, and to get for
themselves as good terms as they could.

THE FOURTH REASON that I shall urge to prove how much the peace and security
of the Nation will be advanced by the liberty propounded, may be taken from the
inclinations of Orders and Degrees of other men among us, and such as are not
much engaged in these parties; who account it their interest to be free from
any religious impositions of the Clergy, and to have the power of Bishops so
moderated, as that they may not be able to make any suffer for not being of
their opinions in lesser matters of Religion. And here I shall observe, first,
how the Judges of the Land and the Lawyers generally have been ready to curb
the excess of power in any Bishops. The Bishops judging of Ecclesiastical
causes according to the Canon Law, (a Law of which Albericus Gentilis, that
renowned Civilian, says in the 19th. chap. of his second Book De Nuptiis, Sed
hoc jus brutumque and barbarum sane est, natum in tenebris seculorum
spississimis, productum a monacho tenebrione, etc.) was an occasion of our
Lawyers contrasts with them. And what may well create suspicions, that the
Bishops keeping of Courts as they did was not according to Law, may be had from
those words of the Archbishop of Canterbury, in his Epistle Dedicatory to the
King before his Speech in the Star Chamber.

I do humbly in the Churches name desire of Your Majesty, that it may be
resolved by all the Reverend Judges of England, and then Publish d by Your
Majesty, that our keeping Courts and Issuing Process in our own Names, and the
like Exceptions formerly taken, and now renewed, are not against the Law of the
Realm, etc.

And how ready the Lawyers have been to check the severity of Ecclesiastical
Courts, their innumerable prohibitions show. In the days of Popery the
Prelates could awe the Judges with Excommunication, for such crimes as the
Church called so. But how little of terror the application of that censure
has had since, appears from the frequent denouncing of it against the same
man. And therefore that Learned Lawyer Judge Ienkins, in the second part of his
Works, says, that for opposing the excesses of one of the Bishops, he lay
under three Excommunications.

Secondly, the substantial body of the Gentry heretofore was, and is still
likely to be for the moderating the exercise of Episcopal power, and for the
opposing its extravagance.

The oath ex officio, and commuting for penance, and other such kind of things,
cannot but be thought troublesome to them. But that which I shall here chiefly
take notice of, is, how a considerable part of the Gentry of England is grown
more inquisitive in matters of Religion within these late years then formerly.

Where this inquiring temper is not, no opinion so horrid but may be
universally believed. Thus the Turks may be induced to think that there is a
Devil in the juice of Grapes, and the Papists that there may be a God therein.
But when men are neither by Religion or temper restrained from searching into
the causes of things, they will not in civility to other men's understandings
believe propositions to be true or false. And that which makes me (beside my
own observation) to conclude that many of the Gentry of late are grown more
inquisitive in Religious things then formerly, and are likely so to continue,
is, because they are more then heretofore inquisitive in civil things.

As when the polished knowledge of Philologie had obtained a conquest over the
insignificant Learning of the Schoolmen, no man was thought worthy the name of
a Scholar but he who understood the Greek Tongue; so since the late
introduction of real Learning into the World by Galilaus, Tycho Brahe, my Lord
Bacon, Gassendus, and Des Carts, neither the knowledge of elegant words, or
nice Speculations, will yield any man the Reputation of being Learned that is
altogether rude in Mathematics; which as they were formerly counted the Black
Art, and their Professors, such as Roger Bacon, Conjurers, so may possibly
School Divinity and School-Divines hereafter be.

Having thus asserted the present searching disposition of a great part of our
ingenious Gentry, it may well be hence inferred that liberty of conscience may
be of high use to them, and that if any Ecclesiastical persons determine any
thing contrary to their reasons, they will not believe them, or, if against
their safety, not obey them. I think therefore by the way, it was very
politickly done of the Consistory of Cardinals to imprison Galilaeus for
affirming the motion of the Earth, since that notion of his might fill the
world with several new debates and inquiries, and so Ignorance the mother of
Devotion be destroyed.

To prevent which, effectual care is taken by the Jesuits, as appears by the
instructions given them in the Directory of their order, called Directorium
exercit. spirit. Ignatii Loyolae, part 2. p. 172. Where there are, Regulae
aliquae tenendae ut cum Orthodoxa Ecclesia sentiamus. And the first Rule is, Vt
sublato proprio omni judicio, teneamus semper promptum paratumque animum ad
obediendum Catholicae and Hierarchicae Ecclesiae. It follows p. 176. Reg. 13.
Ut Ecclesiae conformes simus, si quid quod oculis nostris appareat album nigrum
illa definiverit, debemus itidem quod nigrum sit pronuntiare. This is in the
Edition of that Book at Tholou, Anno 1593. and confirmed by the Bull of Pope
Paul the third.

In short, he that has had but any conversation with that ingenious part of
the Gentry who have concerned themselves in the consideration of
Church Government, cannot but take notice of these two assertions being in
vogue among them; which whether true or no it is not here pertinent to determine.

The first, that it is possible for Monarchy to subsist here without that high
power our Bishops formerly had, and so that Maxim, No Bishop no King, has been
disbelieved. This Maxim seems to them true concerning Turkey, No Mufti no Grand
Signior, because the Mufti can with the Screen of Religion as he pleases hide
the ugliness of those actions the Grandeur of the Turkish Empire is supported
by. But our Kings govern according to Law, and so the Engine of Superstition is
not here of use for the amusing people into slavery. I confess, any party of
men that will not own the Kings Supremacy in Ecclesiastical causes as well as
Civil, is not fit to be allowed as the State-Religion.

But that Supremacy of the Kings in Ecclesiastical matters and in Civil, is
acknowledged by the Divines that are for the Lord Primates form of Episcopacy,
as much as by any other.

A second assertion very much received among them is, that no particular form
of Church Government is of Divine right. Of this opinion my Lord Bacon shows
himself to be expressly in his Considerations touching the Edification and
Pacification of the Church of England: and so my Lord Falkland, in one of his
printed Speeches, where speaking of Bishops, he says, I do not believe them to
be jure divino, nay I believe them to be not jure divino, but neither do I
believe them to be injuria humana. So that it is no wonder that among our
ordinary enquirers after knowledge this notion is believed, which was so by
those two incomparably Learned persons. And it may seem much more to gratify
the power of Princes, then the Maxim, No Bishop no King can do. The Author of
the History of the Council of Trent, makes mention how Laymez, General of the
Jesuits, spent a whole Congregation in proving that Bishops are jure
pontificio, and not jure divino; and said, that the power of Jurisdiction was
given wholly to the Bishop of Rome, and that none in the Church has any spark
of it but from him. It Is there said how the Legates were of opinion that the
question of the Divine Right of Bishops was set on foot to gratify the
Authority of Bishops, and that the importance of that might be to infer that
the Keys were not given to Peter only, that the Council was above the Pope,
and the Bishops equal to him; they saw that the Dignity of Cardinals Superior
to Bishops was quite taken away, and the Court brought to nothing; that the
Preventions and Reservations were removed, and the Collation of Benefices drawn
to the Bishops.

Thus we see how apt men are to make use of Divine Right, as fire, and to count
it a good servant, but a bad Master. Nor are some without their fears, that if
Bishops were here publicly owned as by Divine Right, that the King would
quickly lose his Power of nominating them, and subjects the benefit of Appeals
from their Courts to the King in Chancery. I acknowledge that a moderate
Episcopacy is generally reputed of Church-Governments the best: But the
believers of the Divine Right of it are of late years grown very few. For the
skirmishes in the Press and Pulpit concerning it, between the Divines of
several parties, have occasioned two popular reasons to be brought against it;
which how valid they are, is not my task to determine.

The first is this, That is not likely to be of Divine positive Right (which is
the Right here meant) about which Christians equally considerable for strength
of parts, both natural and acquired, and for time spent in that part of
Controversiall Divinity that concerns Church Discipline, and withal for
holiness in their lives, do at last disagree.

The second Reason drawn from the eager Disputes of Churchmen about their
several Divine Rights is this; Nothing really oppressive of Civil Societies,
or destructive of their welfare, is of Divine Right: but so these forms of
Church Government have been by the opposite Divines of each Persuasion accused
to be, and likewise by other persons.

It has been further observed by many, that though several things were once
confirmed in the Church by an Apostolical Precept or Practice, they are like
Laws abolished by desuetude, and do not now oblige the Christian world,
according to the Vogue of all our Churchmen: as namely the Diaconissae, the
Anointing the sick with Oil, the Peoples saying Amen after the Ministers
Prayers, and Preaching with the head uncovered, etc.

To conclude the Examination then of this particular; a considerable number of
the Laity, whose Fortunes and Parts do keep them from standing up and drawing
their swords to maintain other men's Creeds in every circumstance of them,
having by the contests of the Clergy found out (as they think) the Vanity of
all their pretendings to Divine Right, will not encourage immoderate and high
behaviors in any one party of them; but upon this their imagined detection
adhere to that form of Church Government that shall seem to them most
consistent with the Nations good; just as the Roman Emperors were sometimes
chosen in the Camp, Evulgato (as Tacitus says) Imperiarcano, Principem alibi
quam Romae fieri posse.

Thirdly, it is natural to Parliaments to check any Power that invades a due
Liberty of Conscience, themselves wanting it as well as those whom they
represent.

Nor can any body of men be well without it, as we see in the late Assembly of
Divines, that party which joined against the Independents did want Liberty of
Conscience about no mean points in Religion; some of those Presbyterian Divines
(as they were called) being of Calvin's, and others of Bishop Davenants
opinions, concerning Election and Reprobation.

And moreover, the Parliament that called that Synod was in matters of Religion
much more divided.

But I shall choose to look further back on the nature of our Parliaments in
reference to Religion. It cannot be expected that while Popery was prevalent in
England, much Liberty of Conscience should be granted; the Pope being then
reputed the Vicar of Christ in Spiritual things, was necessarily to be obeyed
therein.

And yet notwithstanding the Authority he had here, no man suffered death for
opposing his Dictates in Religion, till the second of Henry the fourth. Nor are
there wanting Lawyers, and those both Learned in their Profession, and in this
case uninteressed, who deny that this Statute was ever more then a pretended
one, and say that it was never assented to by the Commons; and that whereas in
the Act it self it is said, Praelati and clerus supradicti, ac etiam
communitates dicti regni supplicarunt, that those words, Communitates dicti
regni, are not in the Parliament-Roll, in which when the Law comes to be
Enacted it runs in this form of words, Qui quidem Dominus Rex ex assensu
magnatum, and aliorum procerum ejusdem Regni, concessit and statuit, etc. where
the Commons are not at all named. See Mr. Bagshaw of the Temple his Reading on
the Statute of 25. Edward the III. called, Statutum pro clero, p. 32.

But that de facto this Statute went current for Law, the cruel effects of it
did too clearly show. Yet as high as the Popish Clergy then was, with whom that
usurping King complied, the Commons petitioned the King to take away their
Temporal Possessions, and that the Statute made against Lollards in the second
year of the King might be repealed. And by the complaint of the Commons, as
appears by the Statute of 25. Henry the VIII, it was then in part repealed.

Afterward in a Parliament held Vicesimo octavo of the Queen the Commons
quarreled with the Excessive Power of the Clergy, desiring to have it
restrained both in the conferring of Orders, and in their Censures and Oath Ex
officio.

It Is true, the Foundation of the high Commission is built upon the Statute of
the first of Queen Elizabeth; but the design of that was chiefly to destroy the
interest of the Popish Clergy then not exterminated. In the Reigns of following
Princes, a party known by the Name of Puritan had obtained a large Vogue in
Parliament, insomuch that that party, and another called the Patriots (a sort
of men who were Zealots for the welfare of the Nation, though not for any
Religion) being frequently in conjunction, were the over-ballancing party in
the House of Commons. And in the last Parliament on the fifteenth of December,
1640. It was resolved, nemine contradicen^e, That the Clergy of England
Convented in any Convocation or Synod, or otherwise, have no power to make any
Constitutions, Canons or Acts whatsoever, in matter of Doctrine, or otherwise,
to bind the Clergy or Layety of this Land, without the Commons consent in
Parliament; and that the several Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical,
treated upon by the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, and the rest of the
Bishops and Clergy of those Provinces, and agreed upon by the Kings Majesty's
License, in their several Synods began at London and York, 1640. do not bind
the Clergy or Laiety of this Land, or either of them. Which Vote of that House
may seem to be grounded on this consideration, that a Legislative power is
inseparable from the King and Parliament; and that if a Parliament would
transmit their interest in the Legislative Power to any other order of men,
they cannot do it, more then a Judge can delegate his Authority to his Clerks,
or any be a Deputies Deputy.

I shall only here further observe, that the Lawyers (whose Obligations on the
account of interest to moderate the power of Bishops I have before spoke of)
are still likely to be a great part of the House of Commons, and to have the
conduct of Parliamentary Affairs much in their hands, and to concur with any
party against the Bishops, if they should invade the due Liberty of men's
Consciences, or endeavor to make themselves formidable in the Nation.

The LAST REASON I shall urge to prove what advantages will redound to the
Nation from the allowance of a due Liberty of Conscience, is, that it will
necessarily produce an advancement of our Trade and Traffic, the hinderance
whereof must needs follow from the contrary practice. The largeness of Trade
in any Country is most certainly founded in the populousness of it.

It Is only in populous Countries that the wages of workmen are cheap, whereby
a greater store of Manufactures is prepared for Exportation. In populous
Countries only they fell their own Commodities dear, and buy foreign cheap.
It Is there that Land is worth twice as many years purchase as elsewhere. And
in such Countries only is the fishing Trade carried on, which none will employ
themselves in that can live upon the shore reasonably well; and which in
populous Countries enough will not be able to do.

This then being laid down as a principle, that the wealth of any Nation
depends on its populousness, I may confidently affirm, that the populousness
of a Country does much depend upon the Liberty of Conscience that is there
granted.

The Kingdom of Spain may here serve for this to be Exemplified in, where there
are not men enough to Manufacture their own Wool, and where there is more
black money, Brass or Copper Coin used then in other Nations, notwithstanding
all the Silver that comes thither from the West Indies. It was the rigor of
the Inquisition that brought that Monarch, who would have been an universal
one, to send Ambassadors to his high and mighty subjects.

But we need not look out of our own Country for instances of Trades suffering
together with Freedom of Conscience: For by reason of the former severity
exercised on those that would not conform to the Ceremonies imposed, many
thousands of people bred up in a way of Trade and Traffic left the Kingdom,
going, some of them to America, and others to Holland, where our Contrymen
did compensate to the Hollanders for several Manufactures which they directed
us to, when the Rage of Duke Alva's persecution occasioned their residence
among us. And what could more prejudice the Trade of our Country I know not,
then the peopleing other Countries with our Artificers, and the teaching them
our Arts and Manufactures. And it is considerable that the sort of Trading men
on whom the shock of persecution did seem to light most heavily, was that of
those whose Trades did lie chiefly in advancing our staple-Commodity of Wool,
and preparing our Old and New Draperies for Exportation: to which Trades the
ordinary sort of Puritan Non-Conformists were rather inclined then to ploughing
and digging, because in these Trades of theirs; as namely Weaving, Spinning,
Dressing, etc. Their Children might read Chapters to them as they were at work,
and they might think or speak of Religious things, or sing Psalms, and yet
pursue their Trades. Besides, these Trades were more suitable to their
Constitutions, which were generally not so Robust as of others; and to the
melancholy of their tempers.

Now these men being frequently disturbed by Apparitors, and summoned to
Ecclesiastical Courts for working on Holy Days perhaps, or going on a Sunday
to some Neighboring Parish when they had no Sermon in their own, or for some
such causes, were so hindered in the course of their Trades, that they were
necessitated to remove out of the Kingdom. They could not expect that Merchants
or other Trading persons would employ them and take their work, unless they
could bring it in at such a set time that it might be as occasion required
Exported, and sent to Faires and Markets abroad at punctual times likewise;
which Merchants are concerned in taking care of, lest their Commodities be
undersold.

Now these Puritan Traders were not in a capacity to dispatch the sending in of
their Manufactures to others at the time agreed on, by reason of their frequent
Citations to, and Delays at, the Bishops Courts.

And since other Nations have now the way of making Cloth, as namely France,
Holland and Flanders, if we do not sell it cheaper then they, we shall hardly
have any abroad sold at all.

To conclude the Examination of this particular affair; not any that has
searched at all into the nature of the Trade of this Nation, but believes that
the best way to advance it would be to call in and invite any Protestant
strangers to come and live among us; and to encourage Artists of all Nations to
come and plant themselves here: which cannot be done without the giving them a
due Liberty of Conscience, and if it be our interest to encourage strangers,
and give them this Liberty, this dealing may much more be expected by our own
natives.

But, it is needless to insist longer in giving plain reasons for a plain
proposition.

I shall only therefore before I now draw this discourse about the due Liberty
of Conscience that is fit to be practiced in this Nation toward an end, show
that thereby the Reverend Fathers of the Church, the Bishops, will find their
inter^st advanced in particular, as well as the interest of the Nation in
general.

If any man shall say that the Government of the Church by Bishops is the most
pure and Apostolical, I am firmly of his opinion; yet as No Bishop no King is
now no uncontradicted Maxim, so is it less unquestioned, that no force in
matters of Religion, no Bishop. But notwithstanding the severity that has been
exercised on men's Consciences by former Prelates, such is the prudence of some
of the present Fathers of the Church, that they will I believe see it to be as
much their interest to give Liberty of Conscience, as it can be the interest of
any men to receive it. And indeed if this were but in a fair manner distributed
among the several Sects I have spoken of, they would no more endeavor the
destruction of the Episcopal Clergy, then the Jews at Rome tolerated do design
the ruin of the Pope. Nay further, these Sects having liberty under their
Government would serve them as a balance against popular envy. I have often
wished that our Nobility would dispose the Education of some of their Sons in
order to Ecclesiastical preferments, and that a great deal of envy might be
diverted by the same persons, being Lords Spiritual and Temporal. But it
cannot be expected that persons nobly descended should be engaged in Holy
Orders, till they could see the way of Administering things in the Church to be
as much in the affections of the people here, or above danger from their
hatred, as in other Countries it is, where the Nobless are many of them
Churchmen. Now then the Reverend Fathers the Bishops, may compass the
Affections of the people by Liberty of Conscience, and security from the danger
of their hatred by an Inquisition; but (as I said before) that cannot it self
be compast here.

Indeed our Ecclesiastical Rulers have reason to steer us cautiously, since
they sit at Helm in such a ship as has thrown very many Pilots overboard. And
it may well become those Worthy Divines that have been of late releast through
Gods good Providence from the extremity of their sufferings, to be of most
calm, quiet and sedate spirits, just as persons taken from the rack do
presently fall asleep.

The great alteration in the body of the people since these last twenty years,
requires that our old ends of promoting the welfare of the Church of England,
should be attained by the conduct of new means.

For the greatest part of the old Assertors of all the Ceremonies of the Church
are lodged in graves, many of the zealous Lovers of them are now in Heaven,
where Calvinists and Episcopal men agree; and the present Major part of this
Land consists of those, to whom the introducing the old Church Government will
seem an innovation.

I grant the inconveniences which we suffered for want of Church Government in
general have been many, and those which we should have suffered from a Scotch
Presbytery would have been more. But yet it must likewise be granted, that the
undistinguishing vulgar will be but too ready to endeavor the removal of any
Church Government which does at present inconvenience them, without considering
that the miseries they formerly felt will thereby recur upon them; just as a
horse will strive to fling any Rider that does at present gall and spur him too
much, without considering that the next Rider may possibly gall him worse; or
as a man would try to repel the hand of one who held a burning coal to his
flesh, though he should tell him that if that coal were removed he would apply
a hotter. They therefore that would endeare any form of Church Government to
the Majority of the people, are concerned to make it largely diffusive of
advantage to them.

It Is very apparent how many parties among us have been ruined by narrowing
their interest, and not making it national. And God grant that after all our
enquiries about Church Discipline, the Gentry of England be not by any
divisions the present Clergy may cause, tempted to cry up the Divine Right of
Erastianisme, and say No Erastian no King; which opinion does as much exceed
the Episcopal in giving power to the King, as the Episcopal does the
Presbyterian, or that the Independent persuasion.

It is therefore the true interest of the Clergy here so to temper the
Government of the Church, that it may be accommodated to the content and
satisfaction of the Gentry or other Lay-persons, and of its own Members. And
it is very irrational to think that any Church Government in a Protestant
Country can be so, which does restrain a large and almost absolute power to
the hands of a few. Nor is it more prudent for France to own no distinction
between a Gentry and a Nobility, but to allow equal privileges to such as we
reduce to two Orders here, that it may effectually curb the insolence of the
Peasants, then for the whole Clergy here to grow into one body or form of
Government, and all the parts thereof to be influenced with a convenient power,
that so it may be in no danger from the Enemies of a Ministry in general. Nor
was there ever any thing propounded as a means to make the Clergy of England
very considerable, that can be thought comparable to the form of Episcopacy
described by the Bishop of Armagh. And therefore I do not wonder that its
publicly owned by the Divines formerly called Presbyterian (who now deserve a
name less odious, and to be called the Divines that are for moderate
Episcopacy, as I said before) but rather that it is not as generally contended
for by all their brethren of the Church, excepting a few that are actually
invested with the highest Dignities therein. Now if we divide the Clergy here
into (...) parts, not one in three has these great Dignities, or is likely in
any time to attain to them. But that which the Bishop of Armaghs model of
Episcopacy offers to more then three parts of four, is an Accession of power,
or a gaining of that Authority in Ecclesiastical matters, as namely in
Ordination and Church Censures, which before they had not. And certainly, the
grasping of present power must needs to any Ingenious men of the Clergy seem
more delightful then the tedious Expectation of distant preferments, and the
servile licking up of any men's spittle, that others hereafter may do so with
theirs. By the practice of this model the spirit of the Clergy would be kept
from being embased, and the ordinary sort of Vicars would be cured of affecting
servility, laziness and ignorance. Industry, Parts, Learning, would be likewise
thereby encouraged. For the power of the Keys being thus given to the Bishop
and all the Presbyters in any Precinct or Dioces, those men that could offer
the best reasons for things, and show the greatest strength of parts, would be
most swaying in Ecclesiastical Conventions.

Nor is it likely that the Gentry would be aggrieved at the practice of this
way of Episcopacy, or every Church-Censure's passing through a Consistory of
Divines. For it is not probable that in such an Assembly there should be a
Combination to execute any censure on any man, to gratify the lusts or private
piques of another. Besides, there is no such way that a Divine can use to make
himself considerable with the Laiety as his being eminent for power in the
sphere of his own Profession; just as a Mercer that would by any sway influence
the Company of Drapers, must first obtain a large interest in his own Company.

In short, the Clergy by this fair distribution of Ecclesiastical power among
them will not be in danger of ruin by the discontents of any of its Members,
or of any of the Laiety while Liberty of Conscience is secured to them, and
Ceremonies are not imposed. Nor is there any way by which the incoveniences of
the Presbyterian Government can again invade us, but by the engrossing of
Ecclesiastical power in the hands but of few persons, and by their using
Rigor and Violence. I know it is ridiculous to imagine that a Presbyterian
Government can under that notion find many to own it now in this Kingdom.

Yet are the Non-Conformists likely still to increase, as from Edward the
sixths time to this they have gradually done. And some that are weary of our
former Presbytery, may yet be willing to return to it, if they find Episcopacy
Afflictive to them; though thereby they only shift their pain. For nothing so
much as Persecution makes men set up, Altar contra altar, every man choosing
rather to be a Sacrificer on his own Altar, then a Sacrifice upon another. If
any Ecclesiastical persons therefore shall design to gratify the Peace and
Welfare of the Nation without the allowance of a due Liberty of Conscience, I
shall think their only aim hereby is to confirm the truth of their Doctrine
and Discipline by a miracle. I cannot but judge them too sagacious, to believe
that they can convince men's understandings of the truth of any Assertions by
Torturing their bodies. For men by the rage of passion to conduct knowledge into
the World, is as unlikely as the lighting of a candle with Gunpowder. How
ridiculous is it to think that Truth got any thing by the writings that passed
between Luther and Henry the eight? There are several erroneous opinions, that
if we wish the world well rid of, we shall find to die away of their own
accord, if we do not exasperate the maintainers of them; just as nature makes
us amends for the ugliness of Monsters in their being short-lived. Yet even in
the case of natural unhandsomenesse, I have seen the vulgar vary from their
common Rule of judging it, when a deformed Malefactor has been going to
Execution. Nor do the words of Cheaters that die on Gibbets want belief among
the Rabble. And if the common people are always so ready to believe what is
affirmed by infamous persons, because they are dying, we may well suppose they
will give credit to the words of such as lived demurely when they are to die,
because such and such thing were affirmed by them. I believe that hardly more
Priests have been cut off by the Law then Papists thereby made. That Faith has
been given to the Assertors of Popish opinions, because they have been dying,
which they could just have drawn from me by raising the dead. Nor is it a thing
unobserved by any lookers into Antiquity, that the Christian Religion has
still got ground in the World, not by persecuting but being persecuted.

But that which I cannot without horror observe, is, that the not allowing a
due Liberty of Conscience, has instead of advancing the cause of Truth,
propagated Atheism in this Nation. This does but too clearly appear from that
Irreligion many of our Gentry have been infected with by the Reverend Divines
of the Church of England not having had freedom to Worship God in public
according to their Consciences. For several persons of the Gentry not being
able to hear a Liturgy, (a way of Prayer which every Church in the Christian
World but ours then had) and Sermons from such Divines as were not Puritans,
chose rather not to go to Church at all then be there present at the Worship
they disgusted; and no marvel that thus neglecting Gods public service, they
at last grew unconcerned in any Religion.

The like temptations to Atheism would be incident to many that are not of the
Gentry, if Liberty as has been propounded, should not be given to the
Nonconformist Divines. For though several of this sort of men would exercise
their Devotion in private meetings, and some would join with such public
Worship as was to be had, yet many would hear no Sermons at all, as possibly
not likeing that which looks like a Conventicle, and more disliking the way of
praying and preaching used by very many Divines that adhere to the former
Episcopacy. Now it were pity that this disease of Speculative Irreligion should
infect the Commonalty as well as others, and that by the persecution of
Ministers, who differed from us in lesser things, we should as it were nail
those Canons that might be employed in battering the Atheism of the Age,
because they are not all of the same length and shape. Which Atheism I fear
has occasionally been not a little advanced by the disagreements of Ministers
about the Divine Right of several forms of Church Government. For things to be
believed and done in order to salvation, can have no more then a Divine Right,
and their opinions of Discipline have claimed so much; and by this means they
have made some foolish men apt to think that the Trumpet of Religion gives an
uncertain sound, and that nothing at all is of any Divine Right. I account the
body politic of the Nation to be as well concerned in the upholding Religion
as the Souls of men; the Majesty whereof would be sufficiently kept up, if the
Teachers of it did either agree in all points about it, or else in this one
thing, that the dissenters in lesser Controversies of Religion are obliged to
allow a mutual toleration. And indeed when I consider what opinions men call
one another Heretics for not agreeing in, it seems to me the same thing, as if
after the Pope had pronounced Virgilius the Bishop of Saltsburg Heretic, for
saying there were Antipodes, he should have called the Pope Heretic too for
saying there were none. These parties that differ so in the circumstantial
points of Religion are equally Antipodes to one another, and alike near Heaven,
and in the Revolution of a few hours they see the same fun, though not the
same stars; I mean, they have the same Fundamental, though not less
considerable Truths. The Popish Religion among all the different Ritualls our
Forefathers used was accounted the same, some Worshipping God, Secundum usum
Sarum, and others, Secundum usum Bangor, etc. Why then may not the Protestant
Religion be so esteemed here among our little varyings? Though possibly some
very few Divines of all parties here for want of Prudence and Goodness of
nature may endeavor the rigorous imposing of things not necessary, that is,
such as we may be without, and which all Protestant Churches but ours are
without; yet will the Laiety probably, and I hope a great part of the Clergy of
several persuasions be far from concurring with them as Abettors of such an
odious work as may produce further mischiefs to Church and State, merely to
gratify the blind zeal or unpurged choler of a few. If Gods Ambassadors have a
mind to quarrel about Precedence or Ceremonies in Religious things,
pretendding that it is necessary to observe them most strictly, the people are
now grown so wise as not to think it necessary for themselves to encounter
hazards, to make some of these Legates of Heaven submit to the Punctilio's of
others; just as several Ambassadors from one Prince falling out in a strange
Country about Ceremonies in Civil things, which one of them being of a loftier
humor would reduce the rest to practice, would hardly find any of the Natives
of the place concerned in their debate, whatever love they bore to their Master.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE REPRESENTING THE LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE, That is Practiced in
FOREIGN PARTS.

By N.Y.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Brook, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Angel in Cornhill, 1661.

THE LIBERTY of RELIGION, Which is in use amongst PROTESTANTS.
It Is first inquired what Liberty the States which profess the Protestant
Religion give to different opinions within their Dominions?

To this I shall briefly answer, and begin with the Northern Climate, going
along and relating what I have observed in every different Jurisdiction.

When I was in Sweden, I found the Administrators of that Kingdom very much
inclined to Moderation toward the Reformed party, for they suffered them not
only to have Schoolmasters of their own to teach their Children, but also they
permitted them to have private meetings in their distinct Colonies, wherein
they had the free use of holy Ordinances in their own way without disturbance:
And although the Clergy of the Nation did not willingly allow this; yet whiles
the King Gustavus and his Daughter the Queen Christina ruled, their Liberty was
not abridged; but when Charles came to the Crown by the Resignation of
Christina, the old Chancellor Oxenstiern, in favor of the Clergy, caused the
King to take an Oath at his Coronation, whereby he was obliged not only to
restrain all public exercise different from the Lutheran, but also to abridg
the Reformed party of the Liberty which they had formerly enjoyed; which has
had some operation upon their freedom: but how far they are abridged of it now,
I am uncertain.

In Denmark there is no Liberty granted to any that differs in judgment, so far
as I have been acquainted with that State, only in Holstein, when the
Remonstrants after the Synod of Dort, had not that Liberty which they desired
in Holland, they planted themselves in Eidersh at Fridericksburg, where they
and others also obtained the prviledg of the exercise of their profession
without control, which is continued unto them still. Moreover, in Holstein at
Altena, the High and the Low Dutch, and the French Reformed Churches have the
Liberty of public meetings in their profession; who dwelling in Hamburg, and
not obtaining that Liberty within the City, have procured it within a little
English mile from the Gates thereof.

In Dantzick, the three Professions, viz. Reformed, Lutherans, and Papists,
have, or rather had, an equal liberty in the time of Keckermannus. The
Reformed party had the preeminence of the Government, and then they did in a
friendly manner admit of some Lutherans to share with them in it (for in
Religious concernments all were alike;) but since they have been admitted to
partake with them in the Government, they have found a way to worm the Reformed
party out of power, by which means they have abridged them of their ancient
Privileges and Liberties; so that before these late troubles they were forced
to appeal to the King of Poland, who made decrees in favor of the Reformed
party; but in these late troubles the ways of redress have been obstructed.

And at Elbing, when I was there the chief of the Magistrates, and the regents
of the School also, being of the Reformed Religion, the Liberty was so equal
that no party had any perceptible power over the other, but all was carried
with that moderation, that no offense was either taken or given whiles I was
there: but since (I fear) it is fallen out otherwise, a fierce Lutheran
Minister succeeding in the room of him that then was there, who by dividing
practices, and distinguishing forms, has disturbed their Peace.

In Poland there was an absolute freedom for the exercise of all professions,
and the venting of all opinions; the Papists, the Protestant, Calvinists,
Lutherans, Anabaptists, Socinians, etc. all had an equal Liberty: and because
the Protestants in former time found that by their Divisions, and distance in
Communion from each other they were much weakened, therefore in the year 1570
they agreed at Sendo^^ire, in a Synod of the three parties, viz. the confession
of Helvetia, of Bohemia, and of Ausburg, to unite and make up but one body* to
which effect they established afterward at many National Synods several
Orders, to remove and prevent scandalls and disorderliness from amongst
themselves, and to confirm their unity by the means of mutual Edification.

In Transylvania both the Reformed and the Lutheran profession are equally
free, and in National Synods they meet together, and consult in common,
concerning the means of mutual edification; whereof I have a large proof in
the business of Peace and Unity, concerning which they have done more then any
of the Churches in Europe, by answering all the doubts which were proposed unto
them as Cases of Conscience to be resolved.

In Germany heretofore the reformed party did freely exercise their Religion
under the Protection of the Princes of their own profession; but the Lutherans
did always make it a matter of Dispute, whether that Liberty did belong unto
them yea or no? yet now the Treaty of Peace lately concluded at Munster and
Osnabrugge has decided fully that controversy; for, by a Statute Law it is
determined that the reformed party shall have the same right and privilege of
free exercise which Lutheranes and Papists have; and this is thus determined by
the 7th Article of the Instrument of Peace. Quoniam vero controversiae
Religionis, etc.

Now because the controversies of Religion, which are in agitation at this time
amongst the forenamed Protestants, have not been hitherto reconciled, but have
been referred to a further endeavor of agreement, so that they still make two
parties; therefore concerning the right of reforming, it is thus agreed between
them; That if any Prince, or other Lord of the Territory, or Patron of any
Church, shall hereafter change his Religion, or obtain, or recover a
Principality or Dominion, either by the right of succession, or by virtue of
this present Treaty, or by any other Title whatsoever, where the public
exercise of Religion of the other party is at present in use, it shall be free
to him to have his Court-chaplains of his own Confession about him in the place
of his Residence, without any burden or prejudice to his Subjects ^ but it
shall not be lawful for him to change the public exercise of Religion, or the
Laws or Ecclesiastical Constitutions which have been there hitherto in use, or
take from these that formerly were there their Churches, their Schools, their
Hospitals, or the revenues, persians and stipends belonging thereunto, or apply
them to the men of their own profession; or obtrude Ministers of another
Confession unto their subjects, under the pretense of a Territoriall, Episcopal
or Patronall right, or under any other pretext whatsoever; or bring about any
other hinderance or prejudice, directly or indirectly, to the Religion of the
other party.

And that this agreement may be the more firm, in the Case of such a change, it
is lawful for the Communalties themselves to present; or such as have not the
right of presentation, they shall have the right to name fit schoolmasters,
and Ministers of the Churches to be examined by the public Consistory or
Ministry, if they be of the same Religion with the Commu^alties, which nominate
and present; or if they be not of the same Religion, they shall be examined in
the place which the Communalties shall choose; whom the Prince or Lord shall
afterward without any denial confirm.

This Statute Law of the Empire is the ground of all that freedom which the
Reformed, or the Lutheran party, can lay claim to, when they fall under
Magistrates of a different profession.

As for the observation of this Law, it is found that the Reformed Magistrate
is almost every where more equitable toward Lutherans, then these are unto
those: for in the Palatinate, at Heidelberg, and other places; in Hessen, at
Smalcalden, and at Marpurg, and in some places of Anhalt; in all the
Territories of the Elector of Brandenburg, and in the Principalities of Nassaw,
where the Reformed have the supreme power, the Lutherans have their full
liberty without interruption; but where the Lutherans have the supreme
Authority in Germany, I know no places where they permit the free exercise of
the Reformed profession; but in the places named heretofore in Holstein, at
Fridericksburg and Altena; and in Hamburg the English have their freedom
within the City, but none else; nor do I know any Imperial City where the
Magistrate is Lutheran, which permits the Reformed party to have the liberty of
public profession within their walls: there is one of the Lutheran Earls of
Hanaw, who has given of late years to the Reformed party dwelling in
Strasburg, the liberty to build a Church upon his Territory, and to have their
public meetings therein: and one of the Lutheran Marquesses of Brandenburg
has done the like a year or two ago to the Reformed inhabitants of Noimberg.

At Bremen, where the Magistrate is wholly reformed, within the City the
Lutherans have the possession of the Cathedral Church, where they exercise
their Religious Worship in public; but there are complaints made of the late
King of Sweden, that in the Territory under his Jurisdiction he has suffered
the Statute of the Empire touching the freedom of Religion to be violated, by
casting out the Reformed Ministers, and imposing Lutherans upon the Reformed
Professors, depriving them of the Liberty which they have enjoyed ever since
the first Reformation of these places from Popery.

In the Low Countries of the united Provinces, the Lutherans, the Remonstrants,
and the Anabaptists have a freedom to meet in a public way; others of all
sorts do meet in private: and the difference which is made between the
Professors of several parties is chiefly this; that the Reformed party, which
does own the National Confession, and are owned to be Members of the National
Congregations, have only the Privilege and Preeminence of being admitted to
places of Trust in the State, from which all others are excluded. And this
Liberty of Religion which the united Provinces have yielded and maintained unto
all sorts; has made that little spot of ground to be the Center of the Trade
of Europe, having only three Seaports, the Wicling, the Mase, and the Texel:
and these Ports are not easy neither, but difficult to be entered.

In the Cantons of Switzerland and Geneva there is no different Profession
publicly tolerated: although in the Circumstantial way of the Administration
of Ordinances, and in the particular order of Discipline and Government, each
Canton is different from another; yet they fell not out about their
differences, but correspond in a friendly manner in matters of common
concernment.

In France the Protestant Churches are to be considered within themselves, for
the Liberty which they enjoy under their Popish Magistrate is not under our
consideration; but the liberty which their National Synod does give to
particular men to protesse different opinions without bleach of unity in the
Church, is that which is to be observed, and may be a president to teach others
Moderation; for in the late Controversies between Monsieur du Moulin and
Monsieur Amyraut concerning Predestination, wherein many others were engaged on
both sides, although some hears did begin to break forth; yet the National
Synod has allayed the distemper, and preserved Peace and Unity in the
Churches, notwithstanding the difference of judgment which was found amongst
them. The freedom which the particular Churches have to depute some of their
members from their Consistories to the Colloques and Provincial Synods is the
means to preserve their Unity and Peace.

In Switzerland the freedom which the Churches enjoy does wholly depend upon
the Constitution of their order, as ratified by the Civil Magistrate, who in
each canton is Sovereign; and upon the correspondency between the Churches,
which is ordinarily managed by those of Zurich toward all the rest: for as the
Canton of Zurich has the precedence, and direction in all Civil matters of
common concernment, so has the Antistes and Consistory of Zurich in matters
Ecclesiastical a kind of trust put upon them to communicate to the rest, by
way of correspondency, matters to be advised on for mutual concurrence.

In Germany there is no such correspondency between the Churches, but their
freedom, in the exercise of Discipline and Government depends wholly upon the
Sanction which the Prince and his Ecclesiastical Senate or Consistory does
make concerning the order and way of administering all things.

In the Low Countries the freedom of meeting in Classes and in Synods; in
Classes every Month, or oftener, if need be, according as the Classes are
divided) in Synods Provincial every year once) is the preservation of these
Churches in unity; for the six Provinces, viz. Gelderland, Holland, Ulrecht,
Friesland, Groaning, and Overyssell, hold their Synods so consecutively, that
they can send from each Synod Deputies to another, to correspond with them, and
to communicate matters of Deliberation, that there may be no causes of breaches
between them; the Province of Zeeland has no settled time of Synodicall
meeting, but the Classes of Middelburg upon all Emergencies does give notice to
the other Classes, of the adjacent Islands of matters to be taken into
consideration: So that in the Low Countries the Liberty to meet for the
ordering of all things within themselves, which preserves the Churches in
France; and the Liberty to correspond and to communicate one with another the
things which they settle by order, which preserves the Churches in Switzerland,
is more complete then any where else; and because the Deputies, or rather
Commissioners from the Civil Magistrate are always present at the Provincial
Synods, therefore their decrees are more valid, and yet altogether free in
matters of spiritual concernment.

This is the Liberty which I have observed to be in use amongst Protestants
within themselves, in the exercise of their profession, by public meetings, by
the administration of Government within themselves, by Classes and Synods, and
by a Correspondency with one another in Religious matters. As for the Liberty
which particular members have in each Congregation, and which the Congregations
have in each Classis or Colloque, and by what Rules that Liberty is limited, is
a matter of more diffuse consideration, and perhaps of little use for the end
for which this information is desired: therefore I shall not enlarge upon that
subject.

OF THE LIBERTY of RELIGION
In use between PROTESTANTS and PAPISTS.

IF it be inquired what Liberty Papists have where Protestants bear Rule, or
Papists give to Protestants when they have all the power:

It may be Answered by the consideration of the places where each power is
prevalent.

On the one side, in Sweden and Denmark, and in all the Territories of the
lower and upper Saxony, wherever Protestants have the sole power, no Papists
are permitted to have any public exercise of their Religion; and on the other
side, in Austria, Bohemia; Moravia, and all the heritable lands of the House of
Austria, in Franconia, Bavaria, and the upper Palatinat where the Papists have
the sole power, no Protestants are permitted to have the public exercise of
their Religion.

These whole Territories forenamed on each side being entire Bodies within
themselves, under one head either of the one or the other profession, without
the intermixture of different Dominions, are uniform in the exercise of their
Religion respectively different. But the intermediate parts of the German
Empire are interwoven under several Princes of different Religions, and
therefore are of a mixed profession: my meaning is not, that the professions and
forms of Religion's worship are mixed and jumbled together in one; but that
both professions are exercised, some here and some there, in different places.

And because the inhabitants of the intermediate Territories being mixed, and
pretending to have each of them a right to the same places of worship,
quarrels and strife did arise amongst them, therefore when they deprived one
another of the freedom to exercise their profession, the Treaty of Peace at
Munster and Osnabrugge did appoint the Restitution of places for the public
exercise of Religion on both sides, and ordered that all matters of this kind
should be settled thenceforward as they were in use heretofore in the year
1624. which order occasioned a Deputation from all the States of the Empire at
Francford in the years 1656, 57. and following, to see that Decree and other
matters put in execution.

Now the Intermediate Territories are the Circles of Westphalia, of the Rhine,
of the Welterans, of Franconia, and of Suaben; containing many Principalities
and great Cities depending immediately upon tht Empire; which being of
different professions, and mixed one with another in respect of their
Territories and Jurisdictions, in the time of war none that was prevalent did
suffer a different Religion to be exercised: But since the Instrument of the
Peace made at Munster and Osnabrug was published, the Liberty of Religion is to
be Regulated universally by the seventh article, and some other articles
determining matters between Protestants and Papists; and according to this
Constitution, although some Territories which formerly were under Protestant
Princes are now under a Popish power, and vice versa, yet the Liberty of
Religion is to be left unto each party as it was used in the year 1624. Thus
the Duke of Newburg, and one of the Landgraves of Hessen, and a Prince of
Nassaw, and some others, are obliged to leave unto the Protestants within their
Dominions the free exercise of their Religion which formerly they had. In like
manner in some of the Imperial Cities, as in Francford, Ausburg, and others,
the Papists have their free exercise restored unto them amongst the
Protestants; at Ausburg also the Magistrate is half of the one and half of the
other profession; but in all the other Imperial Cities, so far as I remember,
the Magistrates are wholly Protestants, except at Collen and Heilbron, where
they are wholly Papists.

Thus matters of freedom stand in the German Empire.

In Poland, Hungaria and Transylvania, the Protestants and Papists have
heretofore had a promiscuous Liberty; only whenever of later times either of
the parties did grow more prevalent in power, they have abridged each other of
their Liberties: and now at this time the Protestants of Transylvania have put
themselves under the Protection of the Turk, to maintain the Liberty of their
Conscience, because the Jesuits by the power of the Emperor, which they can
command to bring about their designs, would have forced them to embrace their
Superstition.

In Switzerland the Protestants and Papists when they made their league at
first to maintain jointly their Liberties against the House of Austria, or any
other pretenders to have Jurisdiction over them, they agreed mutually upon this
also, that if any of the Natives living in the Cantons of either side should
change their Religion, (for then they were perfectly divided and separated upon
the interest of Religion, and so have continued still, that no Papists have any
free exercise of Religion among Protestants, nor Protestants among Papists;)
that then they should be permitted respectively to sell their goods, and
transport themselves unto the party whose Religion they should embrace: but of
late the Popish Canton Switz did break this agreement, and would not suffer
some of their Native inhabitants to partake of this freedom, but finding that
some families had changed their Religion, they did confiscate their goods; and
taking hold of some of them, by the Instigation of the Friars and Jesuits, they
condemned some of them to death, and others to the Galleys; which was the cause
of the late war which broke forth amongst them; and although they cease from
open Hostility, yet this business is not fully composed.

And because there are some places of Common Jurisdiction, wherein there are
inhabitants of both parties, and the Cantons of each Profession put governors
by turns for some years over them, it falls often out that the Protestant
inhabitants in these Jurisdictions are commonly abridged of their Liberty by
the Popish Governors; which gives continual occasion of complaints and
disputes between the Cantons, and at last may break forth to some violent
rupture, and to a total suppression either of the one or the other.

In France, by Virtue of the Edict of Nantes, the Protestants ought to have the
full Liberty of their Religion in the places of their abode, and enjoy all the
Rights and Privileges which belong to Natives; but since the time of our
troubles in England they have been very much abridged thereof in several
places; yet in Oliver the Protector his time they got some enlargement, which
now since the Peace is made with Spain does cease, so that they are under the
danger of being persecuted every where, as being expoposed to the fury of the
multitude, without any assurance of Safety, further then it is an inconveniency
to the Society of Papists themselves with whom they live; otherwise the Jesuits
and Popish Emissaries are restless to stir up their zelots to molest them, and
do what they can to extirpate them; witness that which fell out of late at
Montauban, at Bourdeaux, at Dieppe, and and elsewhere.

In the Valleys of Piemont the poor Churches there since the Peace made have
still been molested more or less without intermission; for besides other
matters, that which is their chief concernment, namely the Liberty to meet at
St. Giovanni, to exercise their Catechism, that not only the youth may be
instructed, but those of riper years confirmed in the Protestant Religion, is
wholly taken from them. This Liberty is in a manner the whole substance or
chief part of their public exercise; this formerly they have always had, and
by this last treaty of Peace it has been confirmed unto them; nevertheless
they are deprived of it, and new matters of quarrel are formed against them
for other pretenses, and chiefly against their Ministers; for the design is to
fright away their Leaders, that being scattered like lost sheep upon the
mountains, they may become a prey to the wolves that seek to devour them.

In the Low Countries both of the United and of the Spanish Provinces, there is
a certain reciprocal Liberty for the Papists in the Dominions of the States,
and for the Protestants in the Dominions of the Spaniard; but the Liberty is
not equal, for in the United Provinces the States allow the Papists a certain
number of Priests to administer unto them the things belonging to their
Conscience in a private way, which is done by an express concession or
condescension; but in the Spanish Dominions no such thing is granted unto the
Protestants who live amongst them, but the Ministers who administer Holy things
unto them privately, do it at their peril; they have no Concession to attend
any private meetings, but only they are winked at, and suffered to do (what
they venture upon) by way of Connivence; so that the difference is, that the
Papists in the United Provinces have an assurance of freedom which they enjoy,
but the Protestants in the other Provinces have no such freedom assured unto
them; which makes the Papists increase and multiply in the Dominion of the
States, and the Protestants diminish in the other Provinces: and the effect of
this may be, that when some of the Papists shall creep into places of power,
and finding the Protestants divided amongst themselves, and their own party
strong enough to make a head with the assistance of neighbor foregin forces,
they may make a total change of Government in that Commonwealth.

FINIS.

