THE HAPPY Future State of England: OR, A DISCOURSE by way of LETTER to the
late EARL of ANGLESEY, Vindicating Him from the Reflections of an AFFIDAVIT
Published by the HOUSE of COMMONS, Ao. 1680. by occasion whereof Observations
are made concerning Infamous WITNESSES.

The said Discourse likewise contains various Political Remarks and
CALCULATIONS referring to many Parts of Christendom; with Observations of the
Number of the People of ENGLAND, and of its Growth in Populousness and Trade.
The Vanity of the late Fears and Iealousies being shown, the Author does on
Grounds of Nature Predict the Happy future State of the Realm.

At the End of the Discourse, There is a Casuistical Discussion of the
Obligation of the KING, His Heirs and Successors, wherein many of the Moral
Offices of Absolute and Vnconditional Loyalty are Asserted.

Before the Discourse, is A large PREFACE, giving an Account of the whole WORK,
with an Index of the Principal Matters.

ALSO, The Obligation resulting from the Oath of SUPREMACY to Assist and Defend
the Pre-eminence or Prerogative OF THE Dispensative Power Belonging to the
KING, His Heirs and Successors.

In the Asserting of that Power, various Historical Passages occurring in the
Usurpation after the Year 1641. are mentioned, and an Account is given of the
Progress of the Power of Dispensing, as to Acts of Parliament about Religion
since the Reformation, and of diverse Judgments of Parliaments, declaring their
Approbation of the Exercise of such Power, and particularly in what concerns
Punishment by Disability or Incapacity.

LONDON, Printed MDCLXXXVIII.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Sunderland, Lord President of His Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council, and Principal Secretary of State, and Knight of
the most Noble Order of the GARTER.
MY LORD,
FOR one who is sensible how little he knows of things past or present, to
Dedicate a Discourse of the future State of his Country to your Lordship, who
are by the Age allowed to be as Critical a Judge of Men and Things as any it
affords, may seem to have in it somewhat of Presumption. But when your Lordship
shall have had leisure to consider the plain Grounds of Nature, on which my
Prediction in the following Papers has gone, I will not so much hope that what
I have attempted may appear to have been no Presuming, as I will expect that
your Censure will cast the Presumption on the other side, namely, on such who
were Predictors with a continuando, of the Unhappy State of their Country; and
especially on the account of the Religion of our most Gracious Prince. And were
I now to have my Judgment tried only by that of the Mobile, who measure all
things by the Events, I account I should be out of the Gunshot of Censure,
since the course of Providence after my writing of the following Work having
Conducted His Majesty to fill the Throne of his Ancestors with so many Royal
Virtues, it has been Conspicuous to them that the Glories of his Reign have
transcended the highest flights of my mentioned Expectation.

And indeed, as I remember to have long ago heard one of the Fathers cited for
a Passage to this purpose, namely, that on a Supposal that God recounting to
him the Perfections of the Creation, should ask him what he could name wanting,
and that he could wish, he would answer, Unum Laudatorem, Domine, so it might
till of late be said that in this new Creation or Restoration of England under
His Majesty's Reign, the only thing we had with anxiety to wish and desire from
God next to the ennabling us to Praise his divine Goodness, was one whose
Talent of noble thoughts and words might be adequate to the celebrating the
many Talents of our Prince, and their successful Improvement both for the
Honor and Security, and Ease of his People.

But neither is such one Praiser now wanting; for he who shall read the many
late Loyal Addresses from all Parts of the Kingdom, will find the People of
England to be the Unus Laudator.

My Lord, as I in the following Discourse almost wholly Printed long ago in the
last Reign during the freedom of the Press, adventured on Grounds of Nature to
predict such a growth of Loyalty, as would make all England become one sober
Party of Mankind, and that the more ingenious sort of Jesuits would by natural
Instinct throw off those Principles condemned in this Pope's Decree; and with
Justice then acknowledged a Sober Party in that order, and have at large in p.
322. particularly showed my Abhorrence of charging the belief or practice of
those Principles on all Persons in that Order: So I have likewise in p. 238.
given my Judgment that all Seditious Principles owned by any who called
themselves Protestants must naturally decay, and have at large in my Preface*
opposed my measures of futurity to those of a late Father of the Church of
England concerning the two Plots, that he thought the Papists and Dissenters
would be ever carrying on, and without his Lordships excepting the Loyal in
those religionary Parties.

But having said this, I must likewise say that these happy births of Fate,
having been but (as it were) the Births of a Day under the Powerful Influences
of His Majesty's Government, or (as I may say) a Nation's being thus born in a
Day, are beyond what I did expect: and I did little think that with the
suddenness of the motion of Lightning when it melts the Sword and spares the
Scabbard, His Majesty's Declaration of Indulgence to Dissenters, would at the
same time melt so many hearts, and all hostile Principles of the Doctrine of
Resistance wrapped therein, as it spared the Persons of the deluded Opiners. I
account that any indifferent Observer of the extraordinary sweetness of the way
of painting their Loyalty in their Addresses (and which resembles the way of
Corregio, and is as excellent in its kind as that of the Sons of the Church of
England after the way of the bolder touches of Titian in their former
Addresses, with the Style of LIVES AND FORTUNES was in its) must be very
hard-hearted if he likewise be not melted into a new kind of Compassion toward
such his Brethren; and into a noble sense of a great and good Prince, having
made his Subjects of all Religionary Persuasions Lachrymists for Joy, and
turned all their hearts to invoke Heaven in wishing for him according to that
old Style, a long Life, a secure Kingdom, a safe House, valiant Armies, a
faithful Senate, loyal Subjects, the world at Peace, etc.

The comparatively narrow Idea's of Charity and Beneficence that Subjects Minds
are capable of toward one another do incline them to think chiefly of
particular Toleration, and such as we call Dispensation, and that too with the
nicety of Caution, and upon Persons making the notification of their
Principles, and their particular disclaiming of all Disloyal ones, previous to
their Toleration; and beyond this pitch the flights of my poor thoughts have
not gone in the following Work. But His Majesty having his Great thoughts
intent on restoring England to its ancient Figure in the World, namely of
balancing it, and coming to the Throne when he found the Land so impoverished
^y the Witnesses Plot, and the spirits of the Inhabitants so much intimidated
with Fears and Iealousies, he by his own noble Jealousy for the Honor of the
Nation has chased away all ignoble Iealousies for ever, and by showing so
great an Example of Universal Confidence in his People, has by his Augus^
Genius found out so expedite a way to make the Confidence between the Prince
and People mutual (and which is the hinge on which the Happy State of any
Country turns) as has made any general Relapses into Principles of disloyalty
during his Reign, almost morally impossible. For according to that Saying of
Tully, Perditissimi est hominis eum laedere qui laesus non esset, nisi
^redidisset, and the Common Notion that next to the being perfectly good, it is
the most difficult thing to bring Humane Nature to be perfectly bad, we may
well exp^ct a general growth of Loyalty from the Effects of that great
Confidence, and the great Spectacle it affords the World, that may be partly
expressed in the words of the Prophet, viz. The heart of the Father's being
turned to the Children, and the natural Consequence of the turning the heart of
the Children to their Father; a more noble work then for an Elias to come and
solve Doubts.

And thus while the Principles of some narrow-hearted Divines might seem
confined, like the Sands in their Hour-glasses, yet His Majesty's great
Thoughts and largeness of heart given him by God, being (as was said of
Solomon's) like the Sands of the Sea shore, and he having without setting up
Weigh-houses for Loyalty or Religionary Principles, created universal Charity
and Peace in the Nation, and allowed his Subjects a paulo majora canamus then
verbal Recantations, he by thus trusting his Subjects at once with their
Consciences, has provided an otherguess Prospect for English Minds, then what
can rise from disputacity, or the Ecclesiarum Scabies, and has likewise
secured the transmitting of his Character into the English Chronicles with such
Rays of Glory as are brighter then those that have there adorned our former
Princes, under whom the Roses, and Scepters and Kingdoms were united, through
his having so much united the hearts of People of all Religions to himself, and
to one another.

My Lord, It is here but just that I should acknowledge it to your Lordship
that you have been and are Pars Magna in so highly Contributing by your great
Figure at the Helm in the last and this present Reign, to this happy State of
England. For while in that Reign so many were so intent by what an ingenious
late Writer calls The Wheel within a Wheel, i. e. the Real Plot within the
Nominal one of the Witnesses; and by Outcries against the Church of Rome to
bring in a Roman Republic, your Lordship by your most wise Councels and
indefatigable diligence in guarding the Monarchy, and effecting that it should
not be plotted away by Names or Things, will appear in the History of the Age,
as one who perhaps beyond any one now a Subject secured the old Fundamental
Government of England, and upon which only the new future Happiness of it could
subsist.

I have entertained the Reader with a new Argument of Republics generally
growing more impracticable: but I shall do but justice to your Lordship in
representing your very Character as an Argument of sufficient weight to poise
the minds of the ingenious and the ingenuous against innovations by that sort
of Government. For the World would soon want the benefit of the Example of the
perfect justice inherent in your nature (that glorious Virtue that is the
allowed Continent of all the rest, and necessarily attracting the Eyes and
Hearts and Veneration of the Populace) if Heaven had not fixed you in the
Sphere of Monarchy; a dull Mediocrity of Virtue and of Wit and reason being
only easy to a popular Government, and nothing but an Oyster-Shell or an
Olive-Leaf being to be there expected by a Person heroically just to his
Country as his recompense, and his being always liable to such liberae
accusationes and Calumniationes as were under what I have called the
Martyrocracy here in the turbid Interval of the Plot-times, and of the Fears
and Iealousies.

Your Lordship was then by the help of your great Understanding and excellent
Temper, and your constant Serenity of thought, saevis tranquillus in undis; and
while so many of the timid were with their narrow spirits in that stormy
Conjuncture, tossed about with excessive Fears and Iealousies, and nauseous to
themselves and others, your Lordships great thoughts like a well built first
Rate-Ship, allowed you both Ease and Triumph on the Sea of Time: and in the
Night of the Popular Fears, your great Reason was directive to the Loyal
tanquam lucerna in navi Praetoria how and where to steer their Course with
safety to the Public.

While toward the End of the following Discourse, I recollected how much and
how far my belief had been with that of many Loyal embarked in the belief of a
Plot or the Plot, I there in p. 359, and 360. took notice that the Notions that
men had of a Plot were very various: Some then were so far gone in credulity,
as like the Fool that Solomon says believes every word, they were resolved to
believe every thing the Witnesses had said or would say, the Loyal generally
acquiesced in the Notification of it as Published by the Government; and I
likewise called to mind what I had during my belief of somewhat of it mentioned
in those hot Times, and while. I was writing the warmest part of my Discourse
in that Conjuncture, and when generally every heat of men's Passions was
Feverish, and every Fever Pestilential, and when the Vitium temporis was
Concurrent with the Faults of the Writer: and there in p. 14. observing, that
since according to the expression of God's not being the God of the Jews only,
but also of the Gentiles, so it being true that the King is King of the Papists
as well as Protestants, King of the Irish as well as English, and a Common
Father to them all, it may be worthy of his royal goodness, and a god-like
thing in him to distribute to them all the kindness that would not undo
themselves and others, (i. e. that they were capable of) and having then in p.
44. urged the possibility of Recusants being a sound part of the State here as
well as in Holland, I held my self obliged to do them and the Course of my
Impartial observing, the right as toward the end of the Discourse to mention
it, that whatever petulance some of them were formerly guilty of, yet that the
deportment of the generality of them has of late appeared with such a Face of
Loyalty, as was necessarily attractive of our Christian Love and Compassion.
And I concluded with the Observation, That it was not for nothing, nor without
some end that Divine Providence permitted so many Protestants to err in one
great Point; and that probably it might be to the end to produce in their Minds
so great a degree of Compassion and Charity toward the Persons of all
Roman Catholic Christians, as may not only last in this Conjuncture, but be
operative in them by all Moral Offices of Humanity and Christianity during
their Lives.

But the Course of Providence having further honored His Majesty's Government
by bringing to light in it the Truth about those odious Matters that particular
Roman Catholics were charged with, (and for which in the general Judgment of
the Impartial they appear now to have been put to Death by false Testimony) the
cry of such Blood may well (I think) pass for a loud Call against making the
Body of the Roman Catholics uneasy by the Penal Laws, and while the Reason
for their Severity has so apparently ceased.

As toward the latter end of the Preface which was committed to Writing in the
latter end of the last Reign, I mentioned it as the Concordant vogue of the
Populace to throw off the belief of the only Person referred to as a witness in
the following Discourse, so it must be acknowledged that Time has by its
births of Discovery, now given a just occasion for the laying aside all the
Aggravations there against any Principles in the Canon Law, or the Casuistical
Morals of the Jesuits, that my self and others then built on the Fate of
Godfrey: and has a^cording to what I have predicted concerning the Fate of the
Principles of the Jesuits Condemned by this Pope, tacitly evaporating by Fear
and Shame, made them appear obsolete. And it is one of the Glories of His
Majesty's Reign, that all those Principles in terrorem, which gave occasion
formerly for the Continuance of the Laws in terrorem, do now appear offered up
as Sacrifices to the Justice of it. And tho from the account I found in The
Policy of the Clergy of France of the Fact of some of the Jesuits having
opposed the Publication of that Decree in France, as having issued from the
Pope in his Court of Inquisition, I took occasion to dilate on the Aggravations
of their Disobedience to the Pope, yet upon my having since enquired into the
Transactions of the Papal World, I have found Cause to absolve them from any
Censure of that kind.

And accordingly as the Ingenious Dr. Done in his Pseudo-Martyr says, that
Chrysostom expounding that place in Jeremy, Domus Dei facta est spelunca
Hyaenae, applies it to the Priests of the Jews as hardest to be converted, and
says, That the Hyaena having (as Chrysostom observes) but one Backbone,
cannot turn except it turn all at once, so that the Romanist Priests having but
one Backbone, the Pope, cannot turn but all at once when he turns; it must be
acknowledged that the Pope having by that his noble Decree done so much right
to his own Honor, and that of his Church (and indeed of Humane nature) as to
damn those tenets, the aversion of the whole Order of the Jesuits from them
was necessarily and naturally to happen.

And from the Doctor in that Book applying further to the Jesuits, saying,
Christ said to those whom he sent, what I tell you in darkness, that speak you
in light, and what you hear in the Ear, that preach you in Houses, and fear not
them that kill the Body; and if no other thing were told you in darkness, and
whispered in your Ears at your missions hither then that which our Savior
delivered to them, you might be as confident in your public preaching, and
have as much comfort of Martyrdom, if you died for executing such a Commission,
and then reflecting on the instructions that were delivered them in darkness in
that Conjuncture, for the promoting those Papal Usurpations on the Regal
Rights, whereby they were delivered from all subjection to the King; it may be
here occasionally observed that many persons of our several Religionary
Persuasions having for Curiosity gone to hear the public Preaching of these
Missionaries, have there met with such ingenuous Explications of the Moral
Offices that concern the most Vital parts of Religion, and those so
pathetically applied, as that they have looked on such men who were formerly
dead in Law, to be as it were sent from the dead to make others better
Christians and better Subjects, and to be thankful for the Dispensative Power
animating those for that purpose, and have found no Cause to fear that they had
any Politic whispers in their Missions to oppose the Power of our Monarch more
then their Brethren do that of the Great Neighboring one, and to whom in the
litis-pendentia between him and the Pope about the Regale, they adhered.

My Lord, as to what I adventured to predict of the success of his Majesty's
Political Measures, his past Prudence so eminently appearing in the Series of
his Great Actions might sufficiently encourage me without any help from
Enthusiasme; for Nullum numen abest, si sit prudentia. And the Supposal about
his coming to the Throne in great maturity of years, a thing that the prudence
of the Romans had strict regard to in the Age of their Consuls (and for which
Office none was qualified under the Age of 43 years) and his bringing to the
Throne a vast Treasure of Knowledge and Experience refined and solid by many
Experiments of Providence on himself, according to the Divine words of Seneca
de provid. Deus quos amat, indurat, recognoscit, exercet, might well raise the
highest expectation of his Conduct.

But yet neither was I without some regard therein to the common Course of
Divine Providence, even in this Life rewarding in any Illustrious Person a
signal tenderness for Religion, and inquisitiveness in any Controverted Point
about it, and at last contrary to the most valuable secular Interest
determining his thoughts one way tho perhaps erroneously; and I will venture to
conclude that if it had imported the salvation of such an exemplary inquisitive
honourer of God (and who with great holy Exercise had defecated his thoughts
from settlement on any local Religion, as such) to have found out the truth in
that Problematick Point, God would have honored him so far as to have sent an
Angel to direct him to it: and will expect that such a one whose delight was in
the Law of the Lord and therein did meditate day and night, tho he perhaps
comprehended not every thing aright in it, yet that he shall be like a Tree
planted by the Rivers of Water, that brings forth his fruit in his Season, and
that his Leaf shall not wither, and that whatever he does shall prosper: and
that his ways thus, pleasing God, he will make even his Enemies to be at peace
with him, and that he who makes peace in his high places, and who can make
peace between high and low, and makes men to be of one mind in an House, will
bless him with these Effects, and make him grow in favor with God and Man.

My Lord, I shall in the next place take occasion to acquaint your Lordship
that in the Preface (and which every Candid Reader of any Book will peruse
before his reading of the Book) I do explain my self more clearly about some
things and words writ in the turbid times, and which as one says well, are
the worst times to write in tho the best to write of: and I do not fear the
wanting any man's pardon who shall read over the whole, and which may well be
expected before the allowance of his Exceptions, tho it may seem as copious as
one of the Bankers Bills in Chancery. But because the former part of the
Discourse necessarily requiring those courser Colors relating to Popery to be
first laid on, before the fin^r ones and the gilding on the happy Future State
of our Country; and for that to trouble any ingenious men now with Notions of
Popery were to hinder their repose in the state I foretold, I have been at the
pains of making a large INDEX, and where I have directed the Reader how and
where to enter into the New Heaven and New Earth of his Country, without
passing through the Purgatory of any expressions about Popery or the Plot: and
perhaps the more Loyal and Ingenious Recusants whether Roman Catholic or
Protestants there taking notice of some grateful passages relating to some who
were formerly of their persuasions being placed near others that are less so,
may be the more pleased therewith, accordingly as my Lord Bacon observes, that
a Rose set by Garlic is the sweeter.

Heaven having furnished your Lordships mind with so many Excellencies that are
extraordinary, I could wish that it had been my ability or fortune to have here
provided for your Entertainment somewhat of value that was not vulgar. But my
essaying, or offering here and there at some matter of thought which by
receiving its Form from your Lordships great reason, and particularly in p.
158. and the following ones in my making it a Fundamental Principle for the
quiet of the World, that men are neither to get nor lose by Religion, and my
distinguishing in men's Hypotheses between their Principles denominable as
Religionary, and such Complicated therewith that are not so, and my having
judged that none ought to be severe to any Recusant before he has a Moral
Certainty of such person having imbibed any of the Principles imputable to
Recusancy that are irreligionary and unnatural, and my defiance of the
petulance of the Faction by my placing Laurels on those Heads at which it was
throwing dirt, and my showing how not only Christians of the Roman Catholic
Church in its great spreading Latitude, but even those of the more particular
Church of Rome, and reverers of the Diocese or Court of Rome, are under no
obligation by the LATERAN Council to be either Persecutors or disloyal, may
show somewhat of my honest well wishes in this kind.

I am not so va^n as to think that any thing relating to Numbers or Political
Calculations in the Discourse can appear new to your Lordship, who are so great
a Master in that kind of Knowledge, that the most Curious of the Age may
therein beg instruction from you. But I shall here presume to acquaint your
Lordship, that I observing that many in the late Conjuncture whom I looked on
as honest, loyal, and learned and ingenious men, and some who had formerly a
gusto for the real Learning that refers to number, weight and measure, did
render their Conversation so uneasy by talking of nothing but Popery, Popery
(and which I looked on as unentertaining and nauseous as the Porke, porke and
porke) I thought it might be publicly useful to lay open a new Scene of
Thought before such Persons by showing them some Calculations relating to the
numbers of the People of England, founded on somewhat like Records, and some to
its gradual increase in Trade as well as populousness, and others relating to
other parts of the World, whereby their Souls having somewhat like a new
intellectual World before them to expatiate in, might no longer be confined to
a perplexed word.

Yet moreover considering how lately it was that they came out of that
Conjuncture of Panic fears, when so many who went to Bed without their Brains
were afraid of rising without their Heads, and that as our English World was
emerging out of the late general DELUGE of Fears and Iealousies where omnia
pontus erant, etc. the Curious beheld the several births of Men's Reasons
attended with Imperfections like those of the Animals referred to; -- and in
his quaedam modo caepta per ipsum,
Nascendi spatium, quaedam imperfecta, suisque
Trunca vident humeris: and eodem corpore saepe
Altera pars vivit, rudis est pars altera tellus;
and thus saw the spectacles of men's various Understandings gradually creeping
into sense and reason, and not suddenly likely to be perfected: I showed so
much Complaisance to them, as in stead of hastily removing their Thoughts from
the Course soil of Popery or the old Papal Usurpations, to build my Fabrics of
Numbers and Calculations upon it: and I may say, that finding their vitiated
Fancies rellish'd nothing at that time grateful but the thoughts about Popery,
I then chose to make that the Vehicle of the Notions I meant as Physic for
their Cure.

According to the way of judging of the Draught and Proportion in perspective
Painting by their respect to the Eye being directed to the Center therein, any
ordinary Reader's judgment will be carried by the Index to find what was
principally aimed at in the following Discourse, namely to incline him to
preserve the haereditary Monarchy. And he will there find that my next aim to
that was in a great part of the Work to dispose those who formerly had been
diffident of their Prince, to Promote the Public Supplies for the necessary
Support of the Government. And my judging that our most eminent Patriots would
be inclined to value themselves as such, on the promoting the same, may to some
appear as the most sanguine part of my Predictions. But as I leave it to any
indifferent man to judge of the grounds of Nature I went on in so doing, so I
may some way support the Credit of my measures of futurity in that Affair by
the past event of the Loyal Confidence in His Majesty shown by his late
Parliament in their proceeding so far as they did in Supporting the Government;
and may add that His Majesty's vast Expenses that have been since so
Conspicuous to the World in his Naval Preparations, and otherwise in the
Providing for the Security and Honor of the Nation, may well incline any one
else to judge well of such Patriotly temper of any future Parliament, and to
allow of the Reasons by me urged as more Cogent for the present Reign then the
former, considering the Preparations of our Neighbors that have been since
augmented.

Yet however, I doubt not but that if it had been Gods will further to have
lengthened the last reign, the Course of Nature would then have operated as I
have mentioned. And if it shall appear that those natural Considerations* I
have urged shall have the success of such further Parliamentary Supplies to His
gracious Majesty, as may tend to the further greatning of his Character and
that of the Kingdom, I shall account my claim the more equitable to have the
pardon of my fellow Subjects of what Religionary Sect soever for any thing in
this Discourse that may disgust them. And, as an eminent Protestant Divine has
in a Printed Sermon thus said, viz. that man is not worthy to breathe in so
good a Land as England is, who would not willingly lay down his life to cure
the present divisions and distractions that are among us, I shall say that any
Subject deserves not to live here under the Indulgence of so good a Prince, who
for the helping him to money by all due means for the defense of this good
Land, would not wish himself as well as his Bigottry a Sacrifice; and who would
not as to any Extravagant dash of a Pen lighting on his Party, and bringing
Money to his Prince, cry foelix peccatum, rather then such Divisions and
Distractions and Diffidences of the Government, and stifling of Public
Supplies should still live as were formerly known in some Conjunctures, and
when the Art of Demagogues appeared so spightful in endeavors to frustrate the
Meetings of Parliaments.

But our Prince having freed all his dissenting Subjects from their uneasiness
under Pecuniary Mulcts for Religion, and the Members of the Church of England
from the uneasiness of imposing such Soul-Money, will, I doubt not, when he
shall please to Call a Parliament, find from them such necessary Supplies for
the support of the Body of the Kingdom, as may ease him under the weight of his
great Desires for it: and that it will then appear to all as absurd to Crown
such a Head with Thorns as has taken the Thorn out of every man's foot in
England: and that his passed Sufferings for his Conscience (and others of his
Communion having too suffered for his Conscience) bespeaking us in those words
of the Apostle, Fulfill ye my joy; that both his and theirs will be then
Consummated, and as the Joy of those of the Church of England, and of all
nominal Churches in England has been fulfilled by him: and that as Luther was
pleased in a Christian-like transport of good Nature to Profess in his Epistle
to Jeselius a Jew, Me propter Unum Judaeum Crucifixum omnibus favere Judaeis,
we shall for the sake of one of the Roman Catholic Communion, who has
formerly suffered so much for his Conscience, and since done so much for the
freedom of ours, show all those of that Communion our favor to such a
proportion as may complete his and their Joy.

My Lord, I am here obliged to acknowledge, that tho while the several Parts of
the following Work were written in the times the Government charged both
Papists and Anti-Papists with Disloyalty and Plots, I expressed my sense of the
Non-advisableness to have the Penal Laws against them repealed, pending such
Charge and Plots; I desire the Reader to look on me as very far from insisting
on any thing of that nature in this Happy State of England, now that the Corner
Stone (and that some of the Builders rejected) has thus successfully united
the sides of the Fabric of the Government in Loyalty.

My Lord, It is near a year since I writ my Thoughts at large concerning the
Subject of the Repealing those Laws, and they are in the Fourth Part of my Work
about The Dispensative Power (of which the two first Parts conclude this
Volume) ready for the Press; and reserving my poor Judgment in this great Point
till the Publication of the whole, I think I shall then set forth my Opinion as
founded on Medium's that have not appeared in Print from other Writers, and
which I believe will not only not give offense to any Member of the Church of
England, but be of general use in allaying the ferment the Question has
occasioned.

And if as they who were long fellow-Passengers in a Ship among violent
Tempests and Hirricanes, do usually from their being Participants together in
the danger and horror, take occasion to raise a friendly esteem and wellwishes
for each other, such of the Loyal whose belief I referred to, as imbarqued with
mine in that of the Plot during the late Stormy Conjuncture, shall be the more
favorable to what I write, I shall be glad both for their sakes as well as
mine; but do further judge that what I have so largely in the following
Discourse asserted (and by Reasons taken from Nature) concerning the Moral
impossibility of the belief of the Tenets of the Church of Rome gaining ground
here considerably, on the belief of the Doctrine of the Church of England, will
tend to secure any one from fears of our losing our Religion by any loss of the
Test that may happen: a thing that none (I think) will fear, who are of the
Judgment of the House of Commons in their Address to the late King on the 29 th
of November, 1680. (that I have referred to in my Fourth Part) and where they
say, that POPERY has rather gained then lost Ground since the TEST ACT, and
make that Act to have had little effect. I have in the following Discourse
referred to that Act as represented to have had its rice in the year 1673. from
the alleged petulant Insolence of Papists in that Conjuncture, and I took
notice of a learned Lord since deceased as vouching somewhat in Print of such
temper among some of them. And a Proclamation that year charging the Papists
therewith, I was implicitly guided thereby to take the thing for granted, and
as to the which, considering since the public Passages in that Conjuncture, I
have otherwise judged. But as I think no loyal Roman Catholic should in that
Conjuncture have suffered any Prejudice for any ill Behavior of any other of
that Communion then, much less ought any such thing be now; and when there
appears so noble and general a spirit of Emulation among all men of sense in
the Diffusive Body of the People about who shall make the Head and all Members
of that Body most easy: and for the doing which we may well hope that the
People representative, and the other Estates of the Realm will come with all
due Preparation of Mind, when it shall please His Gracious Majesty to assemble
them.

My Lord, I have nothing further to add but my begging your Lordship's Pardon
for this trouble, and my owning the many Obligations I am under to be,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Obedient Servant, P. P.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Earl of Anglesy having showed me an Affidavit and Information against him,
delivered at the Bar of the House of Commons, on the 20 th of October 1680.
and printed by Order of that House, and in which Affidavit and Information he
was Charged with Endeavors to stifle some Evidence of the Popish Plot, and to
promote the belief of a Presbyterian one, and with encouraging Dugdale to
recant what he had sworn, and promising to harbor him in his House, and that
his Lordships Priest should there be his Companion and likewise watch him, his
Lordship being thereupon desirous that right should be done him by a printed
Vindication, was pleased to Command my Pen therein: and I was the less
unwilling to disobey his Commands, because in that Conjuncture wherein so many
Loyal and Noble Persons were sufferes by the humor of Accusation then regnant,
I held it a Patriotly thing to withstand its Arbitrariness.

Sir W. P. in an Excellent Manuscript of his, called, The Political Anatomy of
Ireland, has one Chapter there, Of the Government of Ireland apparent or
external, and the Government internal: and he describes the apparent Government
there to be by the King and Three Estates, and with the Conduct of Courts of
Justice, but makes the internal Government there to depend much on the Potent
Influence of the many Secular Priests and Friars on the numerous Irish Roman
Catholics, and on those Priests and Friars being governed by their Bishops and
Superiors, and on the Ministers of Foreign States, governing and directing such
Superiors: and thus while England was blessed with the best external Government,
namely of Monarchy, and with the best Monarch and a Loyal Nobility and Commons,
yet after the detection of a Popish Plot, several Persons under the Notion of
Witnesses about the same, made so great a Figure in the Government, and were so
Enthroned in the Minds of the Populace, that the Office of the King's Witnesses
was as powerful as ever was that of the high Constable of England, and the
internal Government of the Kingdom was then very much as I may say a
Martyrocracy, and by that hard name the Noisy part of Protestants Endeavored
to gain Ground as much as ever any peaceable ones did by the old known Name of
Martyrology.

But as all external Forms of Government have some peculiar defects as well as
Conveniences, so did this internal Government appear to have; and those too so
dreadful, that the Air of Testimony having sometimes got into the wrong place,
was likely to have made Earthquakes in the external Government: and as the
Militia that after the Epoche of 41 was called the Parliaments Army, did before
the fatal time of 48, produce the Revolution of the Army's Parliament, so were
we endangered after the Plot-Epoche of 78, to have heard of the Office of the
King's Witnesses changed into another, namely, of the Witnesses Kings.

And whoever shall write the English History of that part of time wherein that
Martyrocracy was so powerful and domineering, will (if he shall think fit to
give a denomination to that Interval of Time, and to found the same on most of
the Narratives he shall read, or the Sham-Papers that many Papists and
Protestants after the Plot Attaqued each other with,) be thought not absurd, if
he gives the old Style of Intervallum (...), incertum, or of (...) fabulosum.

It was in the time of the most Triumphant State of this Internal Government,
that I undertook to weigh its Empire, as I have done in p. 33, 34, 35.
discussing the points of Infamous Witnesses and their Infamy, and of their
Credibility after pardon of Perjury or Crimes and Infany incurred: and a bolder
man than my self would hardly have dared in that Conjuncture to have sifted
their Prerogative, and (as I may say) to have put hungry Wolves into Scales,
and to have taken the dimensions of the Paws of Lions, or to have handled the
stings of Serpents, without expressing against some of the Romanists Principles
he thought Irreligionary, all the zeal he thought consistent with Charity and
Candor to the Persons of Papists, which is so much done in the Body of this
Discourse, and without the expressing of which my Vindicating a Noble Person
from being a Papist, had been an absurdity.

However I have been careful in any Moot-points of Witnesses, not to disturb in
the least the Measures of the External Government about them; and out of the
tender regard due to the safety of Monarchs from all Subjects, have in p. 205
asserted the Obligation of doing every thing that is fairly to be done, to
support the Credits of Witnesses produced in the Case of Treason, and have
there given a particular reason for it: and have in p. 36. with a Competent
respect mentioned Dugdale on the occasion of the Shamm sworn against the Earl
of Anglesy, as if his Lordship had undertook to have unjustly patronized him:
and have showed my self inclined enough to belief credible Witnesses, by the
Concurrence of my thoughts with the Justice of the Nation in Godfrey's Case;
and the fate of which Person, and the Casuistical Principles that allowed it, I
had perhaps not mentioned, but out of a just indignation against the infamous
Shamms about it spread by some ill Papists to the dishonor of that Excellent
Lord the Earl of Danby.

But there was another consideration that induced me to write with such a Zeal
as aforesaid, against such Romanists Principles and their effects; and but for
which the following Discourse had not swollen to a large Volume.

I observed that since the late Fermentation in England, such a Panique Fear of
the Growth of Popery, and the numbers of Papists had been by Knaves propagated
among Fools that made the English Nation appear somewhat ridiculous abroad, and
that during its Course many considerable Protestants were so far misled, as to
think the State of the Nation could never be restored to it self, but by
disturbing the Succession of the Crown in its lawful Course of Descent: and
therefore resolving to do my utmost to free the Land from the Burden of
another guess Perjury, by the general Violence done to our Oaths Promissory (I
mean to those of Allegiance and Supremacy) then that of any Witnesses in their
Oaths Assertory, I thought fit at large to show the Vanity of any Men's fearing
that Popery can ever ( humanly speaking) be the National Religion of England;
and to direct them that they may not, by the imaginary danger of Popery to
come, run with all their swelling Sails on the Rock of it at present, by
founding Dominion in Grace, and outrage those Oaths that do at present bind us
without reserve to pay Allegiance to the King's Heirs after his demise.

And for any one who being concerned to see so many of his Countrymen lying
(as it were) on the Ground, and dejected with unaccountable fears of the
extermination of their Religion and themselves, and besmearing themselves with
the dreadful guilt of their great Oaths, was resolved to endeavor to help them
up, and by persuasion gently to lead them to such a high Prospect of thought,
from whence they might at once have a view of the past and present State of
Popery here and abroad in former Ages, and likewise of its probable future one,
(a sight that might better entertain Curiosity than what the Traveller speaks
of, when from a high Mountain in the Isthmus of America, he could view both the
great North and South Sea) not to have rendered himself an acceptable Perswader
by his Discourse carrying with it Self-Evidence that he was no Papist, had been
a vain attempt.

And again for any one who would persuade the generality of Popish or
Protestant Recusants, that it is not their Interest by any Artifices to
endeavor to make so great a Figure in the Internal Part of the Government as
they have in some former Conjunctures, without his Discourse carrying likewise
Self-Evidence, that his Advice was that of a Friend to their Persons, as far as
the public Security would admit, had been an attempt as insignificant as the
former.

I have in this Discourse often took notice of this distinction of the Tenets
of Popery and Presbytery: viz. Such of them that properly are denominable by
Religion, and such that are not: presuming in my private judgment to differ
from the Measures took by the Government in King James his time, when the
printed Prayers for the Anniversary of the Gun powder Treason represented
Papists Religion to be Rebellion; and I under the Notion of Principles
denominable by Religion have ranked Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Invocation
of Saints, and others, and have judged none of their Principles Irreligionary,
but such as the late Learned Earl of Clarendon in his incomparable defense of
Dr. Stilling fleet attributes to Popery, as injurious to Princes and their
Subjects and what King James in his Speech to both Houses, hinted as such
(according to what is cited by me p. 172) viz. As it is not impossible but many
honest men seduced with some Errors in Popery may yet remain good and faithful
Subjects, so on the other hand^none that know and believe the Grounds and
School-Conclusions of their Doctrine, can ever prove good Christians or
faithful Subjects: and such as are apparently contrary to the Light and Law of
Nature.

But there is nothing in this Discourse otherwise than en passant, that impugns
or confutes the old Religionary Points controverted formerly between the Church
of England and that of Rome, and all the passages throughout referring to those
old points, might (I believe) be comprised together in about a Page.

And if I were as in a Dictionary to express the sense of the words, Popery and
Irreligionary so often used in this Discourse, I would say that generally by
Poper^, or (as the Writers in Latin call it, Papismus) I mean the power of the
Bishop of Rome, in imposing C^eeds and Doctrines and Rules of Divine Worship on
Men, and his Jurisdiction interloping in that of Princes and their Laws, and
the doing this by the Charter of Ius Divinum, and as he is Christ's pretended
Vicar; and by the term of Irreligionary of often by me applied to Principles, I
sometimes mean such as are barely NOT religionary, that is to say, Principles
that are not in truth and in the nature things, parts of Religion, whatever any
Sanction of the Papacy or a Presbytery may term them, and which do not religare
or bind the Soul to God by Moral Obligations, nor by any Band of Loyalty to our
Prince or Charity to our Neighbor, but do only tie men to a Party and to the
owning with them several points of speculation, and no more necessary to be
believed in order to our improvement in Moral Offices that the Divine Law
natural or positive enjoins, or conducing to the same, than are the Hypotheses
of the old or new Philosophy.

But I most commonly apply the word Irr^ligionary to Principles that are revera
contrary to Religion, and Justice, and Morality, and such as I would therefore
dis-robe of the Name of Religion; and under this term of Irreligionary not only
all the Antimonarchical Principles of the Jesuits and Presbyterians are
properly to be reckoned, but those Principles of the Papacy that even in the
times of our Roman Catholic Ancestors, (as I said) were so injurious to our
Princes and their Subjects, and which were by them as Usurpations on the Crown
opposed and defied, and especially by those of them who were in their tempers
most Magnanimous: and in this Case the Papal Principles that favored those
Usurpations on the rights of our Princes, might be said to be both
Non-Religionary, or things beside the matter of Religion, and likewise
Irreligionary or contrary to Religion, as being unjust.

The Religio Officii (as Tully calls the Conscience one has to do his duty)
did bind those Princes of the Pope's Religion, to impugn his Arbitrary
Usurpations on their Realms: and in the Case of the meanest Cottager of
England, the Pope's Excommunication was never allowed good in Westminister-Hall
under our Roman Catholic Kings.

The latter end of the very Reign of Queen Mary, was likely to have diverted
our English World with the sight of as remarkable a Prize played between the
two Swords, (I mean the Pope's Spiritual and her Temporal one) as was ever
played on its Stage: and when Cardinal Pool her Kindsman who had reconciled our
Nation to Rome, was so far lost in the Pope's good Graces, as that his
Legantine Power was abrogated by the Pope, and in affront to Pool given to
Peito a poor Friar; but whose red Hat by Queen Mary's opposition could get no
further than Callis; and She was so regardless of the Pope's Curses in the
Case, that his Bulls in favor of his new Legate were not permitted to Arrive
here, and the designed Legate was enforced to go up and down the Streets of
London like a begging Friar without a red Hat. And more need not be here said
to express the Principles that Usurp on Monarchs to be Irreligionary.

When I have in the former part of the Discourse once or twice mentioned the
term of Apostates, for some turning to the Church of Rome, I did there speak
Cum vulgo, and likewise according to the Style of our Courts Christian, which
proceeding against some perverted to the Church of Rome, impute to them the
Crime of Apostasy: but having observed in the Progress of this Discourse, that
that term was seditiously used by the Disciples of Julian, I have reprehended
the further calling any men Apostates, for the alteration of their judgments in
some controvertible points of says between Papists and Protestants, and that
may without absurdity be called Tenets of Religion.

As to the expression of the Extermination of Popery, and likewise of
Presbytery used in this Discourse sometimes, (and with allusion to the trite
term of the Papacy, viz. Exterminium haereticorum) I have there in p. 283
sufficiently expressed my abhorrence of the Extermination of Persons, and (as
is there said) do only refer to the Extermination of Things and Principles
Religionary, and indeed to speak more properly of that part of Men's Principles
only that is Irreligionary and against Nature.

The words of exterminating and recalling are often used by Cicero as
signifying the contrary: and when Mr. Coleman's Letters showed such an
imperious design in him for the Revocation of Popery that had been driven away,
and banished or exterminated hence by so many Acts of Parliament, and even for
the Extermination of Heresy out of the North, as occasioned such apprehensions
in the Government of what was intended by other innocent and modest Papists,
that made the gentlest of Princes in a Speech in the Oxford Parliament say, and
if it be practicable the ridding our selves quite of all of that Party that
have any considerable Authority, etc. none need wonder at the past warmth of
Subjects expressed against the Recalling of the Exterminated Papal Power: nor
yet at the warmth of their Zeal against the Principles of the Jesuits,
propagating an Internal Power here when they had been exterminated from Rome it
self: and when the Lord Chancellors Speech to both Houses had mentioned the
Proceedings against Protestants in Foreign Parts; to look as if they were
intended to make way for a general Extirpation.

They are poor Judges of things who think that Doctrines of Religion cannot be
said to be exterminated out of Kingdoms, and their Laws without the Banishment
of the Persons professing them. Who accounts not Protestancy sufficiently
exterminated from being the State-Religion in Italy, and yet Sandies his
Europae speculum tells us, That there were 40000 professed Protestants there.
Is not Judaism sufficiently Exterminated from being the Religion at Rome, tho
thousands of professed Jews are there tolerated?

It Is the public approbation of Tenets or Doctrines, and not any forbearance
or indulgence to persons who prosess them, that gives Doctrines a place within
the Religion of a State: for to make any State approve of a Doctrine contrary
to what it has Established, is a Contradiction. But the truth is, the famous
Nation of the Jews (formerly Heavens peculiar People on Earth) having not been
more generally guilty of Idolatry during their prosperity, than of Superstition
during their Captivity and Oppression, and Extermination from their Country,
has taught the World this great truth that the readiest way to propagate
Superstition, and Error is by the Exterminium and Banishment of Persons.

Whatever Church any men call their Mother, if the Magistrate finds them to own
the Interest of their Country as their Mother, and to honor their true
Political Father, they cannot wish their days more long in the Land than I
shall do.

I remember under the Usurpation there passed an Act of Parliament (as 'twas
called) for the banishment of that famous Boute-feu John Lilburn: and under the
Penalty of the Vltimum supplicium, and he shortly after returning to England,
and being tried in London where he was universally known, and the only thing
issuable before the Jurors being whether he was the same John Lilburn, those
good men and true thought him so much transubstantiated, as to bring him in not
guilty: and when ever I find any Papist not only willing to change the Name
Papist for Catholic, but the thing Papistry, for the Principles of the Church
of Rome under its first good Bishops, and before Popes beyond a Patriarchal
Power aspired to be Universal Bishops and Universal Kings, and that even a
Jesuit instead of the Rule of Iesuita est omnis homo, has altered his Morals
and Principles pursuant to the Pope's said Decree, so far as truly to say, Ego
non sum ego, I shall not intermeddle in awakening Penal Laws to touch either
his life or liberty.

Nor can any Presbyterians with justice reflect on the Zeal of any for the
Continuance of the Laws, for the Extermination of Presbytery, when they shall
reflect on the Royal Family having been by their means (as is set forth in this
Discourse) exterminated out of the Realm into Foreign Popish Countries: and of
which they might easily have seen the ill effects, if their understandings had
not been very scandalously dull.

But there is another happy Extermination that I have in this Discourse from
Natural Causes predicted to my Country, and that is of the fears and jealousies
that have been so prevalent during our late fermentation: concerning which the
Reader will shortly find himself referred to in many Pages in this Discourse,
and to have directed him to all of that Nature would have made the Index a Book.

I have in this Discourse designing to eradicate the fears of Popery out of the
Minds of timid Protestants, by the most rational persuasions I could, showed
somewhat of Complaisance in sometimes humouring their Suppositions of things
never likely to come to pass. I have accorded with them in the possibility of
the Event of Archbishop Usher's Famous Prophecy, tho I account the same as
remote from likelihood as any one could with it: and do believe that if that
Great and Learned Man could have foreseen the mischief that Prophecy has
occasioned by making so many of the Kings good Subjects disquieted thereby,
(and which by at once Chilling their Hearts and heating their Heads, has
rendered them less qualified for a cheerful and steady discharge of their
respective Duties) he would have consulted privately with many other Learned
and Pious Divines about the intrinsic weight of the matter revealed to him,
before he had exposed it to the World: for that in the days when God spoke by
the Prophets, yet even then the Spirits of the Prophets were always subject to
the Prophets: and there is no Fire in the World so bad a Master as the Fire of
Prophecy.

It is observable that there has scarce since this Prophecy been a Conjuncture
of time wherein men uneasy to themselves would make the Government so, but
this Prophecy has been reprinted in it and cried about, and few Enthusiasts
but are as perfect in it as a Seaman in his Compass.

The substance of it was to foretell Persecution that should happen in England,
from the Papists in the way of a sudden Massacre, and that the Pope should be
the Contriver of it, and that if the King were restored it might be a little
longer deferred.

A person less learned than that Great Prelate could easily give an Account of
the past Outrages of Massacres that have been perpetrated by Papists, and of
the tendency of the Jesuits Principles to the very legitimating of Future
ones: but the most Pious and Learned Man in the World ought with the greatest
Caution imaginable to pretend to Divine Revelation of Future Contingencies, in
a matter both so unlikely and so odious as this, and which might probably
occasion so much Odium to so many innocent Papists, and so much needless
trouble to so many timid Protestants.

That Pious and Great Prelate did not (I believe) foresee that at the time when
his Prophecy should dart its most fearful influence, St. Peter's Chair would be
filled with a Person of so great Morality and Virtue as the present Pope is,
and a Pope that would brand the sicarious Principles of those Ianizaries of
former Popes, the Jesuits, and that he would be by so many Roman Catholics
called the Lutheran Pope, and that the Papists numbers would be here so
comparatively small long before this time, as to render it absurd to think that
without the Execution of Heavens Peanal Law of an infatuation upon them, they
will ever attempt any such desperate design against such vast Numbers protected
by the best of Princes under the best of Governments.

Whatever Principles of Irreligion any particular dissolute Papists might by
any be supposed to retain, it is not to be supposed but that they who show
respect enough to Numbers and their weight in spiritual Matters, and
particularly in the Divine Concourse with the Majority of Numbers in the
Election of the head of their Church, and in the determinations of a General
Council, and in their valuation of their Church by its Universality, will not
contemn the power of Numbers in Matters Political; and I believe it will never
among their innumerable Miracles and Revelations be Revealed to them, that
numbers are by them in things Political to be dis-regarded.

But as I observed of Mr. Hooker's Prophecy in this Discourse, viz. That he
guessed shrewdly: so one thing has happened that may partly salve the Credit
of this Prelate's Conjecture: And that is, that some Nominal Protestants (but
too justly to be thought Popishly affected) having robbed the Jesuits of their
Doctrine of Resistance and of their Principle of Dominion being founded in
Grace, Endeavored to robb them of their Massacre, and as his Majesty's
Declaration of July the 28th, 1683 mentioned, did plot an execrable Outrage of
that kind: and some of the Dissenters that appeared to me for sometime after I
began this Discourse, only as Sheep straying from the Flock, as they did to
that Great Minister of the State who bestowed on them that expression, were
afterward turned ravenous Animals: and as the effect of Nycippus's Sheep
according to Aelian bringing forth a Lion in one of the Greek States, was
resented as portending a Change of the Government, these men's producing the
Principles of the Jesuits, was to be much more regarded as an Omen of our
Future Mischief than what any former predictions could import, and it was
shortly accompanied with a real design to have effected it: and as I hope it
will be with such a sense of shame in others of them when they shall survey the
Circumstances of that bloody design notified in the King's Declaration, as Mr.
John Geree an Eminent and Learned Presbyterian Minister of S. Faiths in London
did express, in a Dedicatory Epistle before a Book of his called (...),
published some Weeks before the Fate of the Royal Martyr, and in which Epistle
he importunes the Lady Fairfax to show the Book to her Husband then Lord
General to prevent his participating in the guilt of the Regicide then feared,
and says, O Madam let us fit down and weep over our Religion, and we, whither
shall we cause her shame to go. How shall we now look Papists in the Face, whom
we have so reviled and abhorred for their Derogatory Doctrine and Damnable
Practices against Kings or any in Supreme Authority? O study that it may never
be said that any Person of Honor and of the Protestant Religion had any hand
in so unworthy worthy an Action as the deposing and destroying of a King whose
preservation they stand bound to endeavor by so many Sacred Bonds.

I have accorded with our timid Protestants, that Popery may gain ground
perhaps in some turbid Interval, and how by the Divine Omnipotence and Justice,
the Course of Nature in its continuing the Protestant Religion may be
overruled, and that on the account of our having justly deserved the
Visitation of Popery, we may reasonably apprehend the dangers of it, p. 140.
but have never recurred from showing them the Future prosperous Estate of
Protestants and Protestancy in England, but to advance the more forward into
the following Representations thereof.

But having thus with Compassion to the timid endeavored to discharge my duty
as to the Moral Obligation of Complaisance (an Obligation that Mr. Hobbs has
so well shown to be most clearly rising from the Law of Nature, and which the
Christian Doctrine so strongly inculcates, and by virtue of which we are to
bear one another Burdens, and sometimes to the weak to become as weak) I
thought it afterward proper by the strength of Argument desumed from the nature
of things to fortify the minds of the Loyal against Un-Christian and Un-manly
Fears.

But as to the Dis-loyal and Factious, let them (by my consent) fear on. I
shall not trouble my self to bear the burdens of them who resolve to be
Burdens to the Government, and who would if they could, load it with
Presbyteries dead-weight, while they give that term to our Bishops. Let those
who would have both Protestant Princes and their other Subjects fear them, be
laughed at for fearing of Papists, and for not having a better understanding
with the Persons of Papists, when there is so good an understanding and
coincidence between the Principles of such Nominal Protestants, and that very
part of the Principles of some Papists that is Irreligionary and subversive of
the Rights of Princes and their Governments, and when yet they seem not to
understand that; and let Papists (by my consent) afford themselves recreative
smiles, if ever in any Conjuncture of time that may come, they shall behold the
Factious Revilers of the Church of England, to come under its Wing for shelter
after their so long endeavoring to deplume it.

But because I have observed some well meaning and loyal Dissenters, frighted
both by Choleric and Melancholy Expositions of the Apocalypse (a good Book in
which some ill men have found the obscurest passages to be the clearest for
their ill purposes, and in the dark places of which Book many having long lain
in Ambush, have thence sallied out to cut Throats, and subvert Governments, I
have here reared up a Bull-wark of Nature, that may secure them from the
imaginary dangers of Castles in the Air, or Visionary Armies in the Clouds of
any Men's fancies: and in compassion to the Loyal Protestants of the Church of
England, whose Melancholy Suppositions I had a while closed with both as a
Friend and Wrestler, that I might give them a fair and soft fall, I thought it
then proper to warn them of the danger of extravagant Suppositions, and
acquainted them that most Bedlams were founded on Suppositions, and the thought
of Quid si caelum ruat, and of Peoples imagining Earthquakes to happen in the
State from falling Skies: and have shown them how irrational a thing it is to
suppose that a lawful Prince, how unlawful or heterodox any of his Tenets in
Religion may be, will injure his Laws and the Religion by Law Established: and
having conducted the Reader through the former more melancholy and strait and
unpleasant passages in the Fabric of this Discourse, have took care to lodge
him in a more Airy and Cheerful appartment, and whence he may recreate himself
with looking out on the Future State of England, and remain assured that no
frightful Spectrums and Fantoms will disturb him there, when he is either at
his Rest or at his Devotions, and which I have for his diversion furnished with
some such fair Pictures of his Countries Future State as may perhaps not much
either shame it or my self, in regard that I think in the draught and design
thereof, my Art has been according to Nature, how carelessly laid soever the
Colors may have been, and where he moreover will have the Prospect I before
described, and if his sight be clear, will find the Sky so more and more, tho
so many Politic and Lachrymist would-be's have told him of the contrary.

I believe that since the Predictions of the deluge by Noah to the old World,
there were never so many angry Predicters and Predictions of a general
inundation of misery to any Country, under a Future Prince, as within these
late years we have been overwhelmed with, and that to the discomposing of men's
minds in their common converse and while they did eat and drink as in the days
of Noah, and were so ready to devour all their Countrymen who believed not the
same inundation with them.

But during this great Deluge of our popular fears of one of Popery, I have
ventured in p. 297 and 258 of this Discourse, to express my presension of the
Future State of England making men ashamed of their past fears and their former
deference to ill boding Prophets, and that our Melancholy Prophets will appear
to be toto Caelo mistaken in their Auguries as much (as Gassendus tells us) all
the Astrologers were in France when by reason of the great Conjunction of watery
signs in Piscis and Aquarius in the Year 1524, they said that there should be
then in the Month of February a second Deluge that should overwhelm France and
Germany, and by reason whereof many People went with their Goods and Cattle
from the low Lands to the hilly Country, and yet after all the f^rmentation
those Astrologers had made among the Populace in France, that Month of February
(as Gassendus tells us) tho naturally rainy, proved the dryest Month that ever
was known in those Countries.

I account that the deluge of the popular fears did sensibly decrease after the
year 81, and that to the great dissatisfaction of those whose broken Fortunes
made them no worse under it, than the Fishes were in Noah's. The more rational
and sagacious sort of Protestants, who had been so long Seasick with that
deluge, and did nauseate the fears and jealousies that had discomposed them,
began to see Land, when his Majesty with so just a Caution advised them in his
Speech to the Oxford Parliament, That their just care of Religion should be so
managed, as that unnecessary fears should not be made a pretense for changing
the Foundations of the Government, and his Declaration of the Causes that
induced him to dissolve that Parliament, signifying his Royal Resolution both
in and out of Parliament to use his utmost endeavors to extirpate Popery, and
in all things to Govern according to the Laws of the Kingdom, was in effect,
like the Olive Branch brought by the Dove into the Ark, an happy indication of
peace and settlement to the minds of the people and of the Waters being abated,
and indeed a demonstration to them that the Dove had found ubi pedem figeret,
and that our Laws and Religion had done so too: and on that great Vision of the
Lex terrae, that so many mists had so long kept us from seeing, there ensued a
general shout of Loyal Addressers throughout the Kingdom, like that of Sea-mens
at their first seeing of Land after a long stormy Voyage, and when they thought
they had lost their Course: and the hearing of those shouts from the several
Countries, served as a Call of invitation to the many Timid and Loyal, and
likewise to many unfortunate persons, to return thither after they had flocked
from thence to the Metropolis as an Ark for their preservation on the rising of
the deluge of fears in some preceding years: and it served to some cl^an and
to other unclean Beasts as a Call of Nature that they were to March out of the
Ark.

By the unclean Beasts I mean the sturdy Paupers that I have in this Discourse
spoke of, who were observed shortly after the Alarms of the Plot from so many
Proclamations, to flock from so many parts of the Country to London, like the
Rustical Plebs I have spoke of naturally thronging to the shore, when they see
a poor Vessel contending with a violent Tempest near it, and the next Minute
likely to Condemn it as a wrack, and furnish them with Gods Goods (I mean such
as they call wracked ones) and when to prevent the Owners of them from the
benefit of some coming alive to the Shore, they are so ready to out rage those
forlorn Mariners they see swimming to Land.

Many such Atheistical Ruffians of all Religionary Sects (and who had been
desperate in the Country) might, being come to the Metropolis, there probably
feed themselves with vain hopes of mischief to be done to or by some particular
persons, and would probably have been ready enough to be Mercenary Bravo's to
either any Jesuits or fifth-Monarchy men or the Jesuited Protestant Patrons of
the Doctrine of Resistance. But this Scum of the Country was afterward as
naturally thrown off from the well governed City, as are the Purgamenta Maris
from the Shore without making any Heads or Arms ache to remove them, and not
finding more welcome harbor in the City than they had in the Country, were I
believe literally thrown upon the Sea to Convey them to the Asylum of the
Malheureus that we may call our Foreign Plantations: and of the great and
extraordinary Glut of the Advenae from the Country ceasing in London after the
year 1681, the yearly general Bills of Mortality gave a sufficient proof, and
did (as I may say) include too the Burial of the Plot, or at least of the
popular fears of danger from it.

The critical Observator on the Bills of Mortality having long since told us,
That there come about 6000 yearly out of the Country to live in London, and
which swells the Burials about 200 yearly, and likewise taught us the Rule of 1
in 30 there yearly dying, I have in p. 155 Calculated by the yearly great
increase of the Burials from the Year 1675, (when the fears of the Growth of
Popery were so much in fashion) how very great the increase of the number of
the living there was to the Year 1679 inclusive, and the extraordinariness of
which increase was so justly imputable to that of the Advenae from the Country:
and to which it may be added, that the Burials from what they were in the Year
79 ( viz. 21730) falling back about 700 in the Year 80, yet in the Year 1681
were in all 23971, and so for every Thousand gradually dying more in those
Years referred to, 29000 were supposed to have in the same gradually lived more
than in the former: and all which years before mentioned were of ordinary
health.

But the Year 1681 having produced that Pacific Royal Declaration, and the
Congratulatory Addresses thereupon, and likewise that increase of the Burials
before mentioned (that might be supposed to happen partly by the Advenae from
the Country being for some time necessarily detained in the Metropolis, in
making preparations there to leave it, and by some of them in the mean time
dying, and partly from some new P^upers then coming from the Country to hide
their heads in obscure places in London, and which they durst not show in the
Sunshine that Declaration had made in the Country, and partly by the deaths of
many Loyal Persons in London whom the Addresses and expectations of Preferment
for their Loyalty brought thither) yet the Burials in the following year, viz.
1682, being but 20690, was a considerable indication of the abatement of the
popular fears which led so many timid Persons from the Country, with hopes to
find our Metropol^s to be the most quiet part of the Nation, as the most quiet
part of a Ship is naturally that which is nearest the Mainmast: and the
Burials in the year 83 being but 20587, gave an indication of the Advenae from
the Country not then increasing: and although the Total of the Burials for this
year 84 was 23202, yet it being most probable that there dyed above 3000 of
Infants, and of Aged, and infirm, and indigent People by the Accidents of the
extraordinary Frost, it may be well accounted that the popular fears have not
been in this year augmented.

Although during the so long continuance of the general ferment in the Kingdom
after the Plot-Epoche, (and in which inter^al so great a part of the following
Discourse was printed Sheet by Sheet) I could not after the King and Pope had
both of them by written Edicts (as it were) denounced War against the Tenets of
the Jesuits, that included so much Hostility to the Church of Rome as well as
of England, but participate in the general heat against those Tenets, and
improve the occasion of writing polemically about the same, yet I think none
could more carefully observe the Laws of Military Discipline, than I have those
of Loyalty in not going beyond the Measures of the Government, and in following
the Standard of the Royal Pen, set up in the Proclamations, and likewise in the
Declaration aforesaid.

Dr. Done dedicating his Pseudo-Martyr to King James, begins his Epistle by
saying, that as Temporal Armies consist of pressed men and voluntaries, so do
they also in this War-fare in which your Majesty has appeared by your Books:
and not only your strong and full Garrisons, which are your Clergy and your
Universities, but also obscure Villages can Minister Soldiers, etc. Besides
since in the Battle your Majesty by your Books is gone in person out of the
Kingdom, who can be exempt from waiting on you in such an expedition.

That Learned Monarch in his printed Premonition to all Crowned Heads, free
Princes and States, does Magno Conatu, go about to prove the Pope to be
Antichrist, and very subtly discusseth the Moot-points out of the Apocalypse
that refer to it: and from that one word of Antichrist, the Papacy has since
the Reformation received much more prejudice, than has the Reformation from
that other famous word of Heresy: and the Compellation of Antichrist is
especially a more terrible weapon against the Pope, when used by the hand of a
King.

But I must frankly say should my Prince Combat the Pope with this name in
Print, and descend to Command my poor Service in that Warfare, I should humbly
apply to him to excuse me therein: and as it was observed concerning Aretine,
that he left God untouched in his Satyrs, giving this reason for it, Ille
inquit non mihi notus erat: so I shall say the same thing of Antichrist.

But when the Thunder of the Royal Power was in so great a number of
Proclamations heard all over Christendom against particular persons, and their
known Principles and Designs, his Subjects might well think it a part of
Loyalty during that time to wear Clouds in their Brows, and to be tributary to
the Royal Cares by endeavoring in their several Capacities to support the
Throne, and to concur with the constant Practice of Nations in receiving the
beliefs of Matter of Fact as stated by Sovereign Power according to the common
saying of Imperatori seu Regi aliquid attestanti plene creditur.

It is this Test of the Sovereign (as I may say with allusion to the words in
our Writs of test me ipso) that will be the Clew to the Historians to guide
them in that dark and intricate Labyrinth of time, I before spoke of: and will
probably be helpful to any ingenious Protestants or Papists who shall write its
History, when they shall from the many Collections of the Pamphlets relating to
that time treasured up by the curious, see so many bold and contradictory
Shamms and Affidavits fighting with each other for that belief in a Future
Conjuncture, that they could not obtain in the past: and it is nothing but the
declared Sense of the Government that in such odiosa materia, will qualify a
judicious Historian to do right to himself or his Reader, or even to his
History, and keep it from being thrust down among Narratives.

It may be rationally supposed that when Princes and their Ministers do think
fit to notify their judgments of some matter of Fact wherein they might
receive the first Information from Persons liable to exception, that there were
many concurrent Circumstances lay in the Balance before them: and which perhaps
they might not think convenient to divulge: and moreover it is a thing commonly
observable, that Divine Providence does influence the understandings of Princes
(who are its instruments in the Government of the World) more signally than of
other men, and that Crowned Heads are still blessed in some measure as of old
by another Spirit coming on them, than what animated them while private
persons, and that therefore their asserting of Facts of State is more to be
revered than that of other men.

I therefore in the Case of the shamm of throwing the Odium of a Plot upon
Protestants in one particular Conjuncture, have not come short of or gone
beyond the Measures of the Government: nor do I believe that any Historian of
it will.

And when I did read the various Pamphlets, and did confer Notes with some of
the Curious about the last mentioned Shamm, and participated with the Loyal
Protestants in their Concern and Solicitude for the honor of their Religion
thereby attacqued, yet I gave no Rule about the Merits of the matter in my
private thoughts, till I saw in the Prints the Copy of the Order of Council of
November 2d, 1679. reflecting on the Treasonable Papers thrown into a
Gentleman's Chamber, by which diverse Noblemen and other Protestants, were to be
brought under a suspicion of carrying on a Plot against his Majesty, and which
Order was after a Person was sent to Newgate by the Council for forging of
Letters importing High Treason and fixing the same in a Gentleman's Chamber, and
o^ which Forgery I yet thought none but some few of the faex Romuli, who
believed and practiced the Jesuits Doctrine of Calumny could possibly be
guilty.

But I presently accord^d in my thoughts with the many Loyal Protestants and
Papists who judged another Effort, that pretended to be of the same Nature with
the former, and referred to a Plot of Protestants, to be a poor vile Artifice
or Shamm, projected by some Calumnious Anti-Papists, a shamm too despicable to
be here named, and obvious enough to detection from the Trite saying, That they
who can hide can find.

But the many pitiful Shamms, whose humming noise did a while please our
Mobile, and were below the notice of the Government, have had their triduum
insecti, and are not to expect to live in Story, or to be there Entombed like
the Fly in Amber.

The powerful Effects of the Royal Declaration, freeing our Land from the
Plague of Fears and Jealousies and the Annoyance of the Swarms of these Flies,
as Moses his intercession prevailed to deliver a Realm from the Judgments of
other ones, will be a more adequate Subject to a great Writers thoughts, and
especially when he shall consider that in the Course of Nature and without
Miracle, those great Effects could not but rise from so great an Efficient: and
as to which any one will perhaps be of opinion with me, who shall consider that
the most terrible of terribles in so many men's apprehension of Popery is its
arbitrariness: and that therefore the publication of the Royal Resolution to
govern according to the Laws would effectually secure us against all Arbitrary
Power whatsoever.

Mr. Hobbs says in his Behemoth, I confess I know very few Controversies among
Christians of Points necessary to Salvation. They are the Questions of
Authority and Power over the Church or of Profit, or of Honor to Churchmen,
that for the most part raise all the Controversy. For what man is he that will
trouble himself or fall out with his Neighbors for the saving of my Soul, or
the saving of the Soul of any other than himself?

And no doubt it is not barely any men's believing the Doctrines of Purgatory or
Trasubstantiation, or Merit or Works of Super-Errogation, that has made the
past ferment among us, but the Arbitrariness of the Papal Power and the
Complication of the Tenet of the Plenitude of that Power with those Religionary
Tenets, and the making of it Penal not to receive those or other Tenets from
Rome, and the making men Tenants in capite, to a Foreign Head for their Brains
and Estates, and an outlandish Bishop, who lives a Thousand Miles off, with new
Non obstantes outraging their old Laws, and whom they can never see blush after
it. But his Majesty having declared, That he would use his Royal Endeavors
both in and out of Parliaments to Extirpate Popery, (of which its Arbitrariness
was its great dreaded part) and in all things to Govern according to the Laws
of the Realm, the People knew that the Laws had sufficiently provided against
Appeals to Rome, as well as against Appeals from the Country to the City, and
that Declaration naturally fortified the minds of the People as a
Praemunimentum, guarding them before hand (as I may say with allusion to our
Statutes of Praemunire) against the Arbitrary Power either of Rome or Geneva,
and did in effect set up an Ensurance Office in each of his Majesty's Courts
of Justice, to secure them against Arbitrary Power as such in whomsoever, and
that they might in in utramvis aurem dormire as to any danger from the same;
and it is therefore no wonder that the Reflux of People from the Metropolis to
the Country ensued thereupon, as I have remarked out of the Bills of Mortality:
and from which Bills perhaps we may divert our selves with the sight of the
Burial of that Plot, which some feared and others hoped would have been
immortal, who would have had it Entailed too on their Heirs and Successors, tho
they would not allow the Crown to be so to the Royal Line.

The Political uses that the Bills of Mortality may be put to, being more
various than the profound Observator on them took the pains to mention, as I
have thence, by a glancing view of the gradual Increase of the People, coming
out of the Country for several years, to dwell within the Compass of those
Bills, and likewise of the gradual decrease thence deduced, given an account of
what I thought might in some measure deserve the name of an Indication of the
diminution of the popular fears resulting from the Burials, after the great
auspicious year of the Royal Declaration, so I could, in order to the lessening
of the fears of the increase of Dissentership within the Circuit of those
Bills, from the Total of the Christenings in the respective years since that of
81, give what I might without Vanity call more than Indicium, and which perhaps
would be by Critical Persons allowed for somewhat like a Demonstration of the
Increase of the Numbers there, (as I may say) born into the Church of England,
and to what proportion, and that very particularly: and make it out thence that
above the proportion between the Burials and Christenings that was in the Year
81, there were Christened 1084 in the year 82, and that the disposition of
People for baptizing their Children in the way of the Church of England did
increase near a 13th part, in the year 82, and that above the proportion
between the Burials and Christenings that was in the year 82, there were in the
year 83 Christened 2146, which is near a 6th part, that the Baptizing of
Children in the way of the Church of England has gained, and Dissentership
has lost ground in that year.

Nor do I find cause to alter my opinion of such baptizing in the way of the
Church of England, having lost, but rather, on the contrary, gained ground in
this year 84, tho to what proportion I cannot positively judge, by reason of
what I before hinted, namely, of the extraordinary proportion of the Burials
this year, arising from the Accidents of the great Frost, and which Physicians
by comparing the increase of the particular Diseases by which so many died this
year more than in the former happening from those Accidents, have judged to be
considerably above 3000, and likewise by reason of the Births having this year
been revera considerably fewer, according to the Rule of the Observator on
those Bills, That the more sickly the year is, it is the less fertile of Births.

All who have been in the least conversant with those Observations of his, know
that the Births in ordinary years are equal to the Burials, or rather more: and
I have observed the same from the Paris Bills, where the Christenings do
generally much exceed the Burials (and as particularly appeared by the Total of
the Burials in the year 1683 being 17764, and the Total of the Christenings
being 19717) but by the Christenings among us registered and reckoned in our
Bills, we know thence when the disposition of the People to baptize their
Children in the way of the Church began to increase, and Dissentership
consequently to decrease; and accordingly the ground gained by the Church of
England, and lost by Dissentership within the Compass of those Bills, after the
year 81, has been by me sufficiently proved, Quod erat demonstrandum.

I have in this Discourse given somewhat like a little Historical Account of
the Numbers of the Papists, since the Reformation to our late Conju^ctures, and
have with honor mentioned the Vigilance of his Majesty's late Minister, the
Earl of Danby, in directing a Survey of the Numbers of the People of several
Religionary Persuasions in the Province of Canterbury, and which was returned
in the year 76, and whereby the Comparative Paucity of the number of Papists
there is apparent, as it is by themselves agreed on so to be, as I have cited
out of the Compendium.

But tho the Copy of that Survey is in the hands of so many Persons, I would
not have mentioned any thing thereof as to the Number of the Papists, but that
Dr. Glanvill had first published the same, and whose Book I have referred to
for the same. Nor shall I therefore give any particular account of the numbers
of the Non-Conformists resulting from the same.

But tho I think that the Number of the Non-Conformists was not returned
perhaps in that Survey, so justly and near the matter as was that of the
Papists, yet I am fully of opinion that if the number of Non-Conformists were
thrice as great as that returned (which I believe no man will reckon it to be)
their proportion with that of the Total of this great Populous Nation would be
very inconsiderable.

But as to all the Writers or Discoursers of their proportion to that Total
that I have conversed with, (and who have rendered the Quota of the Dissenters
so vast with much positiveness) I am able to say, That I have easily persuaded
them to desist from any positive magisterial determination therein, by showing
them that their measures of the Total of the People of England have been but
conjectural, and depending perhaps on some Calculations too fine and subtle, or
others too course and gross, and that no man can be a competent Judge of this
Total, who has not seen the Returns on the Bishops Survey, and likewise the
Returns on the late Pole-Bills, and of which latter under the Patronage of a
powerful Minister of the Kings, I obtained Copies, and have thence in the
following Discourse showed the Total of the People of England and Wales, to be
probably much greater than any cautious Calculators have made it, and some
whereof made the Total to be 5, others 6, others 7 Millions. I thought the
doing of this an acceptable service to my Prince and Country, and the rather
for that several Authors among the Magna nomina have published it in Print,
that the People of England and Wales are but 2 Millions: and which number if
they did not exceed, we might allow our Dissenters a considerable proportion
therein, tho yet nothing near so great even as to such a Total as some would
have it.

But the Ebb of their Numbers is at this time so apparent, if we respect the
State of them in the whole Kingdom, that their Outcry of Implevimus omnia, and
The Nation and its Trade cannot subsist without us, is very ridiculous: and
they are not in my opinion their friends who writing for them do so customarily
magnify their Numbers, and as if they were half the People of England, as some
have done: and I believe the Gentleman whom I have cited for saying in a late
Parliament, that he observed, That in the Choice of Knights of the Shire for
the County he lived in, that they could not bring one in twenty to the Field,
would if he had been at Elections in some other Counties have found they could
not there bring in so great a number.

And tho the Puritans of old were very numerous in the House of Commons, and
our Dissenters in the King's long Parliament made so great a Figure as to be
able by their weight to crush the Declaration for Indulgence, yet in the
succeeding Houses of Commons, the Dissenters were far from valuing themselves
an their weight or numbers: but of the Dissenters in that Loyal Long
Parliament, I believe there were not any who wished for the Yoke of Presbytery,
or thought its Platform practicable in this Realm.

I have in this Discourse mentioned one thing, that made the most Eminent
Presbyterian Divines after 41, think their bringing of the Yoke of Presbytery
upon the English Necks practicable, and that is, their accounting according to
the Pacta conventa between Them and the Parliament, they should have the
Bishops and Deans and Chapters Lands settled on their Church, whereby their
Discipline how defective soever in weight as to Principles of Divinity and
Humanity, would have made it self ^ormidable by its Balance of Land: and it is
probable, that in Scotland the Livings of the inferior Clergy weighing more in
value than the Estates or Livelihoods of the ordinary inferior Layety, has
supported that Clergy there in their pretenses to expect somewhat of Power, and
which they yet enjoy in the Figure of the Church Government there Established
under Bishops: and although King James in his planting so many Benefices
throughout that Kingdom, worth 30 l. per Annum, with a House and some Glebe
Land belonging to them, never intended any advantage to Presbytery thereby; he
yet occasioned some by making so many Divines there more considerable in
wealth: but our Presbyterian Divines here having been so fatally disappointed
about the Bishops Lands promised them, all ingenious men must necessarily
thereby be made apprehensive that they are never to hope to bring the terror of
that Church Government upon us by that means.

It is moreover observable that most of the Race of our old Presbyterian and
Independent Divines having been extinct, (some few of whom were Learned Men and
gave some Ornament to their Tenets by their Learning) scarce any new ones, and
who appeared not in the Church before the King's Restoration, have since by the
publication of any Theological or DevotionalWritings propp'd up the Credit of
their Party, and that of the Ecclesiastics of those persuasions none have
published any thing valuable against Popery but some of their old stock.

Tho some Presbyterians have not hitherto learned that Modesty and Policy from
the Papists, as to leave off their unjust valuing themselves on their Numbers,
yet as I know not of any number of Gentlemen that would choose to live in any
Parish in England under the severity of that Church Government, and who would
not rather desire to be exterminated from their Native Country than to live in
it with Presbytery Paramount, so neither do I believe, that Presbytery would be
endured by many of our illiterate Mechanics now more than heretofore, if they
were taught its rigor.

And tho likewise another Sect of Dissenters more Gentlemanly than that of the
Presbyterians, I mean the Independants, do in the little Pamphlets they write,
trouble us much with proclaiming their Numbers, and as if they were not only
the sober but the major part of the Nation, they are very ridiculous in trying
to make themselves that way dreadful contrary to what is in Fact true.

I believe that the number of those who in the late times listed themselves in
the particular gathered Churches, and subjected themselves to their Laws, and
Contribution to their Pastorage, was always inconsiderable; and as an Argument,
of that it is in this Discourse mentioned that the Pastors of the most Opulent
of those Churches in London did most readily quit their Posts, when they could
obtain Head-ships of Colleges, and that in a Conjuncture when Independancy was
in a manner the form of Church Government owned by the State.

These Churches were always very few in the Country and are now fewer and
scarce visible, unless we will call the Bands of Quakers by the name of
Churches, and a name I do not hear they think fit to use.

I am of opinion that under the Christian Religion so much ^uller of Mystery
than the Pagan, Jewish, and Turkish, its Divine Planter did necessarily make
Christians loving one another, the Characteristical Mark of their being such;
and under the noble freedom allowed by the Protestants Religion to try all
things, and to trust no Religionary Tenets but what they have tried, a
Heterodoxy as to some speculative supposed Tenets of the Church of England, may
among some inquisitive persons have long gained ground, and still do so.

There was in London an Independent Church under Cromwell's Government, and Mr.
Biddell was their Pastor, and among other Tenets denominable as those of
Religion, they owned these following, viz. That the Fathers under the old
Covenant had only Temp^ral Promises; and That the Universal Obedience performed
to the Commands of God and Christ was the saving Faith; and That Christ rose
again only by the Power of the Father and not his own; and That justifying
Faith is not the pure gift of God, but may be acquired by men's natural
Abilities; and That Faith cannot believe any thing contrary to, or above
reason; and That there is no Original Sin; and That Christ has not the same
body now in glory in which he suffered and rose again; and That the Saints
shall not have the same body in Heaven that they had on Earth; and That Christ
was not Lord or King before his Resurrection, or Priest before his Ascension;
and That the Sain^s shall not before the day of Judgment enjoy the Bliss of
Heaven; and That God does not certainly know Future Contingences; and That
there is not any Authority of Fathers or General Councils in determining
Matters of Faith; and That Christ before his death had not any Dominion over
the Angels; and That Christ by dying made not satisfaction for us: and it is
possible that such Religionary Tenets as these, which are far from being de
lana caprina, and are contrary to the Articles of our Church may not be
extirpated: tho yet I believe there will never be any Fermentation in our
Church or State produced here by them, if in course of time any of them should
happen to be the Sentiments of any of our Princes: and much less that any
Prince, if so opining, would consute others as Heretics with Fire and Sword,
and as Calvin confuted Servetus.

There was likewise in our Metropolis another Independent Church, of which Mr.
John Goodwin was the Pastor, and by which Church the Tenets of Armini^s were
received, and which tho they have ceased to ferment the State, yet the opinions
of men equally pious and learned will in all likelihood be always different
about the same: and as to these Tenets, the Questions are not such as are
called Questiones Domitianae, or of catching of Flies.

But there is a sort of Questions that is little better, and that in our busy
World will not usurp the time they have done, and that is, such as are of the
Nature of that I have spoke of toward the Close of this Discourse, that made
the fermentation in a Church of Separatists that went hence to Amsterdam,
namely, Whether Aron's Ephod were blew or Seagreen: and tho I have asserted it
That men's liberty of professing Religionary Tenets may be reckoned as a part of
their Purchase by Christ's Blood; yet methinks to make the Son of God leave the
Bosom of his ^ather, and take a Journey from Heaven to Earth to impress on it
right Notions about the lawfulness of signing Children with the Cross, or of
men's kneeling at the Sacrament, or standing at the Creed, or bowing at the name
of Jesus, or of placing the Communion Table in the East, or of wearing
Surplices, Tippets, Lawn-sleeves or square Caps, or of keeping of Holy Days, or
singing Psalms to Organs, and to resolve the World in some plain points, as
namely, Whether the Sovereign Power may not lawfully enjoin the observance of
the external Circumstances of Divine Worship, which every man does in his own
Family? or Whether it be not as lawful for the Sovereign Power to enjoin
kneeling at the Sacrament, as it is for private Persons to command their Flocks
not to kneel? and the resolving who does most hurt by Christian Liberty either
the Magistrate, who, commanding me to kneel, tel^s me the thing is in its own
nature indifferent, and that he does not and cannot change the nature of things
in themselves; or my private Pastor, who shall tell me That my not kneeling is
necessary to salvation? and the resolving the Question, Whether I may lawfully
^oyn in a set form of Prayer with a Congregation, when it is plain that another
man's conceived, or extempore Prayer is as much a form to me or to another as
any printed Prayer can be? or the resolving what Mr. Gataker in his Book of
Lots, calls a frivolous Question as made by some Separatists, viz. What Warrant
have you to use this or that Form of Prayer, or to pray upon a Book? (and to
which he answers, That it is Warrant sufficient that we are enjoined to use
Prayer, Confession of Sin, and Supplication for Pardon, etc. No set Form
thereof determined, therefore any fit Form warrantable: this Form that we use
not unfit otherwise, this Form thereof allowable. And let a man demand of one
of them when he prays, what Warrant he has to use that Form that he then
uses, he can answer no otherwise. So for a Book, the means of help are not
determined: and this one among others: this therefore not unwarrantable. And if
one of them should be asked how he proves it warrantable to use a printed Book
to read on at Church: he shall not be able to make other answer than as before)
and further hereupon the resolving of another Question, viz. Whether one man
eminent for Piety and Learning, or perhaps eminent for neither, is able without
premeditation to make as fit a Prayer for the People to say Amen to, as a
hundred Persons eminent for both are able to frame with l^ng study? I say to
make an Elias and much more the holy Jesus, to come down from Heaven to solve
such doubts as these, is an extravagance Parallel with the Error of those old
Poets, who would on all occasions introduce Gods to end doubts that were never
fit to be begun by men, and wherein there was not dignus vindice nodus, and
against which the judicious Poet gave the known Caution of, Nec Deus interfit,
etc.

The holy Jesus by his Tacit Rejection of Questions as impertiment (that the
World thought of more moment than some such as are above named) when he forbore
to give his thoughts of Pythagoras his pre-existence of Souls upon the Question
put to him, viz. Who did sin this Man or his Parents that he was born blind?
showed he thought it not for his honor to have it supposed that it was part of
his Errand from Heaven to set the World rightin Speculations of Philosophy; and
so he threw that famous Notion off as a Titivilitium.

Chemnitius in his Harmony taking notice of our Savior's reprehending in the
Pharisees their use of Oaths, and thereby invocating God as a Witness in the
Occurrences of their common talk and Conversation, says, In re levi ne magnum
quidem virum in testem vocare auderemus: as I find him cited by Mr. Gataker in
his Book of Lots, and wherein he does so learnedly confute the superstitious
conceit in some of the unlawfulness of the use of Cards and Dice in recreation,
as likewise the other of men's being obliged to count every thing unlawful that
they have not a Scriptural Warrant for.

Yet since his writing of those Books of Lots, thousands of such our
superstitious Protestants have not ^crupled to throw the Dye of War, and to
appeal to the Lord of Hosts by the Decision of Battle to signalize the truth in
some of those nugatory and others of those plain points beforementioned: and
our Land groans under the guilt of the Blood of hundreds of thousands of
Subjects as well as of the Royal Blood, by Questions, on which an ingenious man
would scarce think a drop of Ink necessary to be spent.

But I have in this Discourse expressed my belief, That the fierceness of our
Dissenters humor of quarrelling about such little Ceremonial matters will be
naturally reclaimed by the influence of the Civility appearing in the many
French Protestants here, into a Complaisance with our King's and Church's
enjoined Ceremonies, that all the learned Books of our Divines have not been
able to work in them: the Civility of the French humor making it natural to
those Protestants (as I ^ave remarked) not only to comply with Princes but even
their Fellow Subjects in the use of all Ceremonies they expect: and as I have
in many places of this Discourse, and particularly in p. 239, expressed my
thoughts that the sicarious Principles of the Jesuits will naturally evaporate
by fear and shame; so I have in the following Page, that all Rebellious
Principles of any Nominal Protestants will by fear and shame in our populous
English World be abandoned: and do think, That to the shame of quarrelling
about little matters, the shame of doing it before Strangers, being
super-added, will prevent our future disquiet thereby.

Let them ask those Protestants who are fled hither from Persecution (the
Circumstances of which are with great Judgment stated by Dr. Hicks in his
Excellent printed Sermon on that Subject) if in case their great Monarch had
excused them from Conformity to the Gallican Church in the points of Praying in
an unknown Tongue, and the Worshipping the Host, and the Forbidding the Cup to
the Layety, and the other momentous Religionary points controverted between
Papists and Protestants, and had enjoined them only such things as our Religion
by Law Established does, whether they would have with the hazard of their lives
made a migration hither from the best Country in the World, their Native Soil,
or have made their Monarch and his Ministers at home uneasy by Complaints of
Persecution, and by raising of any dust about unnecessary Questions as
aforesaid.

Leo After tells us, that the Inhabitants of the Mountain Magnan on the
Frontiers of Fez, have not thought fit to be at the Charge of any settled
Judicature or Parade of the Law to support their Polity: but to the end their
Controversies emerging may be decided, and that impartially, they stop some
Travelers passing that way, to give Judgment in the same; and that himself in
his passage there was detained many days to perform the Office of a Judge, and
that his performance of the same was rewarded by the Inhabitants, defraying the
Charges of his Stay: and some of those People were ashamed perhaps to trouble
him, a Stranger with vilitigation, or querelles d' alleman.

And thus perhaps may those Protestant Strangers that Providence has sent
hither prove to our Religionary branglers useful itinerant Judges, and their
patience in their Judicature will in my opinion deserve to be well rewarded,
and for the greatness of its burden from the minuteness of its Controverted
Causes, and whereby Strangers are imposed on by as needless trouble as
Travelers would be if in the several Territories they passed through, the
Inhabitants should desire them to weigh their Air. But I hope the
Non-Conformists to the Gallican Church will find those to ours ashamed to
entertain them here with the Crambe of old Controversies of Ceremonies and
things Indifferent; and that those Strangers will not find themselves invited
hither by Nature as to a Theater, where they shall only see our digladiations
with Air, or beating of the Air (as the Scripture Expression is) and much less
where they shall see any Dissenters implicitly swallowing the Doctrine of
Resistance, and weighing nothing but Air.

It was (I think) a little before the Migration of so many French Protestants
here, that some of the Faex of our Dissenters were so shameful as to Nickname
our Clergy: But I do account that the inquisitive and Philosophical Temper of
the Age, shining with so much luster in our English Clergy (and which temper is
as naturally accompanied with the gentle warmth of Charity for the Persons of
different Opiners as light it self can be with heat) is a sufficient Guarranty
to all Protestant ^e^usants of their finding from our Church all the favor, I
will not say that they have deserved from it, but all that they will or can:
and I believe the Charity of our Churchmen is so great for them as almost to
tempt them to wish That there were some dignus vindice nodus in the Religionary
part of Dissenters Principles, that might give our C^ergy a signal occasion to
display the before mentioned Characteristical mark of Christianity in loving
the Persons of Men dissenting from them in any matters of moment.

They have experimented this temper of our Divines in Dr. Stillingfleet's Book
of the Unreasonableness of the Separation after so many of their Waspish
Pamphlets had attacqued his Excellent Sermon of the mischief of separation: and
the soft insinuations of reason, in which having produced from them so much
unmanly passion, may serve as an indication that the present Dissente^ship is
languishing under its old Age, when the gentlest weight and even when the
Grass-hopper is a burden to it.

They have seen this happy temper appearing in some of our most Celebrated
Divines not being exasperated against the persons of one another, tho owning
Sentiments different from our Articles and Homilies. And indeed it is natural to
any man of a great Genius (and of such illustrious Abilities that all the
several Religionary Parties thinks of, with the wish of Vtinam noster esset) in
some Notions peculiar to himself, to soar above the common ^light of the
ordinary Observers of their Rules and Prescriptions, and not to be fled out of
the hearts of those of their Sect, when some times he towers out of their,
sight and above the reach of their understandings.

I have in the Learned Theological Writings of Mr. Baxter, concerning
Iustifications, contemplated his great parts and abilities: and have likewise
observed the great Learning of Doctor Tully appearing in his Iustificatio
Paulina, and where he says, That in the point of Justification the Controversy
is not de muris, sed de Palladio Christiano: and have moreover read Dr. Tully's
printed Letter to Mr. Baxter wherein he charge him (whether justly or no I
enquire not) for seeming to place most if not all the differences that are in
the point of Justification* between us and the Church of Rome, among
Logomachies, p 16th, and uses to him these words in p. 17. But seeing you are
so busy in turning our greatest Controversies with the Papists into a Childish
Contest of words, and in p. 21. he desires him, That he would consider the
great affinity his Tenet of Justification has contracted with the Roman, and
in the same Page desires him to take his Balance and weigh more diligently,
that he might see only the very small odds between his justification and the
Council of Trent 's.

That great Adorner of the Church of England both with his Learning and Piety,
Dr. Hammond, thought it not so acceptable service to the World to fill it with
more Volumes against the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, as to diminish it by
distinction, and when in his Tract of Idolatry. 64. p. 41. he makes the
worshipping of the Host to be only material Idolatry, tho he knew as well as
any the Articles of our Church, and that without the formale peccati as well as
the materiale, there can be no sin of Commission, and that in all things forma
dat esse.

Our Famous Dr. Jeremy Tailor likewise in his liberty of Prophesying, p. 258,
does free the Papists from Formal Idolatry. Thus likewise tho our Homilies and
our Jewel, Raynold, Whitaker, Usher, etc. and the Translators of our Bible into
English in King James's time did place the Name of Antichrist, and the Man of
Sin on the Bishop of Rome, yet Dr. Hammond as well as others of our Church have
publicly avowed their Sentiments of the Popes not being so.

I have not mentioned this as if I thought that any of our excellent Divines of
the Church of England, would ever occasion the least umbrage of jealousy in
any Future Conjuncture, about any design of uniting our Church to Rome, or
Rome's to ours: the common Rule in Politics of minor pars unita majori
censetur facta illius appendix (and which is exemplified by the Church of Rome,
not having been united to all the A^iatick, African, Grecian, Russian and
Protestant Churches, as containing three times more Christian Souls than does
the Church of Rome with all its Dependents and Adherents) and the ineffectual
Project of some well meaning Divines in a former Conjuncture here, will I
believe effectually avert all future jealousies of any thing of that Nature, or
the danger of any in the Vessel by trying to pull the Rock to it, bringing it
super hanc Petram. From various grounds of natural reason, I may venture to
predict that the best Evangelical Church and the best Clergy the World can
show, will direct their measures suitably to those Words of the great
Evangelical Prophet Isaiah, Their strength is to ^it still, and without any
faith to remove the seven Hills or Mountains of Rome hither, or on their sullen
Contumacy resolving like Mahomet to go to the Mountains.

Among the various Considerations urged in this Discourse to fortify the minds
of the Loyal timid against their unaccountable fears of Heterodoxy in any
Prince as to the Religion by Law Established, rendering him a mere natural
Agent, or one without freedom of will as to the point of freedom of their
Consciences, and depriving him of the Brains as well as Bowels of a Man, and
against impressions of trouble from what so many Writers have insinuated,
namely, that a Roman Catholic Prince must by virtue of the Authority of the
Lateran Council exterminate his Heretical Subjects, I have in p. 283 mentioned
that the Munster Peace has in Germany, cured the timid Lutheran and Calvinist
Subjects of any fears and jealousies as of their Religion and Property upon any
Prince by the Lineal Course of Descent coming to be their Ruler, who may
profess any Religionary Sentiments different from theirs.

And because the factum of that Peace has not by any Writers since our late
fermentation (that I know of) been insisted on for the illumination of Peoples
understandings in the firm Provision made there for men's being secure in their
Religion by Law Established, whatever the Religion of their lawful Princes may
be, I shall here give some Cursory Account of the great Fact of that Peace (and
wherein some Popish Princes made so great a Figure, and who sufficiently
understood how far the Later an Council obliged them) that may not only show it
a kind of Pedantry to imagine that Roman Catholic Princes are still by their
Religion bound, after all the Revolutions of time and its incursions made on
their former measures as to Heterodox Religion and Religionaries, to use the
same Methods as formerly, and to move in the same Line as heretofore, (just as
some Crabs on the Land are observed in the West Indies to be so sullen in their
way, that rather than they will move in the least on any side, they will go
over a House or a Tree) but may likewise serve as a Praemunimentum to secure
men in all future times against the fear of any danger to their Religion by the
Heterodoxy of their Princes, a thing that may be expected often to happen,
since People can no more promise themselves that their Princes will
successively resemble one another in their understanding faculties than in
their bodily shapes.

Thus then sufficiently for the purpose above mentioned the Reader may take the
Scheme of that matter.

It may be observed that in Sueden and D^nmark and in all the Territories of
the lower and upper Saxony where ever Protestants have the sole power, no
Papists are permitted to have any public exercise of their Religion: and that
in Austria, Bohemia, Moravia, and all the Hereditary Lands of the House of
Austria, Bavaria and the upper Palatinate, where the Papists have the sole
Power, no Protestants are suffered to have the public Exercise of their
Religion. And these whole Territories above mentioned being entire bodies
within themselves, under one head either of the one or the other Religion,
without the intermixture of different Dominions, are uniform in the exercise of
their Religion respectively different.

But the intermediate parts of the German Empire are interwoven under several
Princes of different Religions, and therefore are of mixed Religionary
professions: that is to say, those professions are exercised some here, some
there in different places: and because the Inhabitants of the intermediate
Territories being mixed and pretending to have each of them a right to the same
places of Worship, various Quarrels did arise among them: therefore when they
deprived one another of the freedom to exercise their Religion, the Treaty of
Peace at Munster and Osnabrug in the year 1648. did appoint the restitution of
places for the public exercise of Religion on both sides, and ordered that all
matters of this kind should be thence forward settled as they were in use
heretofore in the Year 1624: which Order occasioned a Deputation from all the
States of the Empire at Francford in the Year 1656, and 1657 and following, to
see that Decree and other matters put in Execution.

Those intermediate Territories are the Circles of Westphalia, of the Rhine, of
the Welterans, of Franconia, and of Suaben containing many Principalities and
great Cities, depending immediately upon the Empire, which being of different
Religions and mixed one with another, in respect of their Territories and
Jurisdictions, none that in the time of War was prevalent, did suffer a
different Religion to be exercised: but since the Instrument of the Peace made
at Munster and Osnabrug was published, the liberty of Religion is to be
regulated universally by the 7th Article* and some other Articles determining
matters between Protestants and Papists: and according to this Constitution
although some Territories, which formerly were under Protestant Divines, are now
under a Popish power, and vice versa, yet the liberty of Religion is to be left
to each Party as it was used in the year 1624.

Thus the Duke of Newburg and one of the Landgraves of Hessen, and a Prince of
Nassaw are obliged to leave to the Protestants within their Dominions, the free
exercise of their Religion. And so in some of the Imperial Cities, as in
Francford, Ausburg and others, the Papists have the free exercise of their
Religion restored to them among the Protestants.

At Ausburg the Magistracy is half of the one and half of the other Religion:
but in all the other Imperial Cities the Magistrates (I think) were wholly
Protestants, except at Collen and Heilbron where they are wholly Papists.

If any one considering the sharper Animosities between Lutherans and
Calvinists, then those between either of them and the Papists (accordingly as
we are told by Tacitus, that Odia proximorum sunt acerrima) shall tell me, That
if the Treaty of Munster and Osnabrug did plant Civility among Lutherans and
Calvinists as to the Persons and Religions of each other, it did wonders, I
shall therein accord with him, and that it was somewhat like that of the
pulling down the Partition Wall between Jew and Gentile; and that tho Luther a
more Choleric yet (I think) a better natured man than Calvin, did sufficiently
in his Writings inveigh against the asperity of Magistrates in punishing
Heterodoxy (and particularly in his Tract, De magistratu saeculari: part
secunda, where he tells Chief Magistrates so doing, viz. Per Deum sancte juro,
si id verum, tantillas vires in vos acceperit vestra negligentia, nulli estis,
etiamsi siguli non essetis inferiores Turca ipso, potentia: neque vestra
crudelitas and rabies vobis quicquam commodabunt: yet many of Luthers followers
did not imbibe that his opinion, and as appeared long ago by a dreadful
instance of this in Queen Mary's time, when John a Lasco Uncle to the King of
Poland, and many Families of Strangers who had been here received by Edward the
6th, were banished by Queen Mary, and went for Asylum to the King of Denmark,
but (as I have read it in the History of that Migration of theirs writ in
Elegant Latin by John a Lasco) he renders their usage in Denmark by the Clergy
and Populace to have been very severe, and makes the first Course in their
Entertainment to be an Invitation to Church some days after their landing, on
pretense of being instructed, and the hearing there Cal^^^ and themselves
publicly lampon'd or railed at: and because that pleased not their palates,
their next was, an Edict to be gone from the Metropolis in a peremptory short
time, when the Season of the Frost in that Country was so extremely afflictive,
and without permission for their Sick or Infants or Women with Child to stay
for the Clemency of better weather; and whereby many of them there died with
the extremity of the cold in their Journeys. And it had been in a manner as
eligible for them to have stayed and perished in England by the Fires of Queen
Mary: And Alsted in his Chronology speaking of what happened in Queen Mary's
Reign, says to this purpose, Multi ob Religionem mutatam, Anglia relicta primo
in Daniam, deiude in Germaniam veniunt: nam in Dania non poterant habere locum,
per theologorum rabiem: inter exules fuit Johannes Lascus Polonus.

But I can by the Munster Peace, direct the Reader to see that old Lutheran
bigotry and hatred of the Persons and Religion of Calvinists exterminated out
of Germany, whereby it is determined as by a Statu^e Law, that the Calvinists
shall have the same right for the free exercise of their Religion which the
Lutherans and Papists have, and that to the end that any might be ashamed of
pretending to be afraid of any detriment that might accrue to their Persons or
Religion, under a Lutheran or Calvinian or Popish Successor, and that all might
be really afraid of dishonouring God and wounding their Consciences, by
prejudicing the Inheritable Rights of those Princes Successions, it is thus
further determined by the 7th Article of the Instrumentum pacis Caesareo
suecicum,. 1. viz. Vnanimi quoque Caesareae majestatis omniumque ordinum
consensu, etc. It Is likewise thought fit by the unanimous Consent of the
Emperor and all the States of the Empire, that whatever right or benefit both
all the other Constitutions of the Empire, and the Peace of Religion, and this
public agreement, and the decision of all Grievances therein do allow to all
Catholic States and Subjects, and to those addicted to the Augustan
Confession, the same shall likewise be allowed to those that are called the
Reformed, ( i. e. Calvinists) with a Salvo to the States called Protestants (
i. e. Lutherans) as to all things Covenanted and agreed between themselves with
their own Subjects, and as to all Privileges and other dispositions whereby
Provision was made for Religion and its exercise and the things thereon
depending, by the States and Subjects of each place, and with a Salvo to each
for the freedom of their Consciences. Now because the Controversies of Religion
which are in Agitation at this time among the forenamed Protestants have not
been hitherto reconciled, but have been referred to a further endeavor of
agreement, so that they still make two Parties: therefore concerning the right
of reforming it is thus agreed between them: that if any Prince or other Lord
of the Territory or Patron of any Church shall hereafter change his Religion,
or obtain or recover a Principality or Dominion either by the right of
Succession or by virtue of this present Treaty, or by any other Title
whatsover; where the public exercise of the Religion of the other Party is at
present in use, it shall be free to him to have his Court-Chaplains of his own
Religion about him in the place of his Residence, without any burden or
prejudice to his Subjects: but it shall not be lawful for him to change the
public Exercise of Religion or the Laws, or Ecclesiastical Constitutions which
have been there hitherto in use, or take from those their Churches whose they
formerly were, or their Schools or Hospitals, or the Revenues, Pensions and
Stipends belonging thereunto, or apply them to the men of their own Religion,
or obtrude on their Subjects men of another Religion, under the pretense of a
Territorial Episcopal or Patronal Right, or under any pretense whatsoever, or
bring about any other hinderance directly or indirectly to the Religion of the
other Party, etc.

In fine, here has been a great Pacification, and the same agreed on to be a
perpetual Law, and pragmatick Sanction, and as strongly binding as any
Fundamental Law or Constitution thereof, comprhending in behalf of the Emperor,
all his Confederates and Adherents, first the Catholic King and House of
Austria the Electors and Princes of the Empire, the Hanse Towns, the King of
England, the King of Denmark and Norway, and all the Princes and Republics of
Italy, and the States of Holland and others, and in the behalf of the Queen of
Sweden all her Confederates, the most Christian King, the Hanse Towns, the King
of England, the King of Denmark and the Dutch States, etc.

Well: but yet it may be by our timid Protestants objected; that all these
Roman Catholic Princes thus projecting the Peace of Germany and that of
Christendom, did in this great Instrumentum pacis and the pacta Conventa
referred to, but reckon without their Host, I mean the Bishop of Rome, and that
one Bull against it from Rome would thunder it to nothing, and render it
voidable or void, and that all the Concessions to Heresy and Heretics, and
hindering their Extermination were nugatory, and that such a written Treaty
carried in it, its own deletion and that of Heretics, and that the Bulla
Caenae every Maundy Thursday Excommunicates and Cur^es all Lutherans,
Calvinists, Hugonots, and their Receivers, Fautors, and Defenders, and that the
many immunities granted to Heretics by this Peace as likewise Lands and
Territories, and the Erecting of Bishoprics into Secular Principalities, and
settling them on Heretical Princes and their Heirs forever, whereby so much
prejudice accrued to the Roman Catholic Religion and the Apostolic Sea, would
probably engage the Pope some time or other to quash it as null, and to damn
both the Peace and all that made it.

I answer, that within two days after the signing that Peace, the Popes Nuntio
at Munster protested against it: declaring that he made that Protestation by
the Pope's express Commands: and on the 26th of November 1648, Pope Innocent
the 10th issued out his Bull against it from Rome called, Sanctissimi Domini
nostri Inn^centii divina providentia Papae. X. Declaratio nullitatis
articulorum nuperae Pacis Germanicae, Religioni Catholicae, sedi Apostolicae,
Ecclesiis aliisque locis piis ac person^s and juribus Ecclesiasticis
quomodolibet praejudicialium, ad aeternam Rei memoriam. And he therein blames
the Emperor and his Confederates and the most Christian King, on the account of
the perpetual abdication of some Ecclesiastical Goods and Rights possessed by
Heretics, and for their permitting to Heretics the free exercise of their
Religion by that Peace, and their being further Authorized by it to bear
Offices and enjoy not only Church Livings but Bishoprics, and
Arch-Bishopricks: and in fine, that Pope having made it null and void, further
declares, That if any have sworn to observe the Articles of that Peace, such
Oath shall not bind them.

But what did this Declaration from his Holiness signify in that Case? No more
than one from Prester John would have done. The Emperor and Princes of Germa^y
did gloriously stand to their Pacta conventa, and took care to see the same
solemnly ratified and executed notwithstanding the Papal Declaration of their
Nullity. They knew the Pope's Nuntio would soon protest, and the Pope himself
declare against the Peace: and had therefore in Terms therein agreed, That no
Canons or special Decrees of Councils or Concordats with Popes or
Protestations, or Edicts, Rescripts, Mandates or Absolutions whatsoever should
in any Future time be allowed against any Article of it. And they likewise knew
that the Pope's Declaration of the Nullity of that Treaty would contain no
Threatenings of Excommunication or Damnation against their Persons, but only
Quelques chooses or things of Course, or to speak more properly Nullities of
Course: and that while all Christendom was embarked in that Treaty and going
with full Sail, and favored with a strong Gale of Nature into its Haven of
Rest, and being to pass by the Popes Fort, and had resolved against lowering
their Flag to it, the Pope would of Course fire some Bulls of Nullity at them
Charged with no significant Shot, and as it is usual for the Forts of Princes
to do to Ships that pass by them without paying the expected Civility, and the
Shot from which is not valued by Capital Ships that pass by them with a strong
Gale of Wind: and which perhaps think it not tanti to fire again upon the Fort;
nor does that perhaps throw away more shot on them.

And thus stood this Munster Peace, wrought (as it were) by the consent of the
Crowned Heads and States of Christendom, and thus it stands; and any who will
look into the Empire will find those Pacta conventa as to the part of the
Emperor and Princes of the Empire outbraving the chances of time to this year
(how much soever the Emperor may be supposed to have been steered by Jesuits
Councils) and likely still so to do, whereby the various Rights and Religions
of Princes and their Subjects have been secured, and whereby we may see how
unstudied those men are in the great Book of the World, who think that Popish
Princes will not go on in the Course of their Politics, tho the Pope should
seem in earnest or in jest to stop them, and that they cannot tacitly reject
the Papal Declarations of Nullity, and yet continue Civil to the Pope and his
Church.

The firm continuance of the Munster Peace to the year 1680, is mentioned by
the Author of an ingenious Book called, The Interest of Princes and States that
year published, and which goes under the name of Mr. Bethel, and where it is
moreover observed in p. 155. That among the Lutheran Princes the Prince of
Hannover was lately turned Papist, and likewise one of the House of the
Landgrave of Hessen, Darmestat and another of Mecklenburg lately turned Papist,
but their Countries do all continue Lutherans, and among the Calvinist Princes
he mentions the Elector of Brandenburg, but says, his Dominions are most
Lutherans, and where in p. 156. it is his Observation that of four Popish
Princes of the Empire, all their Countries are Lutherans, and says, the
Princes in this Country (meaning Germany) have no great influence on their
Subjects in point of Religion: and says, That in several Countries belonging
to Popish Bishops and Abbots, many Lutherans and some Calvinists have not only
a Right, but do also actually enjoy the public exercise of their several
Religions without disturbance, and much more without Persecution: and further
instanceth in other places in Germany where the Proprietors are mixed of several
Princes, Earls, Free Cities, and Romish Ecclesiastics which causes in each of
them the like Variety in Religion, and some there being Lutherans and Papists
and others being Calvinists, Lutherans and Papists.

And thus we see instead of the Popes having nulled the Munster Peace cum
effectu, the Nulla fides servanda cum haereticis, has been nulled in Germany
by Popish Princes, and which if they had not done, Luthers aforesaid nulli
estis had been their doom: and the Empire it self had scarce been more than a
substantial Nullity, as I may say alluding to what Vantius in his Book, De
Nullitatibus makes such. In plain terms the Germans had not else been now a
Nation, nor would the Emperor again have been saluted by the Grand Signior, as
I have in some of the Comminatory Letters from the Port observed him called,
viz. Lord of few Regions: and this any one (I think) will grant who shall
consider that all the relaxation he has had either of intestine troubles or
Foreign between the years 1648 and 1680, has made his Circumstances as to
Power and Riches appear but just proportionable for holding his own (with the
help of his Neighbors) against the Turk.

I have observed great right done to the Emperors Politics in that Peace, by a
printed Panegyrical Oration made by Henricus Schmid, a Famous Professor of
Divinity in Tubing, for the Celebration of the Munster Peace, and wherein he
says, That the Emperor preserved thereby at least the lives of eleven times a
hundred and ninety two thousand Myriades of men (that is of 21 thousand, 1
hundred and 20 millions of men) and whereupon the Panegyrist pronounces, That
the World was blessed by a new Era from that Peace: and some of the Expressions
in that Oration for that purpose being very memorable, I shall here set down,
viz. Ferdinande Caesar Auguste, pie faelix triumphator, salve, Faelicior Iulio
Ca^sare qui gloriabundus fatebatur, undecies centena and nonaginta duo millia
hominum praeliis a se occisa; atque ita ut non veniat in hanc rationem stragem
Civilium bellorum, Tua, Imperator, qua major esse non potest, gloria and
claritudo erit, totidem Myriadas aut plures non mactasse sed servasse. Macte
animo isto tuo, imperator, etc. Tuis auspiciis novum Calendarium Iuliano long
melius ac emendatius orbi Christiano exhibetur, quod pacis era insignitur, etc.

The Panegyrical Orator did in his Calculation of the Lives saved by the
Emperor, use more than Poetical License, as any one will probably think who
shall read what Sir W. P. in a printed Discourse has mentioned of Critical
Persons having judged that there are but 320 Millions of Souls now in the
World: and according to some ingenious men's Calculations I have seen in print
concerning how much at a Medium each head may be supposed to add to the Riches
of a State per year, and thence making each to be therefore valuable at 80 l.
Sterling, the Panegyric may be said to have made the Emperor preserve for the
World by that Peace 1 Hundred 68 Thousand 9 Hundred and 60 Millions of Pounds
Sterling.

But leaving so exorbitant a Sum for the disposition and Assets of Dego's Will,
and ( raillery apart) accounting the lives of the hundreds of thousands slain
in Germany on the Score of the Excommunication of Princes and Emperors, (as I
have in p. 68 mentioned out of Erastus and suitably enough to Historical truth)
to have been valuable to the Empire at but half of 80 l. each, it may well be
supposed that it was a very vast Treasure that Germany has lost by its Wars
and preserved by its said Peace.

Yet is there one way assignable from which it may be deduced that the value of
what the Emperor preserved was as much really too short, as from the
Panegyrists account it appeared extravagant; and that is this, viz. The Emperor
by that Peace having kept so many from afterward destroying their own Souls by
destroying others Bodies, may be truly said to have preserved what was
invaluable, we know who having judged it that there is no proportion between
the wealth of the whole World and one Soul.

And now having by the deduction of the great Fact proved the Practicableness
of the happy continuance of the luscious blessings of Peace and Unity of
affections among Princes and their Subjects of different Religions, I shall
here in the Close of the Consideration of the same, entertain the Reader with
this last pleasant agreeable Scene of it, which Scene will represent to him the
fair Church built at Fredericsburg by the present Prince Elector, one of the
fairest Churches in Germany: and which was by him in our great year of fears
and jealou^ies and fatal discords, namely 1680, finished and dedicated to Holy
Concord and Union perhaps in Contra-distinction to the Term of Holy Church: and
its Dedication and Consecration was with great Devotion solemnized, and not
without the choicest Vocal and Instrumental Music that could be thought proper
to be used then, and with which the Offices of the Ceremony began: and the
Music being over, there was an inaugural Oration there made in the honor of
Holy Concord, and of the Dedication of the Church to it. And after that, the
Prince Elector (who is a Calvinist) engaged Doctor Fabritius Principal Divine
to his Electoral Highness, to preach there; and in the Afternoon of that day
another Sermon was there Preached by a Lut^^ran Divine, and in the Evening,
another Sermon was there made by a Roman Catholic Divine: and they all made
pious and learned Sermons in order to the propagating of Holy Concord,
applauding therein the Electors design, and with a most devout attention all
those three Divines were present at each others Sermons.

Nor was any of his Popish Subjects then afraid that he would infringe the
rights of the exercise of their Religion, because the Papal Interest had been
so active in bereaving his Family of the Bohemian Crown as well as of its
ancient Rights, many of which are forever abdicated from it by the Munster
Peace.

Thus on this Rock of the Munster Peace was the Holy Concord of holy Churchmen
discordant in opinions founded abroad by a Prince allied to the Crown of
England, and whereby the opposite Religionary Opinors quitted their Antipathys
against each other, and the Lion made under his Government to lie down with the
Lamb, at the same time that we groaned under a judgment more opprobrious than
that threatened to the Jews in Leviticus, namely, The sending of wild Beasts
among them, I mean that of our Populace being frightened and worried with
Chymaeras and with Chymeric Ideas of all Popish Princes being bound to have the
Council of Lateran by heart, and to observe it semper and ad semper, and
without the Latitude of Prudence which the very Definition of Moral Ver^ue
makes Essential to it (as I may say with allusion to Aristotle's sicut vir
prudens eam definiret) and to lose themselves in catching of Tartars, and to
have forgot the Saying of Solomon, That in the multitude of the People is the
King's honor, and the want of people is the destruction of the Prince, and
with the Idea of a Heterodox Prince swearing to maintain the Laws and yet
breaking them, and with another Idea as horrid and monstrous, namely, that men
might observe their Oaths acknowledging Allegiance to Kings and their Heirs and
Successors, and yet exclude their Heirs and Successors from the Throne by a Law.

It was an Observation worthy of the Doctor of the Gentiles, and which he
inculcated to the Corinthians, namely, that (...) the fashion of this World
passes away.

I have in this Discourse mentioned that in the year 1212, the Lateran Council
brought in Transubstantiation as an Article of Faith, and decreed Princes were
to be compelled to exterminate Heretics: but the World has been often
Transubstantiated since that time, and its substance that the Apostle calls its
fashion has been ever in transitu: and the fashion of that Lateran Council is
so far passed away that Protestant Writers are somewhat put to it to prove it
to have been a General one.

There was a scurvy fashion long since in the World abroad, and that was the
fashion of men's sowing a piece of red Cloth on their Garments, when the Monks
had Preached them into Crusados, for the Exterminium haereticorum, and by
Virtue of one of which Crusado's Bellarmine boasts that 100,000 of the
Albingenses were slain; but that fashion has been long left off in the World,
and the World been since no more outraged by it than by the Fraternity of the
Rosy Cross, nor so much as our English World has been by some who have
troubled it about the sign of the Cross.

It was a saying of the old Greek Philosophers, (...) and the Papal World is as
to many of its Politics quite another thing from what it was. Azorius in his
Instit. Moral. observed in his time, That it falls out often that that which
was not the common opinion a few years ago, now is.

Some of our timid Protestants who do not know the Papal, Lutheran and
Calvinian World, because they see it not in the Antique fashion they heard it
was dressed in 30 or 40 or 50 years ago, seem to have been asleep since the
Munster Treaty, and to have dreamed that such fashion would never alter, and
are like Epeminides that the old Fables mention to have fetched a sleep of
fifty years, and who found himself lost in the World at his wakening, wanting
the sight of the old fashion to show him where he was.

I have therefore a great Compassion for those Protestants who take the
measures of their Religion and Politics in a manner only out of the
Revelation, and who think that almost all the Predictions of that Book were
made only for England, and that England was made to be governed only by their
fancies, and their fancies to be given up only to fears of all ill fashions of
things and principles in the World being unalterable, tho there be scarce a
Chapter in that Sacred Book but what refers to Changes and Revolutions, and to
moving the unwieldy bulk of Empires by unexpected and irresistible Turns of
Fate.

The old Fashion of the Popish Writers asserting the Right of the Bishop of
Rome to take away Heretics lives by virtue of that Branch of the Judicial Law
of the Jews, Deuteronomy 17th, has been long exterminated by them. The words
of the Text are thus agreeable to the old Latin Translation, And he that out of
Pride shall refuse to obey the Commandment of that Priest which shall at that
time Minister before the Lord thy God, that man shall by the Sentence of the
Judge be put to death: and the Calvinistick Fashion of founding the practice of
Hereticidium on the Authority of the Judicial Law is passed away. I have in
this Discourse represented the Tenet of firing Heretical Cities, that is in the
Canon Law founded on Deuteronomy the 13th, to be chargeable on our late
Presbyterians, and that justly on the account of their having declared the
Judicial Law obligatory to us: and have showed what Calvin's Principle and
Practice was pursuant to that Law.

The Learned Klockius a Lutheran Lawyer in his large Volume de Aerario l. 2. c.
86. n. 10. endeavors to acquit the Divines of his Religionary persuasion from
the Tenet of Hereticide, and says. Nostri vero Theologi ut capitali paena
haereticos (contra quam plerique Calvinianorum cum Pontificiis censent) affici
nolunt, ita nec bonorum confiscationem, meo judicio, concederent: and Pellerus
in his Notes on Klockius refers to Thuanus about Servetus his Case, and says
of him, Igitur comprehensus, cum sententiam mutare nollet, re prius ex Iohannis
Calvini consilio cum Bernatibus. Tigurinis, Basileensibus and Schafusianis
Ministris communicata, tandem ad mortem damnatus est. Ejus doctrinam postea
Calvinus ( quod ei ex illius invidia conflaretur) proposuit and publicato libro
confutavit, quo in haereticos etiam gladio a magistratu animadvertendum esse
contendit. But Beza who was a Calvinist, and in the first Tome of his Works, p.
85. asserts the lawfulness of punishing Heretics with death, cites not only
Bullinger, who was a Calvinist, but Melanchton, who was a Lutheran, for the
same opinion: and Zanchius Operum Tome 4. Lib. 1. in tertium praeceptum
expressly owns that opinion.

The fashion of the Judicial Law of the Jews in that point was certainly most
proper for the Body of their Polity, as being thereunto adapted by the great
Legislator: but to say that all States and Polities are bound to observe it,
because God prescribed it to the Jews, is as senseless, as to say that all men
are bound to go clothed in Beasts Skins, because God did Apparel Adam and Eve
in that fashion.

I have in this Discourse thought it of some use to the public to have men's
understandings disabused, as to the obligatory power of the Judicial Law,
because men's erring therein has very much increased the fermentations in his
Majesty's Realms in several Conjunctures.

It is not unknown that Deuteronomy the 13th, and the 6th was urged to Queen
Elizabeth, as an Argument for putting the Queen of Scots to death.

Our Kingdom has likewise found by experience, That the Fifth Monarchy men,
have not fired more Guns against us out of the Revelation, than the Scotch
Presbyterians have out of the Judicial Law.

An Excellent Discourse called* Fair warning to take heed of the Scottish
Discipline, printed in the year 1649, and writ (I think) by Archbishop
Bramhall, asserts in Chap. 6. That it robs the Magistrate of his dispensative
Power: and says there, Our Disciplinarians have restrained it in all such
Crimes as are made Capital by the Judicial Law, as in the Case of Blood,
Adultery, Blasphemy, in which Cases they say the Offender ought to suffer death
as God has commanded. And if the life be spared as it ought not to be to the
Offenders, etc. And the Magistrate ought to prefer Gods strict Commandment
before his own corrupt Judgment, especially in punishing these Crimes which he
commands to be punished with death. The Books of the Scotch Discipline are
there particularly cited by the Author.

I have been expressly cautious in the following Discourse to exempt the
Reformed Churches abroad, from the Odium of those Principles of the form^er
Scotch and English Presbyterians that I have impugned as Disloyal and
Seditious; and was a Concurrer with many loyal Persons after part of it was
written in thinking that time had untaught those Principles to most of our
present Non-Conformists: and notwithstanding the many Seditious and Libellous
Pamphlets published by some of them against the Government both of Church and
State, yet such was the continuance of the Candor of the Kings Ministers to
them, as that some at the Trial of a poor seditious Nominal Protestant at
Oxford occasionally declared before that wretch, We know of no Presbyterian
Plot.

But as a Popish Ambassador sent to Queen Elizabeth began his Audience Speech
wherein he was to complain of the Turks having unprovoked broke their League
with his Master, Erupit tandem Ottomannorum Virus, it happened that about the
time of the finishing of this Discourse, the poison of some pretended
Protestants former Seditious Principles broke out again in a horrid Conspiracy
before mentioned, and which was confessed by several of the Conspirators at
their Executions, and another of whom owned the Doctrine of Resistance.

Our blessed Savior cautioning the Christian World in the words of, Beware of
false Prophets, says, You shall know them by their Fruits.

And our famous Whitaker has in his Controversies well resolved us that these
Fruits whereby false Prophets are to be distinguished from true, are rather
their Principles, Interpretations and Doctrines, than their Lives, it being
generally observed that the Founders of Sects are exemplary for the austerity
of their lives, and for coming in Sheeps clothing, as our Saviors words are.

What the Principles of the Non-Conformists in King James his Reign were, I
have shown in this Discourse, with a Remark on the Political Consideration,
that after the era of the Gunpowder Treason induced them to give a Scheme
thereof voluntarily to the Government, and namely, that they might thereby
avoid the receiving a Test from it: and no doubt it was obvious to them that
while their Principles were hid and concealed from the State, the warding off
of Faux his Dark Lanthorn would not have left the Government secure, till it
had likewise got the Non-Conformist^ dark Lanthorn from them, I mean by the
publication of their Tenets.

Of their Principles shortly after 41, the Scotch Covenant was a sufficient
Scheme. And tho the Tenets of Presbyterians and Independents relating to their
Forms of Church Government are enought known as is likewise the degree of their
Complicating Principles of Sedition with the same, between the years 1641 and
1660: yet from that last year to this present one, they have not by the
publication of any Confession of Faith or Scheme of their Tenets; satisfied the
Government that all their Principles are consistent with the Civil Polity
thereof, and that they have renounced those former Tenets of theirs that once
destroyed it, and particularly that intolerably seditious one, viz. That if the
Magistrate will not reform the World, they may.

But because several of their Ecclesiastics have not renounced the
Irreligionary part of their former Principles (and which were so destructive to
the Sacred Persons of Princes and their State and Government, and of all Humane
Society) the University of Oxford in their Convocation July 21st, Anno 1683.
did to their great honor pass their Judgment and Decree against certain
particular Books of Non-Conformists, and Jesuits and others, wherein those
Tenets and Principles were owned: and the very showing of those Tenets to the
World by such learned and loyal hands, has been (I believe) useful in making
many of the Loyal Lay Non-Conformists withdraw from others of them they thought
therewith infected; a thing that might well be supposed naturally to happen
when those of them to whom the term of Sober Party was most due, observed that
the publication of the Dissenters Sayings and of the Censure of their Tenets,
had not occasioned their Leaders to publish other Dissenters Sayings, or Tenets
that impugned Disloyalty and Sedition, and promoted obedience to Government,
and what several Writers of the Church of Rome have been formerly observed to
do upon the Worlds minding how much the Principles of the Jesuits had shook
the Thrones of Kings, and as particularly Father Caron in his Remonstrantia
Hybernorum has done, and there citing 250 Popish Authors who deny the Pope's
Power to depose Kings.

And no doubt but Dissenters late Omissions in this kind, and Commissions in
another, will awaken the Magistracy to require from all Protestant Recusants
such an exact Inventory of their Tenets as has not yet been given it: and the
rather for that it is not by any Dissenters denied that the Sovereign is so far
Custos utriusque tabulae, as to be allowed to require all Religionary Parties
to give him an account of their Principles, and to live according to the Rule
of them.

Thus in the Dutch States the Magistrates of every place where any Sect of the
Heterodox is tolerated, are religiously careful, first to inform themselves
exactly of all their Tenets and Principles, and to see that they hold no
opinion prejudicial to the Constitutions of their Government: and none doubts
but that the entire Body of the Tenets or Principles of the Dissenters to the
Gallican Church, is as conspicuous to that Church and State, and indeed to the
World as can be desired, the present agreement of which with the Measures of
Loyalty I have shown in this Discourse.

Who has there read the Hugonots Sayings published with any stain to their
Loyalty, or has seen any of their Tenets branded for Sedition by an University
or College in France? But our Protestant Recusants having had here the liberty
by Act of Parliament to enjoy their peculiar ways of Religious Worship in their
own Families, with the toleration of four others of the same persuasion to be
present, before all their Principles and Tenets have been notified to the
Government, is an instance of greater Indulgence shown by the Government here
to such Heterodox, than (I believe) can be paralleled in any Country whatsoever.

All dangers are naturally multiplied in the dark: and it is a diminution of
our dread of the very Jesuits Principles, that they are generally known: but
if the Body of their Principles were as much unknown, as are those of
Protestant Recusants, yet would the public be more immediately concerned in
having first an accurate account of those of the latter, as being more numerous.

It may be well thought a Bankrupt Church whose Principles are latitant: and
any men's begging from the Magistrate Indulgence to a Principle of Sedition,
would be as shameful as the Insolence of a Beggar not only begging twenty Pound
(as our Comaedian said) but begging a Leg or an Arm: and not like a man's asking
me who stands in my way as I am traveling on the Road that I would not ride
over him, but that he may mount into the Saddle whose Principles direct him to
ride over me.

It was well observed by Lipsius in his Notes in Seneca, That Naturae quodam
Instinctu ea maleficia coercent homines and puniunt quae societatem convellunt.

But as to any Outrages from any Religionaries which are either prejudicial to
the Bodies of particular Persons, or even Convulsive of the Bodies of States
and Kingdoms (and to which the Actors might be inclined by their particular
heats, and not the general light of their avowed Principles) I account that
Complaints against such will soon evaporate into Air or be buried in Earth, and
with some allusion to the words of, Let the dead bury the dead, I may say, let
Plots bury Plots, and Shams Shams, and let any Seditious Protestants and
Seditious Papists on the Compensation of their Crimes forbear troubling others
by calling one another Criminals; and the Figure of the Body of their Parties
can no more be altered by the unevenness and exorbitance of the actings of
particular Persons, than is the rotundity of the Earth by the ruggedness of
Rocks or protuberance of Mountains.

And that where one Papist goes out of the World at the back door of Justice,
for the Treason of Clipping and Coining, twenty of the more numerous body of
the Protestants do so, is not to be wondered at: but the id ipsum to be
regarded in any reflections made on a Religion by occasion of its Criminals, is
its Principles: and if it could be proved that any Caetus of men were allowed
by the Church of England to assert the lawfulness of that Treason, (as both
Papists and Presbyterians have the lawfulness of the Doctrine of Resistance)
that indeed would have the weight of a just Reflection on our CHVRCH.

Tho several dissolute and nominal Protestants may possibly have invented and
forged as many Shams and Calumnious Accusations against other Protestants and
Papists, as if they had believed the Practice of Calumny to be lawful, yet has
any of them published in Print the Tenet of the lawfulness of it; or its being
a poor Peccadillo? Who knows not that some particular Divines of the Church
of England by the turbulence of their several dispositions, have enflamed
differences and divisions in our Church and State? But who can charge them from
doing this by Communication of Councils with their Superiors, and by
instruction from them? Were any of them charged by Proclamations for doing any
thing of that nature, as some Popish Recusants were by his Majesty's of Ian.
16. 1673. for chiefly occasioning the intestine divisions among us, and by his
Majesty's Proclamation of December 2d, 1680. for fomenting of differences among
his Loyal Protestant Subjects?

But yet this Fact tho thus by the Government charged on some ill men of that
Religionary persuasion would not have moved me to reflect with the lea^t heat
on the Order of Jesuits in this Discourse (by whom so many of our Roman
Catholics are conducted) but for their own Proclamations of their Principles
in their Books, and particularly as to the point of Calumny, the only Engine by
which Divisions could be wrought among Protestants; and but for their setting
up that Doctrine heretofore, without leave from the Pope's Canon Law, and
backing it with another to fright any Fools or Knaves from disparaging or even
calumniating them, and for their making use and application of these Doctrines
since the Pope had damned them by a Proclamation, I mean his Edict of March 79:
and but for Father Parsons having so scandalously exposed the narrowness of his
Soul, and the poor Ideas he had of Humane Nature, and even of the Character of
a Gentleman by saying what I have in p. 61. cited out of his Book of The
Succession, viz. That many Iealousies, Accusations and Calumniations must needs
^^ght on the Party that is of different Religion from the State and Prince
under whom he lives.

As there is very little in this Discourse that reflects on any Principles of
the Romanists that may be called Religionary, so neither have I troubled my
self to attacque the Tenets of the Society of the Jesuits, and of other
Casuists condemned by this Pope, that do not hominum societatem convellere, and
it may well be supposed that I having partly grounded my Conjectures of the
happy Future State of England on the former fashion of Polemical Writing being
passed away, could not be much tempted to Controversy.

The Jesuits and Casuists may still hold the 23d Tenet branded in the Pope's
^ecree as long as they will, without any disturbance from my Pen, viz. Faith in
its large sense only from the Evidence of the Creation, or some such Motive is
sufficient for Justification, and so likewise the 46th Tenet there, viz.
frequent Confession and Communion even in those that live as Heathens is a Mark
of Predestination, and many other Tenets there relating to Religion, and which
the Pope with so great a Pastoral Solicitude has damned as at least
scandalous and pernicious in Practice, and has prohibited to be defended by
any under the pain of Excommunication, ipso facto.

But there are other Tenets by him in that Decree condemned, that I have in
this Discourse dilated on as Convulsive of Humane Society, which the Pietas in
patriam occasioned in me such transports of passion against, that I wished he
had signalized with sharper words of Censure than those beforementioned, and
that I thought the Excommunicatio Major with the Ceremony of lighted Torches
too little for, and even an ordinary Anathema in their case to be a Complement
or a kind of sham censuring them as abominable and not good, or somewhat like
the Censure pro forma shot off against the Munster Peace: and I supposed that
if he had Sentenced them to be absolutely in themselves evil, he would have
satisfied every one that he had put the World out of their Gunshot by his
putting it out of his power to dispense with them.

However finding that Decree of great moment to Christendom, and yet by the
generality of Papists or Protestants to have been not much more regarded than
are the Copies of the Dialogues between Pasquin and Marphorio that come here, I
have deliberately Surveyed it and done it what right I could. And by occasion
hereof do here call to mind a Remark on the Papacy I met with in a Pamphlet of
one of our Dissenters, viz. That if the Pope were a good man, he might do a
great deal of good.

Tho for sometime after I had begun this Discourse, I was somewhat a Stranger
to the great Character of the present Pope, (and so continued till reading the
Preface of Dr. Burnet's very learned Book of the Regale, I sound he there
Celebrated him in these words, viz. That he is a man of great probity, and that
on his advancement to the Papacy, he conceived a very ill opinion of the whole
Order of the Jesuits,) I since found cause from the Universal Concurrence of
all Impartial men about the same, to have the firmer opinion of the quiet of
England, and do expect from the influences of such a Pope on the Loyalty and
Religion of the Roman Catholics of England, some advance of its happiness.

Tho most men may have only little Ideas of the Deity as of somewhat above the
Clouds, that as a great Cipher only surrounds the World, yet the wiser few who
have particularly observed the watchful Eye of Providence over the Critical
passages, and windings and turnings in their own life's, cannot but be sensible
that in the designation of persons at stated times to be at the Helm of the
Church of Rome, (and who are necessarily to have so great a share in the
External, and a much greater in the Internal Government of the World) the great
Governor of it, and preserver of men is no unconcerned Spectator.

It is (I think) most highly probable that at a time when the World being
filled with the Jesuits Principles and Casuistick distinctions, Virtue it self
was grown an empty Name, and the Casuists Project of finishing Transgression,
and making an end of Sin in a subtle way and contrary to the plain Method
intended by our Savior, had in a great part of the World almost finished the
most Vital part of Christian Religion, I mean plain and downright Morality, and
at a time when some Virtuosi in Italy and elsewhere half-witted and half
Atheists taking it for granted that in what hearts soever the Jesuits and
Casuists Religionary Model had prevailed, the simplicity of the Gospel was
extinguished, were observed to talk of Albumazar's fond prediction of the
Christian Religion lasting but about 1460 years, and Criticizing of the time
from whence its promulgation and likewise the promulgation of those Casuistical
Tenets bore date, did profanely insinuate their Miscreant-Conceptions of the
Christian Religion not lasting till the time assigned in the Scripture for
Christ's surrendering his Mediatory Kingdom to his Father. I say it is most
highly probable that at such a time (and when the Jesuits Interest too, had so
much Prosperity as to tempt them to think that the Mountain of their Religion
should never be moved) that nothing less than the great Virtue and Courage of
this Pope appearing by his said Decree could secure Virtue it self and the true
Christian Morality; and give the World occasion to say with some Alteration of
the Question put to Esther, viz. Who knows not that he is come to Rome' s See
for such a time as this is?

The Mountainous heap of Rubbish in the Jesuits and other Casuists Principles
(and even in the Canon Law) appears very stupendous to the World, but
considering the Christian Heroical Acts of this Pope (and who for his severity
against the abuses of Indulgences, has been by some Papists called the
Lutheran Pope (as I said) and for his anger against the Jesuits Principles
been called the Iansenist Pope by others) I think another great Question in the
Prophet Zechary may be here not improperly applied, viz. Who art thou O great
Mountain before Zerubbabel?

Little did the Jesuits think that when they Crowned the Papacy with a double
Crown, I mean of its infallibility in Law and likewise in Fact (a Crown much
more glorious than its Triple one) any Pope would ever uncrown their Principles
and expose their baldness to the World: and little do they who fear that ever
this Pope will occasionally dispense with any men's practicing these Principles,
think of the security they have against the same from his inflexible Virtue and
perfect Antipathy to injustice, and which are judged to be so inherent in his
Nature that I shall here occasionally say that as I was somewhat a Stranger
formerly to the Character of this Pope, so I believe some of the Plot-witnesses
were that reflected on him so ignominiously: for undoubtedly had it been
understood by them, they would never have thought their Credibility could have
outlived their first attacquing it.

It may possibly be here objected by some Critical Inspectors into the late
Papal Transactions that Alexander the 7th (as this Pope observes in the
beginning of his said Decree) did first damn some of the Jesuits Principles,
viz. in the year 1665, and that Guymenius shortly after in that year appearing
in Print as a Champion for the Principles so damned, the College of Sorbon
shortly after that damned the Work of Guymenius in the 11th of May the same
year; and that in the latter end of June so shortly following in the same year,
the same Pope Alexander the 7th, damned that very Sorbon Censure of Guymenius;
and that therefore it is possible the great Scene of Virtue appearing in this
Popes said Decree may with a short turn of Apostolical Power receive too the
Fate of Pageantry and presently disappear, and that the great Mountain which
his Faith has removed into the midst of the Sea, may in little more than the
twinkling of an Eye return to its old place.

But in Answer to which I shall do that right to the Papacy to clear the
mistake in the objection, and inform the Reader that tho Alexander the 7th did
Ex Cathedra, damn that Sorbon-Censure as aforesaid, yet it appears out of the
Condemnatory Bull it self, that what that Pope there did was not out of favor
to Guymenius or the Jesuits themselves or their Tenets: and that to satisfy
the World in that point he there gives the reason for his damning the
Sorbonists Censure, namely, because it intermedled in Censuring some other
Propositions or Principles of the Jesuits that concerned the Authority of the
Pope, the Jurisdiction of Bishops, the Office of the Parish Priests, and the
Privileges granted by Popes; and but for the Sorbons complicating which with
their Censure of the other Scandalous Principles of the Jesuits, no doubt but
the Sorbon Censure had stood as a Rock unshaken.

Let therefore such who fear every thing, fear that this great Pope will after
his said Condemnatory Decree appear, (...) or Self-Condemned, while I observe
it for the honor of his Justice that he made that Decree, and for the honor
of his Prudence that before Nature had caused the detestable Principles therein
censured silently to evaporate, he gave the World this loud warming of them, as
it likewise may be for the honor of that great Seminary of the Divines of our
Church of England, our University of Oxford observed, that before the Seditious
Principles and Tenets of Jesuits and some Dissenters came to be naturally
exterminated out of the English World by fear and shame, they notified them to
this Age, and to Posterity.

There is no Subject that has since the year 1641, more employed the English
Press than that of Liberty of Conscience pro and con: and the fiercest and
sharpest of the Writings concerning it, were what passed between the
Independents and Presbyterians on the occasion of Presbytery's great Effort, to
make the English Nation by one short general turn Proselyted to its Model, and
when it pushed for the auspicious fate of former great Religionary Conversions
happening as it were simul and semel, and when Nations seemed to be like the
Hyena, which having but one Backbone cannot turn except it turn all at once.

But the Independents observing the Kingdom and Presbytery frowning on one
another, thought they could do nothing more popular than to take the Arguments
they found in the many Pamphlets of the Presbyterians lying on every Stall for
toleration under the old Hierarchy, and turn them upon Presbytery, and every
one then who had fears and jealousies of the Arbitrariness of Presbytery,
seemed to be a well wisher to those Books for Liberty of Conscience; and the
destroying of the Credit of Presbytery by Books that had so much contentious
fire in them, was really an acceptable sweet smelling Sacrifice to the Nation.

And after the King's Restoration tho some few Books were writ of that Subject
(and with much more Candor than the others) yet the Yoke of the King's
Ecclesiastical Laws was so easy to the People, as that the Writing of Books
against it was not encouraged by Popular Applause.

The King's Declaration of Indulgence afterward appearing (and as not gained by
dint of Pen but ex mero motu) was applauded by some few particular Writers
among the Popish and Protestant Recusants discoursing in Print at their ease,
of Liberty of Conscience.

But as if Nature meant that Books of that Subject should no more here divert
the curious World, the Empire toleration had thereby gained, did presently
labor under its own weight, and the Non-Conformists being jealous of that
Declaration proving a President of the Prerogatives suspending Acts of
Parliament in general, and suspecting that the Popish Recusants would have the
better of that Game, as supposed to have many great Court-Cards here and abroad
in the World and likely to have more, while the Protestant Recusants had not so
good in their hands (tho yet they had here what amounted to the point in
Picquet, I mean the advantage of their Numbers) did presently thereupon cause
all the Cards to be thrown up: but first had in Concert with the dealers
provided for the packing them to their own advantage in a new Deal.

In plain English, some Loyal Persons and firm Adherents to the Church of
England in the House of Commons, thinking that Declaration illegal, (and
whether justly or no, I here presume not in the least to question) endeavored
tanquam pro aris and focis to get that Declaration Cancelled, and knowing they
could not effect the same without the help of the Dissenters Party in
Parliament engaged their help therein, by giving them hopes to carry an Act of
Parliament for their Indulgence: but what a little foresight would have made
appear to them impossible to be gained, for many Considerations too obvious to
be named.

And the natural result of this Fact (which is on all hands confessedly true)
cannot but be the making of the former fashion of Polemical writing for liberty
of Conscience to pass away.

We have since seen some few Florid Sheets published by some of the Dissenting
Clergy on that Subject, but they have made no other Figure then that of the
poor Resemblances of Flowers extracted by Chimical Art out of their Ashes: and
any little shaking them in the Glass of Time must make them presently fall in
pieces.

I have in this Discourse expressly owned my having no regret against any due
or Legal Relaxation of the Penal Laws against Recusants: but what any due or
legal way may be therein, I enquire not.

The power of the King in dispensing with the Penalties in case of particular
Persons was not (that I hear of) in the least Controverted in the Debates of
the Commons about that Declaration. And Fuller in his Church History relates,
that when Bishop Williams was Lord Keeper, there was a Toleration granted under
the Great Seal to Mr. John Cotton a Famous Independent Divine, for the free
exercise of his Ministry notwithstanding his dissenting in Ceremonies, so long
as done without disturbance to the Church: and the lawfulness of which
particular Indulgence (I suppose) none in that Age controverted, as I think
none would any thing of that kind in this.

But if this Question of Toleration had not here been at the end of its Race,
and if no such thing had happened as the Declaration of Indulgence, and
Dissenters thereby manumitted from Penal Laws saying, Soul take thy ease, and
presently Acting the Part of felo de se, by effecting the Cancelling of that
Declaration, and if the Controversy were now to begin to start forward, I
account it would cause but a very short fermentation among us.

For no Books need be writ to prove the lawfulness of what an Act of Parliament
has permitted to every private Family, and to a certain number of other
persons to participate therein with them. And if Dissentership would now call
for more Toleration, its very being called on to name its Tenets in order ^o
the security of the Government in granting it to more persons to assemble
together in enjoying it, its very naming them would (I believe) soon perimere
litem in the Case: and some of its Tenets would perhaps appear too little, and
others too great to require the formality of Debate.

It is even ridiculous to suppose that any Jesuits and Dissenters would now
dare to demand Toleration for the Principles of the Crown-Divinity of each,
mentioned in the Oxford Censure. None of them would now dare to be Confessors
of Religionary Principles that would make Kings Martyrs.

And as I think that the Pope needed not crave Aid from his Vatican, nor the
Oxford-Convocation from their Bodleian Library to confute monstrous Tenets
Condemned by either (for in this Case according to the words of Tertullian
advers. Valent. Demonstrare solummodo, destruere est) so I likewise think that
both Popish and Protestant Recusants will be ashamed to crave Aid of Toleration
from the Magistracy for Principles they are ashamed to own, or indeed for any
but what they shall first own, and the rather when our Protestants shall
recollect with what vigorous Expedition the great Owners of that Name in
Germany, published their Religionary Confessions, as Alsted tells us in his
Chron^logia testium veritatis, where he makes mention of the Augustan
Confession, tendered to Charles the 5th, and the States of the Empire in the
year 1530, and of the Confessio Suevica in the same year, and of the Confessio
Basileensis in the next year, and of the Confessio Helvetica in the year 1556,
and of all the other great Protestant Confessions exhibited severally to the
World before the year 1573.

Such of our Dissenters therefore who have to this year 1684, made it their
business to be Anti-Confessors by hiding many of the particularities of their
Principles, and giving the World cause perhaps to say, Difficilius est inven^re
quam vincere, and who yet assume the name of Protestancy, will perhaps hardly
think it possible for them to gain Toleration for their further being called by
that Name, without showing the Title of their Principles to it.

As on the account of what I have said it would be a Persecution to the World,
for the most ingenious men to trouble it with Discourses of the lawfulness of
Toleration, so it would too be to trouble it with Discourses of the
unlawfulness of denying Toleration to men who either deny their Principles, or
deny to give an account of them: a duty that can plead as clear a jus Divinum
for it self as any Form of Church Government, and by Virtue of which Christians
are to be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks them a reason
of the hope that is in them, with meekness and reverence.

There are some Principles to which it is by all agreed, that it is unlawful to
give Toleration, namely, to those that disturb Civil Society; nor would it
appear otherwise than ridiculous to the hoodwink't sober Party of any Sect,
that when the Magistrates reprove them in those words of our Savior, ye
worship ye know not what, the Magistrates by tolerating them at that time
should give cause to others to tell them, ye tolerate ye know not what.

I have observed it in the Course of my reading, that there is one great point
of Religion on which the hinge of Loyalty does very much turn, that several
Eminent Papists and Non-Conformists, have not dared to speak their plain agreed
sense of, and as to which it may therefore seem very rational that they should,
and that is, How far the Civil Laws of Princes or the Municipal Laws do bind
the Conscience, a Point that the Council of Trent could not be brought to
Define; and herein it is obvious to consider that tho it is on all hands granted
that in any thing contrary to the Divine Law natural and positive, those Laws
do not bind the Conscience, and that the jus Divinum of the Papacy, Presbytery,
or Independency would not be caught with a why not, on the holding the Question
in the Affirmative, that Humane Laws do bind the Conscience in things not
contrary to the Law Divine, yet are the Adherents to those Religionary Models
conscious to themselves, that in many particulars necessary to bring them into
practice, there must be a Sanction of them by Penal Municipal Laws, and they
hoping to have the Magistracy and its Power on their side, and to Act in
Concert with them according to that Saying of the Emperor to his Bishop,
Iungamus gladios, and knowing that the Authority of the Magistrate to support
both Religion and Loyalty, and for the Custody of (...) Tables, has as clear a
jus Divinum as their Plat-forms can have, and that therefore the Civil Power
(...) not let its jure-Divinity be taken too by any with a why not (as it would
be if the Question were held wholly in the Negative) they have in their Writings
been generaly obscure and short in that point, and have hoped by their power
and interest to keep the World from calling on them to explain.

But I have in my occasional Converse with some of the most learned of the
Nonconforming Clergy observed them in Discourse to speak out their minds
plainly and Categorically enough that Humane Laws do not bind the Conscience,
and to account it an absurd thing to make any Penal Law bind the Conscience
even in matters purely Civil, and wherein there is no pretense of any things
enjoined concerning the Worship of God, and yet where the things under
Penalties enjoined are of great importance to the State.

The men of somewhat hot rather then distinguishing heads, tho they know that
Humane Laws are necessarily Penal, and tho they believe that Oeconomics do best
subsist by their Wives and Children and Servants, being bound to observe those
their lawful Commands by the Tie of Religion that they intended should be
effectually obeyed, have not considered that Politics would likewise thereby
be best preserved, nor learned to distinguish the Penal Laws where the
Magistrate intended to oblige the Subject in point of Fault, and where only in
point of the Penalty: but our clear-headed and loyal hearted Sanderson who may
well come under the account of (...) as to those Opiners, has for the honor
of the Church of England's Principles in his 8th Lecture (and there de lege
paenali) well taught us in what Cases Penal Laws oblige in Conscience; and
showed that they may so bind where the Legislator did intend to oblige the
Subject Ad culpam etiam and non solum ad paenam: and in that Case says he,
Certum est eos teneri ad observandum id quod lege praecipitur, nec satisfacere
officio si parati sint poenam lege constitutam subire, and where he further
says, That the mind and intention of the Legislator is chiefly seen in the
Proeme of his Law, in quo (says he there) ut acceptior sit populo lex, solet
Legislator Consilii sui de ea lege ferenda causas, and rations expo^e^e quam
sit lex iusta, quam fuerit tollendis incommodis and abusibus necessaria, quam
futura sit Reip. utilis.

There is a particular Principle of moment worthy of the Magistrates Survey,
that relates to the Gathered Churches, and that is a Principle made a necessary
ingredient in the Constitution of of those Churches by a Divine of the same
Authority among them, as Bishop Sa^^erson is in the Church of England, and whom
I occasionally beforementioned, and that is* Mr. John Cotton B. D. who in a
Pamphlet of his printed at London in the year 1642 Ent^tuled. The true
Constitution of a particular visible Church proved by Scripture, wherein is
briefly demonstrated by Questions and Answers, what Officers, Worship and
Government Christ has ordained in his Church (and in the Title Page whereof is
this place of Scripture, viz. Jer. 50. 5. They shall ask the way to Sion with
their faces thitherward, saying* Come let us join our selves to the Lord in a
perpetual COVENANT that shall not be forgotten) in p. 1st, makes his first
Question, what is a Church? And the Answer is, The Church is a mystical Body
whereof Christ is the head; the Members and Saints called out of the World and
united together in one Congregation by an holy COVENANT, to Worship the Lord
and to Edify one another in all his holy Ordinances.

And in another Book of his printed at London in the year 1645 called, The way
of the Churches of Christ in New England, his third Proposition is this, viz.
For the joining of faithful Christians into the Fellowship and Estate of a
Church, we find not in Scripture that God has done it any other way than by
entering of them all together (as one man) into an holy COVENANT with himself to
take the Lord (as the head of the Church) for their God and to give up
themselves to him to be his Church and People: which implies their submitting
of themselves to him, and one to another in his fear, and their walking in
professed subjection to all his Ordinances, their cleaving one to another as
fellow Members of the same Body in Brotherly Love and Holy Watchfulness unto
Mutual Edification.

He there partly props up the Obligation of this Church Covenant on the Jewish
Economy mentioned in the Book of Deuteronomy and other places of the Old
Testament.

The reasonableness of Subjects not entering into Religionary Covenants without
the Consent of the Pater patriae, may be inferred from the old Testament, where
in Numbers c. 30 the Parent has a power given for the controuling of the
Childrens Vows not entered into by his consent; but since these Principles of a
new Church Covenant may seem to introduce a new Ecclesiastical Law without the
King's privity and consent (a thing that if our very Convocation should presume
to do, would bring them within a Praemunire,) and since the whole power of
reforming and ordering of all matters Ecclesiastical is by the Laws in express
words annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm (and particularly by the 1st
of Elizabeth) and since that it has been said, that even without an Act of
Parliament, a new Oath or Covenant cannot be introduced among the King's
Subjects, and moreover since all the famous Religionary Confessions of the
Protestant Churches abroad, assert nothing of any such Church Covenant, and
since Covenants and Associations have lately heard so ill in the Kingdom, I
think the nature and terms of this Independent Covenant ought to be laid as
plain before the Eye of the Government as was the Scotch Presbyterian one.

Those words of Mr. Cotton of the entering them all together as one man into an
holy Covenant, carry some thing like the same sound of one and all, and tho
their thus entering into it to take the Lord as the head of his Church for their
God, and to give up themselves to him to be his Church and People, may be a
plausible beginning of this new Church Covenant in nomine Domini, yet the
following words, of submitting themselves to him and to one another in his
fear, and their cleaving one to another as fellow Members of the same Body in
Brotherly Love and Holy Watchfulness, are words that (I think) the Magistracy
ought to watch, and to see that Dissenters have a very sound form of words
prescribed to them in this Case, if it shall think fit to have the same
continued.

I have found the Assertion of a Church Covenant as Essential to the Form of a
true Independent Church in many other of their Books, and do suppose that this
Covenant being laid as Cornerstone in the building of their Churches by Divine
Right, it must last as long as Independency it self: and of its lasting still,
I met with an Indication from a Loyal and Learned Official of the
Court-Christian, who told me that tho several of the Dissenters called
Presbyterians have been easily persuaded to repair to the Divines of the Church
of England that they were admonished to confer with, and had upon Conference
with them come to Church and took the Sacrament, yet he thought that some of
another Class of Dissenters were possessed with a Spirit of incurable
Contumacy, by reason of their Principles having tied them together to one
another by a Covenant.

And if it shall therefore appear to the Magistrates that they are thus
Conference-proof and (as I may say) Reason-proof by virtue of their Covenant,
it will then be found that no one M^mber of a gathered Church can turn to ours,
without the whole Hyena-like turning, and perhaps some of the Lords the Bishops
may think it hereupon proper humbly to advise his Majesty to null by a
Declaration the Obligation of this Covenant as his Royal Father did that of the
Presbyterian Covenant.

In the mean time the Consideration of the Principles of Independecy thus
seeming to have cramped the Consciences of its followers with a Covenant (that
is at least unnecessary, and must naturally be a troublesome imposition to men
of thought and generous Education who love to perform Moral Offices without
entering into Covenant or giving Bond so to do) may serve to let men see how the
Pastorage of the Church of England treats them like Gentlemen, and may serve to
awaken their Compassion for their deluded Countrymen whom they see fr^ghtened
by their Teachers into a fancy of the unlawfulness of a Ceremony, and yet
emboldened by them into the belief and practice of a Covenant without the
King's Consent, and from which Persons we should perhaps quickly receive Alarms
of Persecution, if the Government should impose any Covenant or Test on them in
order to Loyalty, tho never so necessary for the public Peace.

But the World is aweary of the umbrage Sedition has found among denominations
of Churches, and of judging of Trees by their Shadows, or otherwise than by
their Fruit, that is by their Principles: and for the happiness of the present
State of England, after we have by many Religion-Traders been troubled with
almost as many Marks of true and false Churches as there are of Merchants
Goods, Nature seems to have directed the People to agree in this indeleble
Character and Mark of a false Church, namely, one whose Principles are Disloyal.

The Genius of England is so bent upon Loyalty in this Conjuncture, that a
disloyal Principle does jar in the Ears of ordinary thinking men like a false
string in the Ears of a Critical Lutenist, and the which he knows that Art or
Nature can never tune: and upon any Churches valuing themselves on the
intrinsic worth or the weight of their Principles as most opposite to Falsehood,
men generally now take into their hands the Touchstone and the Scales of
Loyalty, and do presently suspect any Church that refuses to bring its
Principles to be touched and weighed, and they will not now allow the
Reputation of a visible Church to any body of Men, whose Principles relating to
Loyalty, shall not first be made visible.

Nor can it be otherwise thought by the impartial, than that Men's Consciousness
of somewhat of the Turpitude of some of their Principles, restrains them from
bringing them to appear in public View, and according as Cicero in his de fin.
bon. and mal. answers Epicurus (who said that he would not publish his Opinion
lest the people might perhaps take offense at it,) viz. Aut tu eadem ista dic
in judicio, aut si coronam times, dic in senatu. Nunquam facies. Cur; nisi quod
turpis est Oration.

I who thus urge the Reasonableness and Necessity of men's being Confessors of
their Principles of Loyalty, have frankly exposed one of mine own in p. 131.
and which I say there that I account the great fundamental one for the quiet of
the World as well as of a Man's own Conscience, viz. That no man is warranted
by any Intention of advancing Religion, to invade the right of the Sovereign
Power that is inherent in Princes by the municipal Laws of their Countries: and
I have mentioned the same in p. 136. as owned by the Nonconforming Divines in
King James his time.

Tho I believe as firmly as any man, that the Christian Religion does plainly
forbid the Resistance of Authority, and that his Majesty's Royal Power is
immediately from God and no way depends on any previous Election or Approbation
of the people, yet since the Sons of the Church of England are sufficiently
taught both that Doctrine, and likewise that human Laws in the point of their
Allegiance do bind the Conscience, and since other men who err in Principles of
Loyalty may sooner be brought to see the Absurdity of their Error by the known
Laws of the Land, than by Argumentations from Scripture which may admit of
Controversy, and since his Majesty has been pleased to expect the Measures of
our Obedience from the Laws, and that our English Clergy while in the late
Conjuncture they have so universally preached up Loyalty, have so religiously
accorded with the Measures of the Laws, and have therein (as I may say) showed
themselves Apostolical Pastors, and since the persons whose Complaints of the
danger of Popery are most loud, do join therewith their Exclamations against
Arbitrary or Illegal Power, and seem to join Issue in the point that they are
willing that the Power that is by Law inherent in the Crown should be preserved
to it, I thought it most useful in the present Conjuncture to assert the
Principle in these Terms I have done: and I the rather chose to do it, because
I thought that the security of the Crown is by some Laws well provided for,
whose Obligation admits of no Doubt, I mean, those whereby Men have been
obliged to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.

But moreover as I considered it to be one great valuable Right inherent by Law
in our Princes to secure the Continuance of the Succession in their Line, so I
likewise judged the legal Right of Princes to Succeed according to Proximity of
Blood, to be unalterable, and therefore having my eye on the prevention of
further Scandal to Protestancy from the Exclusion, I introduced that Principle
so worded as aforesaid, that by dilating thereon as I have done, I might bring
the Reader the better prepared to my Casuistical Discussion of the Oaths.

The Reader will find at the end of this Discourse the Casuistical Discussion
of the Obligation to the King's Heirs and Successors resulting from the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy, by me promised in p. 214, and the occasion of my
writing which is likewise there mentioned.

It was wholly writ in the time that the Question of the Succession made the
greatest noise among us and was then by me Communicated to several of my
Friends in Terms as herewith printed without any thing since added or
diminished, and both it and the Discourse (which contains so many things
naturally Previous to the Consideration of that Question) would have been long
since published* but partly for the various Accidents of Business and Sickness
that necessarily interrupted me in the Writing of the latter.

And tho perhaps the Publication of the former in the time of the Sessions of
our late Parliaments, might have been more significant, than after the Volly of
Loyal Addresses shot of manifesting the general just zeal against the Exclusion
(of which Addresses I yet observed none to mention any thing of the Obligations
to Allegiance to the King's Heirs and Successors from the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy) it may be said that the subsequent Births of Fate have not
restrained the possibility of its usefulness in future times: and tho Heaven
may be propitious to our Land in the blessing it according to the Loyal Style
of the Addresses, namely, in his Majesty's Line continuing on the English
Throne as long as the Sun and Moon endure, yet many and many may be the
Conjunctures when a supposed Heterodox Prince shining like the Sun in the
Firmament of the English State, and regularly moving in the Line of the Law and
his own Religion, may attract the dull Vapors of Fears and Jealousies again,
as another glorious Prince has done, and the exhalations of which may cast
such Mists before Men's understanding Faculties as to hinder them from seeing
their way in the observance of the Oaths they took: and therefore as a (...) or
premuniment (as I called it) against our being future Enemies to our selves,
and against poor little Mortals (as it were) standing for the Office of
Conservators of Gods glory, while they are losing their own Souls by Perjury,
and against some Loyal Timid People troubling themselves with falling Skies and
fears of Gods not upholding his Church (just as Galen tells us of a Melancholy
Man who by often reading it in the Poets how Atlas supported Heaven with his
Shoulders, was often in a Panic fear least Atlas should faint and let Heaven
fall on men's heads) instead of taking pains to uphold and maintain their Oaths
which they swore to God in Truth and Righteousness, it may perhaps be always of
importance to our English World to have right Notions of the Obligation of
those Oaths left behind in it.

When I have read many of the late Pamphlets against the Succession (the Venom
of which was stolen out of Doleman's alias Parson's Book) and have often
considered that the Government in King James's time* might well be apprehensive
of the mischief that Book might do with its Poison, and perhaps with its Sting
in following Ages, I have then wondered why none was employed to Answer it
thoroughly, a thing that I do not find was ever done, unless it may be said that
an Answer to the 1st part of it was in the year 1603 published by Sir John
Haward, and that its 2d part has been confuted by some Loyal and Learned
Persons since the late Conjuncture of our Fermentation, and in which time that
Book of Parsons was Reprinted.

I am sorry that that Book and some others of Father Parsons were in some part
of King James's time Answered as they were by the real Characters of severity
that then fell on some innocent Papists, and who (I believe) were Abhorrers of
the Sedition his Books contained, and on whom Dr. Donne's Pseudo-Martyr,
printed in the year 1610, reflects in The Advertisement to the Reader saying.
That his continual Libels and incitatory Books have occasioned more
afflictions, and drawn more of that Blood which they call Catholic, than all
our Acts of Parliament have done.

And with a just respect to the Learning in Sir John Haward's Answer to the
first part of that Book, and by him Dedicated to King James, it may yet be
wished that with less Pomp of Words and greater closeness of Argument referring
to the Principles of internal Justice and natural Allegiance and the lex
terrae, he had shown the perfect unlawfulness of defeating the Title of
Proximity of Blood in the Case, and instead of so much impugning the Book by
References to the Civil Law, and old Greek and Latin Authors making for
Monarchy in general, or even by the places cited out of the old Testament
favoring primogeniture: and indeed I do not find among all our late Writers
for the Succession, that so much as one of them by so much as once quoting this
Book of Sir John Haward (tho so common) has thence brought any Aid to their
Noble Cause.

But however the Oath of Allegiance* having been enjoined since the writing of
Sir John Haward's Book has given an ordinary Writer the advantage of bringing
the Cause of the unlawfulness of disturbing the Course of Succession to a
quicker hearing and speedier issue in the Court of Conscience, which is the
point I have endeavored to carry after the end of this Discourse, leaving it
to Candid Men to judge of the sincerity of my performance therein, and of my
fair stating of the Question and the deducing genuine Propositions from it so
stated, and which shall yet be reviewed by me when I come to Review this
Discourse.

The truth is when I began it, I observed the generality of Men who writ
against the Exclusion-Bill with a great deal of good Law, History and
State Policy, did show both their Learning and their Loyalty, and did very
usefully set forth the dreadful Confusions it would introduce and perpetuate in
the State: and the Illegality and indeed Nullity of any Exclusion (tho by Act
of Parliament) was by them likewise usefully shown: but yet I think it would
have been some scandal to the present Age if it had passed away without
transmitting to the next some instances of Protestants who had leisure to
write, writing of the unlawfulness of such a Bill with relation to our Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy; and I was sorry to find that when the late Loyal and
Learned Bishop of Winchester had afterward appeared as the first Divine who in
Print asserted, That the Exclusion of the Right Heir was contrary to the Law of
God both Natural and Positive, and that such Exclusion was against the Law of
the Land also, his judgment in his Book called the Bishop of Winchester' s
Vindication given so Learnedly in the point, seemed to so many of our new
pretenders to Loyalty and to Conformity to the Church of England, to be a kind
of a Novelty.

But yet I observed that that Learned Prelate thought not fit there to
strengthen his Assertion of the unlawfulness of such Exclusion, by the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy.

Nor did I observe that among all the Loyal Writers for the Succession, I had
met with from first to last, any one had surveyed the Question of the
unlawfulness of the Exclusion resulting from our Obligation by the Oaths of
All^giance and Supremacy, (tho yet some few of them hinted the thing in general
and were still answered with the haeres viventis) till at last another Divine,
namely, Dr. Hicks, Vicar of All hallows Barking and Dean of Worcester, honored
both himself and the Question by taking notice of it in his Iovian, and in the
Preface to a Sermon of his printed in the year 1684, and Entitled, The harmony
of Divinity and Law in a Discourse about not resisting Sovereign Princes: and
he in the 3d p. of that Preface observes, That some men did pervert the meaning
of the word Heirs in the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, from its common and
usual acceptance to another more special, on purpose to elude the force and
obligation of them, which otherwise they must have had upon the Consciences of
the Excluders themselves.

The Doctor had made himself Master of Law enough to Master the true notion of
the point, and did in his Preface exorcise the Fantom of haeres viventis, a
Noonday Spright raised by one who was thought a great Conjurer, and which had
before haunted the Question, and had affrighted so many from lodging their
thoughts in it.

And tho no other of our Divines (that I have heard of) writ of the same, nor
any of the Layety otherwise than starting the Notion of it in Print, yet
considering the great weight of his Learning and Reason with which in his
Iovian and that Preface he directed so many in the Obligation of their great
Oaths, I will so far prefer his Labors to all that writ before of the
Succession, as to say of him in those words of the Apostle, He has labored
more abundantly than they all.

That which I have writ thereof was finished some years before what the Doctor
published about the same, as several of my friends know, to whom I gave Copies
of the same, and with an injunction of printing it, in Case of my death: and I
have since added nothing to what I writ, nor shall till I proceed to the Review
of the Discourse: but had otherwise for the honor of my judgment, therein
concurring with so learned a man's, respectfully cited somewhat thereof in my
Discussion.

No doubt but there were many loyal and judicious and learned men that in the
late Conjuncture had the same sense with the Doctor, concerning the Obligation
of those Oaths, tho they had not time to publish the same by the Press; and I
have in p. 269 referred to what a very learned and honorable Person urged from
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, in his Speech against the Exclusion-Bill
in the House of Commons, and to which I have mentioned somewhat of a reply
there made by Sir W. I. in that House, and of the prodigious Applause that
Reply found from many Persons there.

But in that Speech of Sir W. I. there was another thing said, and which being
spread about the Kingdom, had the effect of Thunder from an Oracle, and kept
thousands from daring so much as to deliberate of the Obligations resulting
from the Oath of Allegiance, to oppose the Exclusion. His words I refer to for
this, were to this purpose, viz. It is urged also that we are sworn to the King
his Heirs and lawful Successors. It is true we are so: but not obliged to any
during the Kings life but to himself. For it were Treason if it were otherwise.

It was in vain at that time for any Discourser to hope by fair and gentle
Principles of Reason to open the Wards in the Locks of Men's Consciences, and to
let in there a true Sense of the Allegiance sworn to the Kings Heirs and
Successors, when so great a Pick-lock of the Law had made it Treason.

Yet never was I mortified with a greater Example of Humane Frailty than by the
Sense of so great a number of knowing Persons in that Loyal Parliament being so
suddenly infected with the Error of that Insinuation, from a single Demagogue
who had never been bred up to Logic, which yet caught the understandings of the
Majority of the Representatives of the Commons of England, in the Trap of a
little Sophism; and when an ordinary Lease drawn by a Lawyer's Clerk might show
one that the Lessee at the time of the perfecting it, actually enters into a
present Obligation both in Law, Equity and Conscience to pay his Rent to the
Lessor his Heirs and Assigns as it shall become due to each respectively, and
which when the Lessor dies or assigns his interest, is to be paid to the Heir
and Assign then and not till then.

But as Tully who had as great a Veneration for the Constitution of the Roman
Government, as I have for that of our English one, said in his Oration pro L.
Murena, that Nihil est fallacius Ratione tota Comitiorum, the same thing may
happen to our great Loyal Body of Men assembled while under a ferment of
Passion; and then every man's anger influencing another, Fallacy it self may
pass for Reason: and as we see when many Workmen are at once altogether crying,
and pulling a great piece of Timber forward to them with a Rope, if that does
not hold but break, they all fall backwards together, so when any Caetus or
Body of Men are drawing with all their strength to bring any matter of weight
in the Government to them, if the Principle of Reason they use for that purpose
will not hold, but proves a poor weak Sophism, they naturally fall down
together.

I have in this Discourse usually mentioned those Parliaments with the prefixed
name of Loyal, wherein I yet thought so many Persons were so dreadfully
mistaken in so great a point, and for which Charity (if extravagant) no
Iesuited Papists can blame me, knowing how great an Exclusioner of old their
infallible head has been: but which I was the rather inclined to do (as any
one may guess by the Current of the Discourse) because I knew not but his
Majesty's calling a New Parliament at such time as he should think convenient
for the same, might give many of the mistaken Persons such an advantage of
recollected thoughts as would show them the Errors of their former measures,
and render them afterward averse from putting at once both their own
Consciences, and the very words of the Oath of Allegiance on the Rack, and from
such a squeezing of Blood out of that, contrary to the Grammatical Sense that
might occasion the flowing of blood through the Kingdom in after times: and the
sharpest expression I was naturally led to use whereupon, fell from me without
any Reproach of the Persons erring when I said in p. 209, viz. Thus just is it
for Heaven sometimes to blind and confound good men in their Counsels, when
they abandon plain Principles and Dictates of Reason, and when they will not do
what they know, to suffer them not to know what they do, etc.

I have somewhere read of one who writing of the Constitution of and Rule for
the Franciscans, says, That for the firmer observance of that Rule Christ
himself was heard in the Air, saying to St. Francis, This Rule is mine and not
thine, and I will have it observed, Ad literam, ad literam, sine glossa, sine
glossa: and let any men be attentive to the voice behind them, viz. That of
Conscience about the Rule of the observing of their Oaths, they will hear God
there speaking much to the same purpose.

Nor have I heard of the understandings of men of great Abilities made
Spectacles of shame to the World through the Divine Dereliction in any
particular point, more than in that relating to their natural Allegiance and
their Oath to confirm it.

Let any one consider somewhat in the Speech of Sir H. V. printed in the year
1662, As what he intended to speak on the Scaffold, where having mentioned by
what steps he became satisfied with the Parliaments Cause he was engaged in,
and did pursue the same, and that the Parliaments Cause did first show it self
in the Remonstrance, and Secondly, in the Solemn League and Covenant, he
adds, That it showed it self, Thirdly, in the more refined pursuit of it by
the Commons House in their Actings single, and says afterward referring to my
Lord of Arguile, viz. That Noble Person (whose Memory I honor) was with my
self at the beginning and making of the Solemn League and Covenant, the matter
of which and the holy ends therein contained I fully assent unto* and have been
as desirous to observe, but the rigid way of prosecuting it and the oppressing
uniformity that have been endeavored by it, I never approved. This were
sufficient to vindicate me from the false Aspersions and Calumnies which have
been laid upon me of Iesuitism and Popery, etc. And recollect whether (tho that
Covenant was contrary to the Oath of Allegiance) any thing yet could be more
contrary to that Covenant than that House of Co^^ons acting single, or any
thing could be more contrary to the plain literal Sense of the Covenant, than
that refined pursuit of the Cause, owned by a person of such refined and real
great Abilities, and within the Prospect of Eternity: and whether the owning of
the same then contrary to the literal Sense of the Covenant was a proper Medium
for him to use then, whereby to clear himself from the aspersion of Iesuitism?

There was another person of great Theological Learning and strong natural
parts who lived about that time, I mean Mr. John Goodwin, the Divine I before
mentioned: and who in two Books of his, the one called Redemption Redeemed, and
the other of The Divine Authority of the Scripture has signalized his great
Abilities: but in the very Pamphlet where he presumes to vindicate the very
Sentence against the Royal Martyr, and to make the same Coherent with the
Scotch Covenant, he in p. 51 says, Evident it is that those Words in the
Covenant, in the preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of
the Kingdom, import a Condition on the Kings part, without the performance
whereof the Covenant obliges no man to the preservation or defense of his
Person or Authority: and yet allowing the Words to speak for themselves, they
do not say in HIS Preservation and Defense, etc. but in THE Preservation and
Defense, etc. plainly referring to the same Preservation and Defense of
Religion and Liberties which is before promised, and sworn to in this and the
preceding Articles, as evidently referring to the same Persons Preservation and
Defense of them here who are to preserve and defend them in the former Clauses,
and who are to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority in
this, namely, the Covenanters.

If the Covenant had intended to ground the Preservation and Defense in this
Clause upon another Person or Persons as the performers, beside those to whom
the same Actions are referred immediately before, it would have pointed them
out distinctly: but when it expresses no other, the plain ordinary Grammatical
construction will attribute them to the Parties before nominated, and cannot
put them on any other.

And the Premises notwithstanding Mr. Goodwin concludes that if that his
Anti-Grammatical Paraphrase were not the true meaning of those words
beforementioned in the Covenant, it was unintelligible by him: and his Words
are these, If this be not the clear meaning and importance of them, the
Covenant is a Barbarian to me, I understand not the English of it.

Thus naturally is it even for the learned and unstable to wrest not only the
Scriptures but even their own subscribed Covenants, where the words have no
(...), to their own destruction and the destroying of common Sense, when they
recede from the common Principles of Loyalty and Allegiance.

There was likewise another Person reputed one of first-rate Parts and great
Learning in the late times, who published a Book called, The lawfulness of
obeying the present Government: and in his 11th Page there directs the World to
make this Enquiry, viz. Whether there be any Clause in any Oath or Covenant
which in a fair and common sense forbids obedience to the Commands of the
present Government and Authority: and refers particularly to the Clause of
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, in the former of which it is said I shall
bear faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and in
the latter. I shall bear faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness his
Heirs and Successors.

He there goes on very Childishly to sell the World a Bargain, by trying to
puzzle it with Questions, viz. If it be said that in the Oath of Allegiance,
Allegiance is sworn to the King his Heirs and Successors, if his Heirs be not
his Successors, how does that Oath bind? Either the Word Successors (says he)
must be superfluous, or it must bind to Successors as well as to Heirs. And if
it bind not to a Successor as well as to an Heir, how can it bind to an Heir
that is not a Successor? And if you will know the common and usual sense (which
should be the meaning of an Oath) of the word Successors, you need not so much
ask of Lawyers and Learned Persons, as of men of ordinary knowledge, and demand
of them who was the Successor of William the Conqueror, and see whether they
will not say W. Rufus: and who succeeded Richard the Third, and whether they
will not say Harry the 7th: and yet neither of them was Heir: so in ordinary
acception the word Successor is taken for him that actually succeeds in the
Government, and not for him that is actually excluded.

May we not to this Questionist who was as I may say such a Mountebank of a
Casuist, put the Question of Tertullian, Rideam vanitatem, an exprobrem
caecitatem? And may we not properly bring in St. Austin's Casuistical Decision
as to things of this Nature, Haec tolerabilius vel ridentur, vel flentur, i. e.
A man is at liberty either to laugh at or lament them.

I have in p. 41 of this Discourse mentioned D' Ossat's Observation of Father
Parson's often contradicting himself, and that very grossly in his Book of the
Succession, as it happens to all Persons in passion as able as they are who are
not guided by truth and reason, but transported by interest and passion: and I
shall here further remark out of the same Letter of D' Ossat by me there cited,
that to those words last mentioned he there adds this, viz. I will here name
two of his Contradictions. He opposes to the King of Scots among other things
to exclude him from the Succession of England, That he was born out of England
of Parents not subject to the Crown of England. He likewise opposes to
Arabella among other impediments, That she is a Woman, and that it is not
expedient for the Kingdom of England to have three Women, Queens successively:
and that often the Children of Kings have been excluded for being Women: and
yet not withstanding he adjudgeth the said Kingdom to the Infanta of Spain, by
preference even to the King of Spain, her Brother, as if the said Infanta were
not a Woman as well as the said Arabella.

I had almost forgot to observe how the Author of The lawfulness of obeying the
present Government, that uses such thick paint of Equivocation in his sense of
the word Successors, having pushed on his Question about any Clause in any Oath
or Covenant forbidding obedience to the present Government and Authority, by
adding to it the consideration of obeying it, when no other Government can be
had, and of the Commonwealths going to ruin, if the present Government were
not obeyed, and having thereby insinuated that the Obligation of the Oath
ceased, was so horribly impolitick as to prop up that insinuation by a passage
cited for that purpose out of a Popish Casuist, who says, That when a thing
sworn is too difficult, or he that swore is by change of Abilities or Estate
rendered less apt to perform: or lastly, when the thing sworn is an hinderance
to the swearer from consulting the public good, then there is a lawful Cause
of DISPENSING in the Oath.

We have here then found a Protestant and a Casuist-would-be exalting himself
above all that is called God to Dispense with Oaths, a thing that Protestancy
abhors, and a thing that the Oath had precluded in these words, I do believe
and in Conscience am resolved that neither the Pope nor any other Person
whatsoever has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof.

Thus as the Author has by his interpretation of the word Successor, qualified
an Usurper to have the benefit of the Oath of Allegiance to our lawful Monarch,
so he has barefaced made himself Successor to the Pope, and an Usurper upon
Oaths by dispensation.

More instances need not be given of the hortor of Heavens withdrawing its
ordinary influences from particular men of extraordinary parts, who after they
have despised Dominions and Dignities and their Oaths to them, would be
Critical inventors of new Rules concerning the Allegiance to Kings and the
Oaths about the same, but who have thereby appeared more despicable than the
Pedants who call themselves Critics, whose skill in the Minutiae of words or
trivial Niceties in the learned Languages has yet^secured their pride from
being humbled by erring in the sense of words in their Mother Tongue.

When I was writing the former part of the following Discourse out of my just
Compassion to my Country, as well as to the Noble Lord and others, who suffered
so unjustly by Oaths Assertory in the time of the Martyrocrasy (as I called it)
when every single Witness was almost as considerable as Ingulfus the Abbot of
Crowland, Confessor to William the Conqueror was in his time (of whom it was
said, that Quo^ voluit humiliavit, and quos voluit exaltavit;) and when if the
number of Witnesses had continued to increase and swarm as it began, it would
in time have scarce left any to be Judges or Jurors, and when some of them who
were bread-worshippers, were yet almost as much adored by the Mobile of
Protestants as the Host is by the Papists, I had thoughts to have entertained
our English World with an account of the particularities of the usage that
Witnesses in the Case of Treason find in the World abroad, and to have showed
how the Custom and Practice of Nations and their Laws have with all the
Critical Nicety of Politics imaginable provided that such Witnesses may
neither be too much discouraged by fears nor encouraged by hopes, and that it
frequently there happened that in the discharge of the Office of Witnessing,
men were to expect so great an allay of trouble, and so much exposed to depend
on the next World for the reward of their Veracity in this, as to prevent in
this an allay of truth with falsehood in their Testimony, and that sometimes
when Paupers come to be Witnesses in Criminal Causes, they have not Beds of
Roses provided for them, but are put to the Rack, and that ordinarily the
bodies of such Witnesses are ^acked on their being found vacillant and halting
in their Testimony, and whereby they had given Judges occasion to think that
such Witnesses had first tried the Rack upon their Souls and Consciences.

But tho I thought any Scene of that would appear horrid to an English Eye, as
it does to the Eye of our Laws, I have yet in this Discourse mentioned how the
Jewish Law by God's express Command took care to prevent men's ambitus in
standing for the Office of Witnesses, by tacking thereunto the standing Office
of Executioners, and I have in my Notions of infamous Witnesses exactly
accorded with the Justice of our English Laws, our lex terrae being the allowed
Landmark for all to go by in matters judicial: and I have endeavored by that
to stop the Course of an infamous Person, when from an Accuser^ he would
presently grow to be a Witness and e Serpente factus Draco, or as I may say, be
always growing in Arbitrary Accusation, and like a Crocodile never come to his
full growth; and I have not robbed him of his right of being an informer in
Cases where the lives of Princes are concerned: and have moreover represented
such a Malefactor capable by his penitence and subservience to the great influx
of Providence on the safety of Crowned Heads, of being thought his Countries
Benefactor and a piece of a Founder to it, and could have gone no higher
without following our profanum vulgus in making every Informer and Witness a
Savior, a word that Cicero was much scandalized at and taxed Verres about,
because he found him at Syracuse written (...), a Savior, and said that the
Style of such an one could not be expressed in one Latin word.

I have moreover fairly stated how and when, and by what exercises performed
relating to Moral Philosophy, an infamous Person may as a Witness commence
graduate in Credibility.

But Moribus antiquis stat Res Britannica, and so I desire it may while the
World stands; and as I have occasionally mentioned Boccaline's Character of the
best Reformer, viz. One who leaves the World as he finds it, so I have took
care to be no Propounder or Innovator about new Methods or Systemes of
Politics in the point of Accusation or Testimony which is so extraordinarily
tender, and wherein I have found the wisest and greatest of the Ministers of
Princes, to whose Custody the depositum of their Masters Crowns and Lives was
committed, to appear undetermined as to their measures.

And of this D' Ossat's Letter 150th, and to Villeroy in the year 1602, has
transmitted to the World a remarkable instance, where he says, I have received
advice from Lorrain, that an English Divine called Pitts, having held
Communication with a French Divine called St. German, about killing the King,
and the said St. German having dropped some words whereby another came to
understand it, the Bishop of Toul examining it caused the said St. German as
well as the said Pitts to be put in Prison, and by the Party accused denying
the Fact, his Condition is found better than the Accusers, who has no way to
prove what the other said to him, none else being present: which proceeding
whether 'twas deliberate or by neglect, tends to this, that no man hence
forward to whom any one has spoken of killing the King, will dare to reveal it
to any one for fear of being put in Prison, and punished: for that he was
willing to save the life of the King and preserve the whole Kingdom: whereas in
Cases of such Consequence it ought to be free to any man to Accuse another, not
only without fearing any thing, but further with hopes of great Recompense:
having a respect never the less not to believe too lightly* nor to Condemn any
Person upon the bare Affirmation of another without good Indications and
Proofs. I believe that the King advertised of this matter will at least take
care of the Deliverance and Safety of him that could not endure to hear any
speak of murdering him.

I am apt to think that the horror of the Fact of such an Outrage to the
Persons of Kings, so much astonishing the imaginations of the Loyal, and the
very Idea of it being so ghastly as to affright them from Contemplating it,
has partly contributed to some Omissions in the Worlds providing against it:
and it has been so incident to Writers to mention it without thinking of its
horror, that a late useful voluminous Collector we had, began the first Edition
of the first Part of his Works with a very inauspicious Sentence, telling us of
King James his declaring his being so much disinclined to Popery, because it
holds Regicide and other grosser Errors: as if it were possible for any man of
Sense to call such an execrable outrageous Treasonable practice, an Error, or
to range it in the Class of Errors: or as if even any damnable Error or Heresy
either could be more gross than that.

In the next Edition he a little mended the matter by saying, and other gross
Errors: but he afterward mended the Book to better purpose by causing that
Sentence to be quite left out.

My intended Review of this Discourse that I lately acquainted the Reader with,
is mentioned particularly at the end of it (where I observe the Customariness
of Authors of large Discourses bestowing on them a short Review) and do think
that the Corroborating some of the various important Calculations therein,
relating to matters Political, may perhaps be of public use.

I shall not trouble my self with Corroborating any thing of the Plot which
has so much weakened the Nation, nor with strengthening any sayings of
Witnesses that have weakened the Plot.

Let about 2 or 3 Lines that I think in this large Discourse may have referred
to the propping up any little matter by citing for it the Plot-Witnesses in
general, take their Fate to be either remembered or forgot by others as much as
they are almost by me, and but one of whom is on the Account of Testimony so
much as named, and whose name has been mentioned in this Preface.

Nor shall I have occasion to choque any Party (or as I may rather say all
Parties) with any thing of Controversy that may be called Religionary: or
matters that refer not to numbers.

But the fixing of Political Observations on numbers in some things so great as
I have attempted, is a Task very difficult for a person much Superior to me in
intellectual endowments, to do so clearly and satisfactorily as the matter will
bear; and is not possible to be done by any without the Expense of that time in
consulting Records and Registries and Offices of Accounts and many particular
Persons, which I hitherto could not spare, but hope to be shortly able to do
for my Readers satisfaction as well as my own: and having so done, I shall
publish a Review of this Work by it self, making such Additions or other
Alterations as to what I have here observed, as I shall see cause.

And as I have showed that Reverence to the Age as not to expose my thoughts
Magisterially of matters relating to Numbers, but have therein either cited
Authors of Note about the same, (that so their Credit may vouch for the thing
asserted and not mine) or have fairly my self Calculated the things, or if I
have omitted either to cite Authors, or to make Calculation when I have
asserted any thing relating to Numbers, I have still endeavored to keep within
Compass and Bounds in my reckoning, and not to favor my assertion by exceeding
them, so I shall most readily on occasion acknowledge my mistake in any point
however, or from whomsoever arising: nor can any man (I think) be tempted to do
other in a matter of this Nature, and wherein his mistake amou^ts not to any
thing like the making of false Money, or the designed putting it off in
Exchange, but only to the false telling of true; and which I desire the Reader
to tell after me as often as he pleases, and do wish him if ever he hopes that
men would receive the belief of matters of moment upon his Authority, that he
would first satisfy them that he has implicitly believed no man: and for
which purpose I once writ my mind by a poor plain Verse in the Album of a
German on his importuning me there to write my name with some saying or other,
viz.

Is nulli credat, credi qui vellet ab omni; Meaning it, as to matters that may
be reduced ad firmam, by Calculation.

I remember not that I have cited any Authors extravagant Calculation or Error
without somewhat of a fair Remark on it, and do suppose any one to labor under
a Disease of Credulity who does otherwise: and do account that Cicero himself
was therewith infected when as to the Error in a Childish Report he says so
gravely in his 2d Book De divinatione, Tages quidam dicitur in agro
Tarquiniensi cum terra araretur, and sulcus altius esset impressus, extitisse
repent and eum affatus esse qui arabat, etc.

For Ovid in his Metamorphosis to tell us this of Tages that Famous Hetruvian
Sooth-sayer, was not so much to be wondered at.

Our Excellent Historian therefore of Harry the 8th, when he mentions that
Harry the 7th left in his Coffers a Million and 8 hundred thousand Pounds
Sterling to Harry the 8th, and such as might be thought effectively quadruple
to so much in this age, did but right to his own Credit by inserting the Clause
of, if we may believe Authors.

I have in p. 109 mentioned that when Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown (which
was in the year 1558) the Customs made not above 36000 l. per Annum, and which
I was induced to believe partly on the relation of some whose Ancestors were
Officers of the Customs in her Reign, and whose Papers and Accounts they now
have. But I found after the printing of that Sheet, that I had made sure of
being within the Compass of Truth and likewise Modesty as to my Estimate; and
looking into my Notes out of Cambden about it, I found that about the year 1590
and after all her Glories of 88, her Customs were farmed but for 14 thousand
Pounds Sterling a year.

One would wonder that our great Oracle of the Law Sir E. Coke could err so
grossly by his Credulity and inadvertence as he did, when he tells us 2.
Instit. and de statuto Iudaismi, that from December 17th, An. 50. Hen. 3. till
Shrove-tide 2. Edv. 1. (which was about 7 years) the Crown had 4,20,000 l. 15s.
6d. Sterling. de exitibus Iudaeorum. And he there attempts to prove it by Records
and refers to Rot. patent. An. 3. E. 1. m. 17. 26. Middleton reddit Computa.

But at the rate of Silver being now thrice in value per Ounce to what it was
then, the Crown would have had then for those 7 years from the Jews as Money
now goes about 1,2,60,000 l. and none can think that the King would have
thought a 15 th gi^en by the Commons to have been an adequate Reward for the
expulsion of the Jews, had they been such beneficial Guests to him, as Coke
mentioned. We may therefore naturally as to this say, Credat Iudaeus, etc. and
Mr. Prynn has in the second Part of his Demurrer to the Jews, etc. most
plainly shown Sir E. Coke's mistake in the Record by him cited.

I hope to be able in my intended Review to give some such further indications
of the numbers of the People of England exceeding all the Totals of cautious
Calculators I have referred to, as may be variously useful to the public, as
well as perfectly satisfactory to the Curious, among whom the Enquiring into
the Totals of the Numbers of People in States and Kingdoms and their chief
Cities, is of late become as much in request as was the enquiring before of the
number and strength of their Ships of War.

I have mentioned before how some men of great Name have published it, that
they think the People of England and Wales are but 2 Millions: and shall here
take notice that a Book lately printed Entitled Isaaci Vossii variarum
observationum liber, and Dedicated to his Majesty, does in p. 66 represent
somewhat of the Judgment of that Learned Person (and who in various sorts of
useful Learning is deservedly held not inferior to any one in Europe) relating
to the Numbers of People in Spain and France, Italy, England, Scotland, and
Ireland, Denmark, Sweeden, etc. and where the People in England, Scotland and
Ireland are represented to be Two Millions.

But had he been so fortunate as to see some of the Manuscript Discourses of
Sir W. P. giving an account of the People of Ireland to be about 11 hundred
thousand after he had Surveyed that Kingdom as Surveyor General, and after he
had critically perused all the Books relating to the Chimney Money and the late
Poles, and found that of the People of Ireland who paid their Pole Money in the
year 1661, the Number was 3,60,000, I doubt not but he would have concurred in
opinion with him of the Total of the Number of the People in Ireland: and I
likewise believe that if he had seen some late Estimates of the Numbers of
People in Scotland, made by inquisitive Persons born and bred in that Kingdom,
he would have been easily inclined to judge the People of Ireland and Scotland
to be at least 2 Millions.

As I think that Learned Man was much short in his Estimate of the Numbers of
People in his Majesty's Realms, so I likewise think that he was in that of the
numbers of the People in France, in accounting them to be but five Millions.

Cardinal Pool (I think) did very judiciously estimate France, to exceed us a
3d part in the number of People, as I have mentioned in this Discourse: and the
Author of The reasonable defense of the seasonable Discourse, answering a
Romanist who asserted, that Popish Countries were as populous as the Reformed,
has clearly enough shown, that Englands not being fully peopled is not to be
attributed to the Reformation, but partly to our being drained by our
Plantations, etc. and he says in p. 31, If Spain which has Plantations be
compared with us we are much more populous, as we are also than Italy which
has none at all. It Is true France exceeds us not having had that drain of
Plantations till of late, and that sparingly in respect of us; and possibly
somewhat of the populousness of France may be owing to the Reformation, as not
obliging any to caelibate.

But if the Learned Author of that Reasonable Defense (who does so well and
carefully weigh the Nations there in the Balance of his Judgment) had
considered what has been by Sir William Temple remarked in his Excellent
Survey of the Constitutions and Interests of the Empire, Sweden, Denmark,
Spain, Holland, France, etc. viz. That the common People of France are as
little considerable in the Government as the Children, so that the Nobless and
the Soldiers may in a manner be esteemed the Nation, he would have agreed that
tho France may exceed us in the Numbers of our People, it does not in the
weight of our Numbers (as I may say) by reason of the considerable weight of
our Common People in the Balance of the State: and especially if he had
likewise considered what the ingenious Author of the Book called, The power of
Parliaments, mentions in p. 162, of the English ( man to man) as allowable to
be a third stronger than the French: and so I believe generally Northern
Nations may be allowed to that proportion to exceed Southern.

And here by the way it occurring to me that the Author of the Reasonable
Defense has in p. 24 took Notice of his Roman Catholic Adversaries instance
of the Treaty of Munster, as upon which so many Papist and Protestant Princes,
Noblemen and Gentlemen have either Bishoprics, Abbeys or the like CONFIRMED to
them by the Pope (and to make out what he had said that none but the Author of
The seasonable Discourse fancies the Pope cannot be tied to an agreement as
well as other Governors) and that the Author of The Reasonable Defense has
impugned that instance by saying, But if after all this there be no such
matter, if the Pope have been so far from confirming those Grants as to protest
against them by his Legate in the Treaty, and afterward in a particular Bull
has damned them to the Pit of Hell, what shall we say to the honesty and
credit of the Author, etc. I am glad that by my Historical Scheme of the factum
of that Peace, I have done that which may prevent both these Authors and other
Persons from being further mistaken therein.

Most certainly (as I have shown) the Pope did not by any Grant CONFIRM them:
but they may be truly said to have Confirmed the Papal Religion, as far as the
prevention of the Ruin of the Empire and Emperor, and the Roman Catholic
Princes of the Empire and their Subjects, may be judged to have amounted to the
Confirmation of that Religion. But that the Emperor and Princes and States of
the Empire did as perfectly slight Pope Innocent the 10ths Bull of the Nullity
of that Treaty cited in the Margent of the Author of The Reasonable Defense, as
I have mentioned the thing with Historical Truth, Archbishop Brambal in p.
178, of his just Vindication of the Church of England speaking of that Peace,
and how thereby freedom of Religion was secured to Protestants, and Bishoprics
and other Ecclesiastical Dignities conferred on them, and that many Lands and
other Hereditaments of great value were alienated from the Church in
Perpetuity, and yet the Popes Nuntio protested against it, and having there in
his Margent referred to the aforesaid Bull of Pope Innocent, says, yet the
Emperor and the Princes of Germany stand to their Contracts, assert the
Municipal Laws and Customs of the Empire, and assume to themselves to be the
only Judges of their own Privileges and Necessities. And moreover Sir William
Temple in his said Survey of the Constitutions and Interests of the Empire,
writ in 1671, mentioning The Domestic Interest of the Empire to be the limited
Constitution of the Imperial Power, and the Balance of the several free Princes
and States of the Empire among themselves, says, that those Interests have
raised no doubt since the Peace of Munster.

While the Jesuits make the Pope infallible, and some Anti-Papists generally
make him a mere natural Agent. that must always Act Ad extremum virium, I fear
not to take a middle way, and to suppose him to be a rational Animal, and one
that knows when the Papacy is not to exert its former Principles against the
Power of Kings and lives of Heretics, and for this reason, namely, Quia
deerant vires, and one who will not do it for the Future in all places, Quia
deerunt vires.

He is not to learn the reasonableness of that Gloss in his Canon Law, that
Canes propter pacem tolerantur in ecclesia, and especially when the Heretical
Dogs are there the most numerous, nor needed he or the Popish or Protestant
Princes of the Empire to have been minded of the Dutch Proverb so well known
there, viz. Veel Honden Zyn de' haez d^ot, i. e. Many Dogs are the Hares death,
and that the old sport of hunting down Heretics with Crusado's was hardly
practicable when both Popish as well as Protestant Princes were weary of it,
and that therefore according to the saying, Difficile est ire venatum invitis
Canibus.

Nor was either the Pope or the Popish Princes of Germany to be taught that if
ever there was to be that wild thing of a Crusado against Heretics again,
better use might be made of them then by killing them: and that it would turn
to better Account to deal with them as Matthew Paris tells us on the year 1250
(the time about which Crusado's were most in fashion, and when Popes that had a
mind to ravish the Regal Rights of Princes would take an opportunity to do it
by sending them on Fools Errands to the Holy Land) that the Pope dealt with the
many Pilgrims who were Cruce signati in an Adventure for that Land, namely,
that he very fairly sold those crossed Pilgrims for ready Money, as the Jews
did their Doves and their Sheep in the Temple. And if the 100,000 Heretics
that I mentioned out of Bellarmine as slain by one Crusado had been sold but
for 20 l. Sterling each, a fond might have been thereby provided for the
incommoding the Turk very much more than by the taking from him the Holy Land.

But the Pope and those Popish Princes are sufficiently sensible of their want
of Power for any such Nonsensical Outrage: and I wish that our English Owners
of the Doctrine of Resistance, and who with Bellarmine have agreed in that
being the Cause of the Primitive Christians not attempting to shake the Empire,
namely, because they had not strength to do it, were but as sensible as the
Papacy is of their wanting strength to do it in England.

No marvel therefore that the Jupiter Capitolinus in his Bull of Nullity did
not discharge the old Artillery of the Lightning and Thunder of Anathemas, and
the greater Excommunications against the Emperor and Roman Catholic Crowned
Heads and Princes concerned in the Munster Peace, as I have shown, nor
according to the Expression in the Reasonable Defense, damned them to the Pit
of Hell for it. No; both the World and the Papacy were so Metamorphosed, and
their old fashions so far passed away, that those Popish Crowned Heads found
that there was in this Bull only what partly resembled that which Ovid tells us
of in his Metamorphosis, viz.

Est aliud levius sulmen, cui dextra Cyclopum
Saevitiae flammaeque minus, minus addidit irae,
Tela secunda vocant superi, etc.
But as I just now expressed my wishes that some of our English Owners of the
Doctrine of Resistance, were as sensible of their wanting strength to subvert
the Rights of the Monarchy in England, as the Pope was of his wanting it to
break the Measures of the Crowned Heads relating to the Munster Peace, I have
in this Discourse expressed not only my hopes but belief that nature it self
which is thus always Acting to the extremity of its Power, will overpower the
Arts by which they have been seduced to Principles for endeavoring it: and
will render the Principles of many of our Protestant Recusants coincident with
those of the Primitive Christians, instead of those of the Jesuits: and that
this Storm which the World has brought on the Irreligionary part of their
Principles as well as of the Jesuits (both of which have brought so many
dismal Storms on the World) will make them come to an Avarage, and to submit to
the casting many of their Principles overboard as well as the Jesuits have
been obliged so to do by the Pope, as Master of the Vessel commanding the same.

And as in a Storm the very Victuals of the Mariners are often according to the
Maritime Law cast into the Sea to lighten the Vessel, it may resemblingly be
expected that many of our Dissenting Religionaries will now part with some of
those Principles that have in their Religion-Trade afforded them a Subsistence;
and that when they shall consider how this present Pope, notwithstanding the
Privilege of a Master of a Ship, by which he may refuse to begin the Iactus by
throwing out first his own Wares and Goods, did about a year before he threw
out the Lumber of the Jesuits and Casuists, throw overboard a vast Treasure
of Papal Indulgences, and by which the Ship of the Papacy was formerly
victualled.

It was by the Popes Decree of the 7th of March 1678, that a Multitude of
Indulgences was suppressed; and the Names of 14 Famous Popes are there
mentioned as having granted some thereof: and great numbers of others are by
him quashed without mentioning the Popes by whom granted: and there was a
particular Clause in the Decree that did shake the whole Body of Indulgences.
And tho the Virgin Mary has been by many of the Vulgus of Papists oftener
prayed to in Storms than the Trinity, and a printed Devotional Office called,
The Office of the immaculate Conception of the most holy Virgin our Lady
approved by the Sovereign Pontiff Paul the 5th, had been much in vogue in the
Papal World, yet the Pope by his Decree of February the 17th, 78. damned that
Office and (as I may say) threw it over board. And of this the Author of Julian
the Apostate might have took notice if he had pleased, when in his Comparison
of Popery and Paganism he instanced in the transprosing of part of the Psalms
to the Virgin Mary, after the mode of this Office that had been suppressed
about 4 years before.

The old stubbornness of Popes against the making any Reformation of Abuses and
Errors in their Church has been commonly observed: but I believe that
considering the great Figure England makes in the World, it may not be unlikely
that the brisk Spirit of Opposition against Popery that had displayed it self
in England for about 8 years before the Plot-Epoche, and the sharp and learned
Books that were in that Conjuncture printed here against the Abuses of the
Church of Rome, might much contribute to the laudable Proceedings of this Pope
in those Decrees I have mentioned. And therefore when Nature had thus enforced
the Papal Chair in so great a Measure upon Recantation, and a great deal of
pretended infallibity was thrown overboard, (and that even relating to some
Principles that might be called Religionary) it may reasonably be thought that
the same operation of Nature will produce among our little Protestant Recusants
a tacit renuntiation of the Irreligionary part of those very Principles, that
both the World and themselves must needs see they have transcribed from Popery.

The Complication of the Principles of Irreligion that has joined the Jesuits
Popery with that of our former Presbyterians Popery, has long been as visible
as the great Isthmus (I spoke of) that joins the Mexican and the Peruan parts
of the new World: and as I being to explain as in a Dictionary what I meant by
Popery, I would not expose my self to the Critical Religionary Controvertists
by nicely defining Popery, (the Observation being no less than a Rule in the
Civil Law, that omnis definitio in jure Civili periculosa est, parum est enim
ut non subverti possit) but gave the Description of my sense of it as before in
this Preface, so if I were to give a Description of our Scotch Presbytery as
Covenanted to be here introduced, I would take the said Description of Popery
and only mutatis mutandis, say that by Presbytery I mean the power of our
Presbyters in imposing Creeds and Doctrines and Rules of Divine Worship on men,
and the Presbyters jurisdiction interloping in that of our Princes and their
Laws, and the doing this by the Charter of Jus Divinum and as they are Christ's
pretended Vicars, and do account that its intended Arbitrariness here in
England justly appeared as terrible as that of Popery, and that our Consciences
being enslaved to a Foreign Bishop is not more inglorious than their being so
to our fellow Subjects, and that a blush being divided among ten thousand
Ecclesiastics after they had out-raged our Laws and our Consciences, would
have here been no more seen by us than one at Rome on occasion of any Popes
there blushing after they had so done.

I have observed in this Discourse how that part of Presbytery that may (tho
erroneous) be called Religionary as practiced in some Foreign Churches, has
here decayed and must so naturally more and more: and was glad to hear, That
since the putting the Laws in Execution against Protestant Recusants, those of
them who were called Presbyterians have, on recollection of thought, and after
Conference had with our Divines forborne their former Schismatical Separation
from our Churches, and that particularly in our Metropolis they have in all
things been ameinable to the Doctrine and Discipline of our Church, except as
to the submitting to have their Children baptized with the use of the Sign of
the Cross there, and their Superstition in not complying with which will I hope
not be long lifed.

The gradual increase of the Christenings in some Parishes in the Country that
I have seen Accounts of, (and in which places the Dissenters formerly were very
numerous) has been to a far greater Proportion than the gradual Increase by me
remarked as to London, and within the same years. And a Learned Divine who is
Minister of a Parish not far from London has acquainted me, That the number of
Communicants being there about the beginning of those years but a 100, has
since arisen to 400: and I believe that generally the numbers of Conformists
may have much increased in the Country beyond the proportion of their Increase
in the City, and may probably do so for some years.

Tho there are several Merchants and rich Traders in our Metropolis who are
Dissenters, yet I have observed, that the gross of their numbers consists there
of ordinary Retail-traders: and as these have been naturally Sufferers there by
the Cities so much removing Westward, and by the Retail-trade being so much
gone to the other end of the Town (and are likely so to be more and more) so it
has been and will be natural to them to be more and more querulous: according
to the saying of, Omne invalidum est Querulum.

And in this Case it will be natural to them both to support their decaying
Trade by Religionary Combinations, and perhaps to fancy Religion it self
breaking together with their Bankrupsy, and both for the Consoling one another
as Socii doloris, and likewise relieving one another thereby, to endeavor to
keep Heterodox Religionary Societies as long and as much as they can.

But Necessity, the known Mother of Industry, must naturally in time cure them
of their Poverty and Temptation to Heterodoxy thereby.

Our Quakers are by many thought to be a kind of a Roma subterranea, but
whether justly or no, I enquire not: nor shall I give my opinion in it till the
Principles of their Light within shall be exposed to that without; many of
which Principles have hitherto been by them kept as hid from the World as were
the Subterraneous Lights preserved in the Roman Monuments, and as to which
Principles they are perhaps conscious that when they shall be exposed to the
Air and Light of the Sun, they will be as naturally extinguished as those
Monumental Lights were when occasionally brought into the open Air.

But one of their known Tenets being the unlawfulness of Oaths, I account they
have an advantage thereby beyond the Presbyterians or Independents in their
Claim to Indulgence, by demanding it in a Doctrinal point wherein there is
D^gnus vindice nodus, by reason of some words in the 5th of St. Matthew and 5th
of St. James seeming prima facie very emphatically and vehemently to forbid all
manner of swearing, as the Commentators generally observe.

And in this point they are entitled to a very true and great Compassion
because, of the very false Comments so many true Protestant would-be's Actions
have made on their great promissory Oaths beforementioned: and for that they
have not out-raged their Natural Allegiance by Rebellions, as many other
Dissenters have done. If therefore to those Yea and Nay Men, the King should
grant such a Charter as the men of Rippon had from King Athelstan, namely, Quod
homines sui Ripponienses sint credendi per suum yea and per suum nay, in
omnibus querelis and curiis licet tangentibus Freed-mortel, etc. I should not
grudge it them.

And to speak frankly, I know not but this their sullen Principle may be
subservient to some great Birth of Nature, that may happen perhaps within an
Age or two, when shame may in the more populous World have so far exterminated
Fraud and Cozenage and the danger of Perjury, as that the manner of our Oaths
Assertory before Tribunals may grow obsolete: a thing I account not altogether
improbable, since I my self observed that in a Case that happened before some
of the greatest Peers of the Realm, Authorized to give an Oath as being the
Lords Commissioners of Prizes in the first Dutch War, it appeared that there
was somewhat in Nature that had greater weight than an Oath among some men,
namely, Reputation: for many Merchants being present at a sitting of the^r
Lordships, and one of them claiming a Ship and lading before them as wholly
belonging to Hamburgers, and showing himself ready to swear the same before
their Lordships, one of the Lords asking him if he would on his Reputation
declare that no Subject of the States of Holland was as Proprietor therein
concerned, he refused to do it.

But before this Golden Age of Morality may come, and the bending Leaden-rule
of Oaths has been laid aside, I expect that the Names of several of our
Religionary Parties will be forgotten, and be as insignificant as the word
Lollards and Lollardies, and to suppress which every High Sheriff is still
bound to by his Oath, and who perhaps may think that the Lollards were Papists
or some Heterodox People or other.

And therefore were I Master of never so much leisure I would bestow no part of
it on the writing against those Religionary Errors that have been so often
confuted, and especially when I see the Circumvallations of Nature so carefully
wrought in its Siege against them, as that it cannot miscarry; and no man
having fixed his Judgment of Natures Course, need Spur it on, and according to
the Words of the Great Prophet, He that b^lieveth shall not make haste.

Notwithstanding the severity of all our old Laws against Popish Recusants, it
has been for the honor of our R^formation, that the Government has notified
it in the times of Queen Elizabeth and King James, that no Roman Catholic here
suffered death for his Religion, and notwithstanding all the Penal Laws against
Protestant Recusants and Recusancy, our pious Princes have without any general
Relaxation or Suspension of those Laws, shown signal favors and indulgences to
many particular Persons who appeared to the Eye of the State to be really
Conscientious and to hold no Principles that would create disturbance to it.

And as I have mentioned that Mr. Cotton was particularly indulged, so I might
likewise Assign many other instances of this Nature, and particularly of the
known Letter of Edward the 6th to Cranmer to omit some Rites in the
Consecration of Bishop Hooper, and of some Indulgences in Queen Elizabeth's and
King James his time, and others in King Cha^les the First's, in favor of
particular Protestant as well as Popish Recusants. And to this purpose the
History of the Life of Mr. Hildersham, one of the most Eminent Divines that
Puritanism had bred, mentions that on the account of points relating to
Nonconformity, he was very frequently suspended ob officio and beneficio, and
very frequently restored to the same: and the same thing appears in the life of
Mr. Dod an Antesignanus among them: and both these Divines in their printed
Writings asserted the Principles of their Loyalty and impugned the Doctrine of
Resistance, as likewise some others of the Puritan Divines did, and were
therefore particularly indulged. And Mr. Prynn showed himself extremely partial
in reflecting on the Government as he did in his Seditious Book called, The
Popish Royal Favorite, by not taking notice of the Relaxation of the Penal
Laws made in the Case of particular Loyal Puritans and Non-Conformists, as well
as in the Case of particular Loyal Papists.

But if the Government thought it so often necessary for its safety to revoke
its particular Indulgences granted to Hildersham and Dod (for the former being
silenced in June 1590, and restored in January 1591, was again suspended and
silenced in April 1605, and after he was again restored in January 1608, was
again silenced in November 1611, and being June 1625 restored to preaching, was
in March 1630 was again silenced; and the latter of them found the like
vicissitude of favors and punishments too tedious to be here inserted) how can
the Government be now secure in granting an Indulgence to other particular
Protestant Recusants more than only dura^te been placito, or quam diu been se
gesserint, after all the Dis-loyalty of the Principles and Practices chargeable
on so many of them since 41, and not known to have been since abhorred by them?
But our Parliaments not knowing but only suspecting so many of their owning
their former Principle of the Doctrine of Resistance (and who did therefore in
the toleration of any Heterodox Religionaries in their own Families restrain
them to a number only of four other Persons to be present) seemed with the
mixture both of tenderness to the Consciences of those Religionaries, and
likewise to the public Peace, to draw the Copy of that Modus of their limited
Toleration, in some sort after the great Original of the old Decree at Rome
against the Bacchanals, and by which it was or dered that they should not as
before be observed at Rome or in Italy: but that Si quis tale sacrum solenne ac
n^cessarium duceret, nec sine Religione ac piaculo se id omittere posse, apud
Praetorem urbanum profiteretur, praetor senatum cons^leret: se ei permissum
esset, cum in senatu centum n^n minus essent, ita id sacrum fieret, dum ne plus
quinque sacrificio interessent.

But most certainly whatever Complaisance with the Consciences of any
pretending Religionaries that Parliament intended, had they had any Prospect of
four Persons being present any where that held any Principles destructive of
Monarchy, and that inclined them to sacrifice our Princes and Laws as formerly,
they would have accounted those four too many to be tolerated. And the dreadful
Outrage the Government conflicted with, when Venner and the other few
Fift-Monarchy men came out of the Tiring house of a private Religionary Meeting
in Coleman-street, to Act the part of Furies as they did in our M^tropolis (and
that beyond the wildness of any mad Bacchanal) may well be an instance of
Caution against many of a Party whose Principles are not known, being trusted
together with themselves.

Yet after all this, as once in a little Nominal Parliament we had in the the
time of the Usurpation, it was ordained, That all Persons that could speak
should speak the enjoined words of Matrimony, and that all that had hands
should there join hands, so I believe that in any future Conjuncture,
particular Persons, who by the Loyalty of their Principles and Practices, and
by their being ready to attend our Divines for instruction, can make it appear,
that they have Consciences, will have no cause to complain of their being not
free.

But by an Accident of Moment that has offered it self to the consideration of
our Protestant Recusants, since the Epoche of Plots and Rumors of Plots, I
doubt not but they will find an imminent necessity to make it demonstrable to
the World, that they own no Principles destructive of it: and that particularly
the easy access that Witnesses have found to Credibility on their swearing
Plots against Iesuitick Popish Recusants, by the Precipice of the Principles on
which they stood being so conspicuous to the World (and from whence the very
breath of their Adversaries, of how mean and despicable parts and fortunes
soever, has served to throw them down headlong into ruin so easily) will be
an effectual Document to all Recusants who would prevent the danger from
Plot-Witnesses, that the very next thing to be done by them is their bearing
their Testimony against Principles of Dis-loyalty.

The late Bishop of Winchester (to the Character of whose Loyalty and Learning
Christendom is no stranger) having his thoughts on the Wing, and ready to take
their Flight to that Region of Bliss where none are admitted but Souls that
part hence with a noble disposition to Charity for all Humane kind, thought fit
in his Prospect of that World and in the great Interval of his Preparation for
it, to send to the Press his Book called His Vindication, etc. printed in 1683,
and in the Conclusion of it to transmit his opinion to the Age and Posterity
that ever since the Reformation, there have been two Plots carried on by
Papists and Dissenters, and that the same would long continue.

He had there mentioned Mr. Baxters justifying the late War, and quoted him for
saying, that as he durst not repent of what he had done in the aforesaid War,
so he could not forbear the doing of the same if it were to do again in the
same state of things. It Is true indeed (says the Bishop) he tells us in the
same place That if he were convinced he had sinned in what he had done, he
would as willingly make a public Recantation as he would eat and drink when he
is hungry and thirsty. But neither he nor any of the Non-Conformists that I
have heard of, has as yet made any such public Recantation, and therefore we
may rationally and charitably enough conclude, That they are still of the same
Judgment they were then, and consequently that their Practice will be the same
it was then when any opportunity invites them to it, etc. And then proceeds to
say, For mine own part I must confess as I always have been, so I am still of
opini^n that ever since the Reformation there have been and are two Plots,
carrying on sometimes more covertly, and sometimes more secretly, the one by
those that call themselves the only true Catholics, the other by those that
call themselves the only true Protestants, and both of them against the
Government as it is Established by Law both in Church and State: and as there
always has been, so there will be Plotting by both those Parties until both of
them be utterly suppressed: for as for making of Peace with either of them, I
take it by reason of the perverseness of the one, and peevishness of the other,
and the Pride of both, a thing not to be hoped for.

How much my poor Measures of Futurity do differ from his Lordships, in the
Case of our Popish and Protestant Recusants, the Current of my Discourse shows:
and am sorry that he, having used this harsh sounding word of Plots, described
not* his Idea of the particulars thereof relating to the time to come, and that
he innodated in this his Censure (as it were) the Body of the two Religionary
Parties, without any exception of the Loyal in both.

But I have observed it in a printed Letter of this Reverend Prelate to the
Earl of Anglesy, of the Date of July the 4th, 1672. where having spoke of the
keeping out of Popery now it seems to be flowing in upon us (as his words are)
that he says, You know what I was for in the late Sessions of Parliament, I
mean (not a Comprehension) but a Coalition or Incorporation of the Presbyterian
Party into the Church as it is by Law Established; and I am still of the same
opinion, that it is the one only effectual expedient to hinder the Growth of
Popery and to secure both Parties: and I am very confident that there are no
Presbyterians in the World (the Scotch only excepted) that would not conform to
all that is required by our Church, especially in such a Conjuncture of time as
this is.

My Scope by quoting this Letter is to show that about 10 years ago, the Bishop
was not of opinion that Nature had condemned the Presbyterians to eternal
Plotting against the State, but that a Coalition between that Party here and
our Church, would then naturally happen: and as to which I have shown how far
he was fortunate in that his Conjecture, by the late great advance of those
called Presbyterians toward Conformity, and that therefore his Opinion varying
in 83 from what it was in 72, as to the Presbyterians, it might (had he lived
longer to have writ again) vary perhaps as to the Papists being Plotters with a
Continuando, and he might have recanted that opinion as much as he would have
had Mr. Baxter recanted his. And I would from that his Letter show, that we
have the less reason to be mortified with the fear of the continuance of these
2 Plots, or to be tempted to uncharitable thoughts of the whole Body of the
Papists upon this Bishops opinion, as delivered in what I have cited out of his
Vindication, because one expression of it includes so much of Humane Frailty
and Error, viz. his Lordships saying, That he was ALWAYS of opinion, that since
the Reformation these two Plots were and would be, till both the Parties were
utterly disabled and suppressed; for when he writ the said Letter, his Opinion
appeared otherwise.

And there is another use I would make of this Pious and Learned Prelates
having given such an Alarm to the World concerning the Plots of these Heterodox
Religionaries in future time, and of his having made them as to Disloyalty to
be in a manner damnati antequam nati, and that is this: namely, That the only
substantial thing that could give weight to this Censure of these two Parties
being their Principles, and that the great allowance of this Bishops Opinion as
Oracular by so many, being likely to throw so much lasting Odium on the
Principles of Popish and Protestant Recusants as Hostile to Church and State
(whereby any disloyal Practices charged on them by their Adversaries, tho
perhaps very unjustly, will naturally be the sooner and more easily believed,
as I before hinted) it may hence appear necessary for men to go, or run, and
even fly from Principles of Disloyalty as soon, and as fast, and as far as they
can.

But as I have here observed it to be the Interest of our Heterodox
Religionaries to disclaim all Principles that I called Convulsive of Civil
Society, and the Concern of every Country to have those Principles notified
(and as fairly and particularly delineated and described as are the Beds of
Sands and shoaly places and rocky Bars of its Harbors and Seacoasts by
Hydrographers) so I shall likewise observe that the sharp Execution of any of
the Penal Laws has not to the Factious among the Protestant Recusants appeared
so afflictive as the publication of the Principles and printed Sayings of their
Pastors since 41, and the which seemed to be like the Doom of the Priests in
Malachy, namely, to have the Dung of their Solemn Feasts spread in their Faces:
nor could they call such usage of their Tenets, any Trial of cruel mocking, nor
the Publishers any of The Mockers that should be in the last times, since their
very Sayings and Tenets have been plainly and briefly published in their
Authors own words and without Addittaments.

As to the Papal Tenet in the Canon Law, dilated on in the following Discourse,
I have there in p. 181. sufficiently showed my Aversion to contribute any grief
or trouble to Loyal Papists by the notifying the same in the hot time of the
late Fermentation, and while some factious Anti-Papists were so busy in
senseless Narratives to load a great Body of them with the guilt of its
Practice; and when I had any inclination to show my self unchristianly or
ungenerously disposed, as to the Persons or Religion of Roman Catholics, I
might with the expense of an hour or two's time have easily gratified such a
corrupt Humor, by descanting on this Tenet, among the Pamphleteers and
Sheet-Authors whose feet were accounted beautiful by the Mobile, for any dirt
their hands threw at the Papists, before the Epoche of the Declaration, after
the Oxford Parliament. And after the restoring of the English Genius, or as I
may say, of the English understanding to it self, that thereby happened, I
account that the Notification of any Tenet chargeable on the Papacy or
Presbytery referring to the Measures of Loyalty, or preservation of the Rights
of Civil Society, could bring no damage in the least to any Recusants Person
whatever it might to his Erroneous Principle. And I having accounted it a kind
of nauseous superfluity to confute at large any one of the old Religionary
Controversies between our Church and that of Rome, was willing thus to reserve
the discussion of this Irreligionary Tenet (how proper soever to be known) till
some healing Conjuncture of time; and when I might hope by discussing the same
and thereby effectually satisfying any Considerate Excluders, that I was no
Papist, to bespeak their Approach with more Candor to my great Casuistical
point discussed.

I have sufficiently shown in this Preface how much it imports our Security and
Loyalty, to have the Fantome of the Judicial Law exorcised out of men's
understandings, and am ashamed to think that Christians do yet no more know the
certain time of the Burial of that Body of Moses's Laws, than the Jews do the
place where his deceased natural Body was laid. I know that some of the old
Schoolmen have told us that that Law was given only to the Jews: but when so
many Popish Universities and Casuists, told our Harry the 8th, That his
Marriage was against the Law of God, the World wanted teaching in this point:
and the Tutelar Angels even of Protestant Countries are still in effect put to
it to contend with the Devil about the Body of Moses his Law: and if any one
has a desire to see the dreadful impressions that that Law has so lately made
abroad in the World and here in England, and that have much de^aced our Loyalty
and Religion, I shall refer him to Dr. Hicks his printed Sermon called Peculium
Dei, where he has given us very Learned Remarks, That many unsound Iudaising
Christians have still dreamed that the Mosaic Code was yet in force, and that
Carolostadius and Castellio about the time of the Reformation asserted the
Doctrine of the validity and indispensable Obligation of the leges forenses of
the Jews: and that many, tho they did not assert the validity of the whole
Mosaic Code, have yet asserted the indispensable obligation of some particular
Laws in it, to the great scandal of the Protestant name, and particularly that
against Idolatrous Persons and Places the Mosaic Laws are still in force: and
that for want of distinguishing in the Decalogue and the Laws which follow
after it, many men have run into many gross unfortunate Errors; and he has
there referred to the Ancient and Modern Sabbatarians, the Writers against
Usury, the Modern Iconoclasts, the strict Divine Right of Tithes, and Tithes of
Tithes, or Tenths to the Pope as the Christians high Priest, and to the
Asser^ors of the unlawfulness of the Supreme Magistrates pardoning Murder which
God made unpardonable among the Jews: and to Baronius and Bellarmine arguing
thence for the Popes Supremacy: and to Pope Adrian the 6th moving the Princes
of Germany, to cut of Luther and his followers, because God cast Corah and his
Company down to Hell, and commanded that those who would not obey the Priest
should be put to death: and to the Promoters and Abettors of the Solemn League
and Covenant, which some have equalled to the Covenant of Grace, and were wont
to express themselves about it in the Text and Phrases of the old Testament,
which concerned the making, breaking or renewing of that Political Covenant
which God made with the People, and afterward with his Viceroys the Kings of
the Jews: and to the specious popular Arguments used by the former and later
Rebels in Great Brttain, for Deposing and Murdering Kings, and to the Speech
delivered at a Conference concerning the Power of Parliament which is nothing
but Doleman alias Parson' s Title to the Crown transprosed.

And under this head we might refer to the Covenant mentioned among the
Independent Churches.

Mr. Buroughs one of the best of our late Independents, quoting Deuteronomy. 13. 6.
If thy Brother, the Son of thy Mother, etc. Chap. 5. of his Irenicum says, Let
not any put of this Scripture saying, this is in the Old Testament, for we find
the same thing, almost the same words used in a Prophecy of the times of the
Gospel. Zech. 13. 3. He says indeed that by those words in Deuteronomy. the meaning
is not that his Father or Mother should presently run a Knife into him, but
that they should be the means to bring him to condign punishment even the
taking away his life.

Calvin likewise in giving his sense of that place of Zechary foresaw the Odium
of having any killed without going to the Judge, and there says, Multo hoc
durius est, propriis manibus filium interficere, quam si ad Iudicem deferrent.
But here Mr. Buroughs and Calvin have Categorically enough asserted what the
Judges duty is in the Case, and I have said what Calvin effected by going to
the Judge about Servetus.

Gundissalvus does not determine the lawfulness of burning an Heretical City
without going to the Judge; and the lawfulness of Protestant Princes judging
the Persons or Cities of Idolaters to be destroyed by the pretended Obligation
of the Mosaic Law, is chargeable on the Anti- Papists I have mentioned: and I
believe there are few of our Presbyterian or Independent Enthusiasts, but who
think it as lawful to burn Rome as to roast an Egg.

But the Church of England abhors this flammeum and sulphureum evangelium:
and Dr. Hicks in the Preface to his Iovian, taking notice of the Reasons which
the Papists urge for putting Heretic, and the scotising Presbyterians for
putting Popish Princes to death, says thereupon, I desire Mr. J. to tell me,
Whether he thinks in his Conscience, the Bishops of the Church of England could
argue so falsely upon the Principles of the Jewish Theocracy to the like
proceedings in Christian States? And says, if this way of arguing be true,
then the Queen (meaning Queen Elizabeth) was bound to burn many Popish Towns in
her Kingdom and smite the Inhabitants with the Sword, etc.

I have therefore thought it Essential to the advancement and preservation of
Loyalty, to endeavor to have the Papal and Presbyterian Error as to the Jewish
Laws exterminated.

And the settling of this point is the more important to the Measures of
Loyalty, because the same Chapter in Deuteronomy, viz. the 13 th, that has
been the Popes Palladium for his power of firing Heretical Cities, has
likewise been made use of by our deluded Excluders, as theirs to recur to in a
practice so scandalous to Loyalty and to the Protestant Religion, and which
has too much appeared in the many Factious Pamphlets for the Exclusion; and as
I hinted that that Chapter of Deuteronomy was impiously applied in a former
Conjuncture, for putting the Queen of Scots to death, so the pretended
lawfulness of the Exclusion by arguing from the greater to the less, was by the
deluded generally inferred from that Chapter: and the place I just now referred
too in the Preface of Iovian, mentions, Mr. I's arguing from Deuteronomy. 13. 6. If
thy Brother, the Son of thy Mother, etc. in citing of which (says the Dr.) it
is evident on whom our Author did reflect.

The very exposing the absurdity of the Papal power of destroying Heretical
Persons and Cities on the account of the Mosaic Law, will (I believe) as by
Consent of the sober of all Parties much help to exterminate the aforesaid
Error, which has cost the Papacy so dear, and naturally tempted so many
Calvinists to own the same Error, partly by way of retaliation, and not
altogether through defect of Judgment: and I doubt not but if the Papacy were
now to begin to claim the allowance of exercising the Jurisdiction over all
Christians in the World as the High Priest did over all proselyted to the
Jewish Religion (and as appears by not only the Inhabitants of Palestine, but
others of the most remote Countries, and particularly by the Ethiopian in the
Acts of the Apostles owning subjection to the Jewish Priesthood) it would stop
at the Conquest of that Ecumenical Power, and Tenths of the Levites thereby,
without demanding the Power to destroy Heretics Towns, and to exterminate the
Persons of Heretics by Crusado's, as other dependencies on it. But the Papacy
has long ago passed that bloody Rubicon of the Judicial Law, and cannot in
Honor or Politics go back: nor will any Pope expressly renounce the Power of
compelling Princes to exterminate their Heretical Subjects, tho yet the Fashion
of the exercise of this Power be thus as I have showed, tacitly passed away,
and as a thing necessarily impracticable in the more populous World.

And no Iesuited Papist dares disclaim this Power in the Pope's behalf or
impugn the same; however it was a thing that the Pope could not but fore^ee,
that his quashing the Jesuits Power to kill men by retail, would render the
Jesuits averse from writing for his Power to kill Heretics by wholesale and
by Crusado's, or for the power to fire Heretical Cities, if there were occasion
to have any such power asserted in behalf of the Papacy, as I believe there
neither is nor ever will be. But partly according to my Conjecture of the
Result of the Fermentation about the Regale in France, I suppose that tho the
Papacy will no more be brought to disclaim its pretended Monarchy over other
parts of the World in ordine ad spiritualia, than the Dukes of Savoy will the
Title of their being Kings of Cyprus, yet it will be neither able or studious
to prosecute its Claim of such power by disordering the World as formerly.

All the personal Virtue and Probity of any Popes will never incline them to
pronounce against their Jurisdiction, however they may thereby, and by want of
strength to execute it, be kept from the old injurious ampliating it; and on
this slippery Precipice the Papacy still remains, and from whence through the
natural Jealousy of Crowned Heads and States in the point of Power, it will
probably fall down to its tame principium unitatis, and its Patriarchal Figure,
and in time to nothing.

But by many of the Anti-papal Sects, and such as call themselves The only true
Protestants, still owning the Obligation of the Jewish forinsec Laws, a
Necessity is by God and Nature put on the Protestants of the Church of England
to Combat such pretended Obligations by dint of Reason, and thereby to support
the Rights of their Princes without Condition and Reserve, and which no
Jesuited Papists or Protestants either can or will do.

Nor is it safe for other Papists to own Principles that touch the Pope's
imaginary Monarchal Power. For Power how fantastic soever, would seem a
serious thing and will endure no raillery, and the honest Father Caron whom I
have mentioned as citing 250 Popish Authors who denied the Pope's Power to
depose Princes, does tell us, that the Pope's Nuntio and 4 Popes condemned his
Doctrine, and the Inquisitors damned his Book, and his Superiors his Soul, I
mean, they very fairly excommunicated him for it.

There is another thing that may render the knowledge of this Papal Tenet
worthy of the entertaining our Curiosity, tho we are past its danger; and that
is what occurs to me that I lately mentioned in a Discourse I had with an
intelligent Person of the Church of England, who saying to me that there was
one part of the barbarous Outrage of the Gunpowder Treason, which was very
scandalous to Humane Nature, and which he thought could not be pretendedly
legitimated by any Papal Principles, namely that part of the Outrage, that
related to the designed destruction of so many Magnificent Piles of Building,
and of the adjacent City of Westminster, and the life's of thousands of Men,
Women, and Children with one Cruel Fatal Blow, I gave him an account of the
Tenet in the Canon Law, grounded on the 13th of Deuteronomy, so fairly and
fully discussed in the following Discourse, and whereby I satisfied him about
the Principle that pretended to legitimate that part of the Outrage: and do
assure any man that as arbitrary as the Papacy ever was, it yet was so just as
to inflict no kind of punishment on Persons or Communities that was not in its
Sanctions intimated and for what Crimes.

I have in this Discourse rendered some of our late Fift-Monarchy men
Principled for all Villainy imaginable, and justly Convicted and Executed for a
design to fire our Metropolis, and in which design they had subtly contrived
to have backed their Outrage with the terror of Armed Forces, nothing of which
appeared in the Case of the two poor French Papists charged with the Odium of
the Fact, and beyond which least of numbers it is not in this Discourse
extended: and as to those two Persons, there being then open War between the
English and French, it may be said, that the Religion of Popery might be out of
the Case of any thing done by such as were justi hosts, as the Laws term them,
however I yet think that none concerned in the Government of that Nation, would
then be so barbarous as to design us such an Outrage.

Moreover I have in this Discourse said, that I will not charge the allowance
of this Tenet on the generality of Papists either at home or abroad, and that
no un-jesuited Papist nor perhaps some sober Party in that Order would think
the worse of me for calling the Decretum of the Popes Canon Law, by reason of
its empowring him thus to burn Cities, horrendum Decretum.

And because my knowing of this Papal Tenet, as founded on the Judicial Law,
made me, after the beginning of this Discourse, to surmize, that more Papists
might possibly be concerned in this Outrage than really were, and so in my
balancing the actings of some Loyal Protestant Recusants in Ireland, with some
Dis-loyal ones of some Popish Recusants there and here, I mentioned the
Outrage on the Metropolis as done by Papists, ( i. e. by Papists, and not by
Protestants, and as Sir W. Raleigh mentioned that Harry the 4th was murdered by
the Papists, that is not by the Huguenots) I yet thought my self bound in
Christianity and Moral Justice to show my self so far from being in the least
misled by the scandalous and incoherent Narratives that reflected on a great
body of the Papists, as concerned in such a horrid Fact, and particularly by
that whose Author in a Plot with Booksellers had stole his Fire of London out
of old printed Examination before a Committee of Parliament, that I have shown
the ridiculousness of the palmare argumentum of the Populace, and cried up as
so unanswerable, to prove that very many Papists designedly fired the City, and
which Argument I have not met with exposed to contempt by any other Person, and
which had so far happened to work on the understanding of an ingenious man who
employed himself in writing the History of England, since the King's
Restoration, that he had been likely, but for my showing him the Childishness
of his Error, to have sent it to Posterity with a Crown, instead of a Fools Cap
on its head.

And tho I have rendered the same Tenet of firing Heretical Cities, that is in
the Pope's Canon Law founded on Deuteronomy, chargeable on our late
Presbyterians, I have exempted the Persons of such our Protestant Recusants,
from any guilt of an Outrage against our Metropolis as Idolatrous: for
whatever their Principles are, there is yet another sort of Idolatry prevalent
among them as all Religionaries (and which I have referred to) namely
Covetousness, that would secure them from firing their own Nests.

But here while I am troubling my self to do right to Papists and
Presbyterians, I cannot without all the horror and detestation imaginable call
to mind how a vile traitorous Subject of his Majesty's, who presumed to call
himself the Protestant Ioyner, was so far transported with Madness and Fury, as
to the scandal of Religion and Loyalty and common Sense, with the guilt or that
Fire to reproach his Prince, whose Reign had so long signalized it self, with
such a Father-like tenderness for all his Subjects. And yet in the TRIAL of
that Monster of Calumny, his slandering his Prince thus with so much desperate
and ridiculous Molice was in proof. And ridicu^ous it may well be called: for
what could be more remote from the least shadow of possibility, than a Prince
of such Eminent Wisdom and known great Abilities, firing his own Chamber, and
destroying his Revenue, and vastly impoverishing the People, and thereby
weakening himself in the Flagrancy of War between England and France, and the
States of Holland? It is absolute dotage and Bedlam-madness to imagine, that
any one interested in the Government of England, and its being a Kingdom, could
be in the least a well wisher to such an Outrage. The very Fift-Monarchy men,
who designed it, were abject Paupers, and the two Frenchmen were no better.

But Justice found out that Shimei, who thus outragiously slandered the Lord's
Anointed: and may all such his incorrigible Enemies be clothed with shame;
and let them see that tho Heaven does not think fit always to hide Princes from
the scourge of the Tongues of men of Belial, yet at the same time it shows
some tender regard of the honor of Crowned heads, by abandoning the dis-loyal
to reproach them with impossibilities.

It was observed by the late Bishop of Winchester in his printed Sermon before
the King on the 5th of November, p. 18. That the Doctrines among the Dissenters
that tend to Sedition and Rebellion, seem to be derived and borrowed from the
Church of Rome: but his Lordship in the same Page, having before spoke of those
Doctrines, said, That if they are believed and practiced they must necessarily
produce Confusion among us.

Yet having a regard to the Piety and Peaceableness of some Dissenters, and
considering how long many of them had been trained up to Principles of Loyalty
before they went off from the Church of England, we may reasonably have the
better hopes of their not being able to believe the Doctrine of Resistance and
Principles convulsive of Civil Society.

But we have of late found cause to judge, that that Doctrine, and those
Principles have been believed and practiced by others of them, and with such
Artifice to amuse and divert the incautelous Loyal from the apprehension
thereof, as was practiced by several of the Papists a little before the
Gunpowder Treason: for as at the end of the Papists supplication to the King
and the States of the Parliament in the year 1604, they undertake that as to
the Loyalty of their Priests, they shall readily take their Corporal Oaths for
continuing their true Allegiance to his Majesty or the State, or in Case that
be not thought assurance enough, that they shall give in sufficient Sureties,
one or more, who shall stand bound life for life for the performance of the
said Allegiance; and further, that if any of their number be not able to put in
such Security, that then they will all join in such supplication to the Pope
for recalling such Priests out of the Land (and thus by the Offer of Security
attempted to lull the State in a secure sleep and dream of their Loyalty) so
have many of our Protestant would-be's by the publication of their NO
PROTESTANT PLOT, so lately before their plotted Outrage, done what was
tantamount to keep our Country from being awake to observe the March of their
Principles, till it should be surprised with the suddenness of Sampson's Alarm
when it came to be said, The true Protestants are upon thee, I mean those who
falsely call themselves so.

I know no true Son of the Church of England owning a greater propension to
afford favor to Heterodox Religionaries, in points denominable by Religion,
than what my natural temper and habitual inclination prompt me to. And tho some
men are apt to have a sharper regret against others for differing from them in
judgment, than for a material injury, I am naturally so far from such an
humor, as to be more pleased with, and to think my self better diverted by the
Conversation of the Learned, whose Sentiments differ from mine in most points
Philosophical and in many Theological, than by theirs who perfectly agree in
opining with me therein: and do fancy to my self that I have the fortune hereby
for my h^mour to accord with that of the generality of men of the gayest temper
in the Age, how different soever their Religions are; and do suppose, that if
such a captio^s fiery Bigot as Bishop Bonner were now living, the ingenious
Maimbourg would scorn to keep him Company.

But the present State of Christendom making Loyalty a Virtue of Necessity here
in England, (as I have shown in this Discourse) I would abhor the Conversation
of any Dissenter I thought Dis loyal, as of a Person not only wicked but
stupid: and on this Rock (as I may say) of Loyalty being likely so long to
continue Essential to our continuing a Nation, have I built my Conjecture of
the future happy State of England.

It is a possible thing that the serenity of its Future State may be for some
little time over-cast by Clouds of Discontent, if the Balance of Trade should
long continue to be against us, and that then forlorn Paupers instead of
fearing Popery would for a while fear nothing at all: for Nescit plebs jejuna
timere. But I have cited the Observator on the Bills of Mortality for
accounting not above one in 4000 to have starved; and I having in p. 185 cited
the Author of Britannia languens, for saying, that he heard of no new improving
Manufacture in England but that of Periwigs, did give my Judgment, that the Ebb
of our Trade has been at the lowest point, and that Nature will necessarily
hasten its improvement: and having observed in p. 66, that after a long Age of
Luxury a contrary humor reigns as long in the World again, I have said that of
that contrary humor I think we now see the Tide coming in, and have assigned
one late Woollen Manufacture, by which England has gained double as much as
for 76 years, it lately did by the Balance of Trade.

But if any one of our true Protestant Plotters should be supposed ever to
inveigle any of the poorer Mobile to fly out into tumultuous Disorder or
Commotion, any such Commotion making an Exception from my general Rule of
England's necessary future pacific State, would both certainly firmare regulam,
and make the Odium of the Loyal Populace so keen against all Principles and
Doctrines of Resistance, as to exterminate the same from our Soil for ever, and
to deter men as much from daring to propagate the same in England, as in those
two most Famous Receptacles of Heterodox Religionaries, I mean Amsterdam and
Constantinople.

Any one who will accord with me how necessary it was for the confounding of
Dis-loyalty, that I should point out the fatal time when our Trade was
confounded, viz. in January 1648: and any Reader of this Discourse will find
the obvious way mentioned, how a Child of ten years of Age may know when the
Balance of Trade is against us, and how long it has been so, tho not to what
proportion; and so whether I have been too sanguine in my fancy by predicting
in effect that it will be for us, and long so continue, time will show. But if
I am out in my Measures as to that point, I am sure the Divines of the Church
of England will gain Cento per Cento thereby, as to the point of their absolute
usefulness; and necessary encouragement under a Prince of what resolution
soever; and upon a wanton supposition that they had all withdrawn themselves to
the remotest parts of the Earth, it would be any Princes interest to invite
them back again at any rate, and that for their persisting in the preaching up
of Loyalty as they have done for several years, and thereby so much helped to
preserve us from weltring in one another blood.

It is excellently observed by Lucius Antistius Constans in his De jure
Ecclesiasticorum, that the CLERGY is necessary to console us with the World to
come, as to the hardships daily occurring to us in this, as well as to direct
us in our Course to that World. And if contrary to my expectation, Heaven
should think fit to punish the past Rebellions and present murmurings of so
many of our Land, by any future diminution of our Trade (and when we should be
enforced to work the harder for the necessary support of our Families and of
the Government) 10000 Preachers of Loyalty will be an useful Treasure both to
the Prince and People.

Fuller in his Church History mentions, that in the year 1619, It was
complained of that the Grantees of Papists forfeitures generally favored them
by Compositions for l^ght Sums. But the famous Book of The Right and
Jurisdiction of the Prelate and the Prince, printed A. D. 1617. says in the
Epistle Dedicatory to the English Catholics, You have this long time suffered
as violent and furious a Persecution as ever the Jews did under an Antiochus,
or the Primitive Christians did under a Nero, Domitian, Dioclesian, Maximinian
or Julian, and yet you see no end of this fury, etc.

I would ask any Loyal Roman Catholic, if a Clergy that could console such
Lachrymists and preach Loyalty to them, was not then necessary? And I am sure
he will say it was; for that the Doctrine preached by the Author of that Book
appears thus in the Contents of the Chapters after the end of that Epistle,
viz. Regal Power proceeds immediately from the Peoples Election and Donation,
etc. By the Spiritual Power which Christ gave the Pope in his Predecessor St.
Peter, he may dispose of Temporal Things, and even of Kingdoms for the good of
the Church: and the many Republican and Seditious Assertions in that Book are
such, that any Asserters thereof would in the judgment of our Loyal Populace,
be thought to merit what the Jews or Primitive Christians suffered as
aforesaid. And that no man dares now partly so fear of the Popular displeasure
and being thought absurd, say, that the English Monarchy is otherwise than from
God and not from Men's Election, just as for fear of the People, the chief
Priests and Scribes and Elders durst not say that the baptism of John was not
from Heaven but of men, is most eminently to be attributed to the late Loyal
Sermons made expressly of Loyalty by the Divines of the Church of England.

But that I may draw toward an end of this long INTRODVCTION or PREFACE
(wherein yet if I have happened to acquaint any Reader with any valuable point
of Truth, it will be the same thing to him as the payment of a Bill of Exchange
in the Portico or in the House) I am necessarily to say that by the
inadvertence of an Amanuensis employed in writing somewhat of this Discourse
for the Press, there happened to be several mistakes of words and names; and
one of them I shall mention here, and not trust to its being regarded among the
Errata, viz. that whereas it is said in p. 39, that Creswel a Jesuit writ for
King James his Succession when Parsons writ against it, it should have been
said that Chricton a Jesuit then did so: and so the latter part of the Volume
of the Mystery of Iesuitism relates it: and any indifferent man would think
that Chricton writ not in earnest, and that his Book appeared not on the Stage
of the World, but only to go off it, since so necessary a Counterpoyson to
Parsons his Book, could never yet be heard of in any Library.

Some little Omissions and Errors about Letters and Pointing, easily appearing
by their grossness, are not put into the Errata: and some the Reader will find
amended with the Pen.

Moreover I am to Apologize for the carelessness of the Style, and to acquaint
the Reader, that the Rule of any ones writing in any thing that is called a
Letter, being the way of the same Persons speaking, I do thereby justify the
freedom I have taken in not polishing any Notions, or delivering them out with
the care employed on curious Pictures (and that require twice or thrice
sitting) and in using that coloring of words, and such bold careless Touches
as are to be used in the finishing up any piece at once, and which the Nature
of Discourse necessarily implies, and in sometimes using significant
expressions in this or the other Language for any thing, as I do in my common
Conversation with those who understand those Languages; and by the same Rule I
have exempted my self from the trouble of that nice weighing of things as well
as of words, that a Professed History or Discourse, otherwise then in the way
of a Letter, would have required, and the same excuse may serve for the Style
of this Preface.

If the Date of this Discourse had not at the writing of the first Sheet been
there inserted, a later one had been assigned it: but I thought it not ^^nti on
the occasion thereof to have that Sheet reprinted.

I hope to be able in my Review to gratify the Readers Curiosity with somewhat
more of satisfaction as to the Monastic Revenue, and which in p. 92 I mentioned
as not adequate to the maintenance of 50000 Regulars by my not considering how
plentifully it was supported by Oblations of various kinds, and other ways not
necessary to be here enumerated.

In p. 1. I say, I think it was St. Austin who said, Credo quia impossible
est: and have since thought it was Tertullian. I care not who said it, as long
as I did not.

I have in p. 13 mentioned the Order of Jesuits as invented by the Pope in the
year 1540, wherein I had respect to the time of its Confirmation from the
Papacy and not of its founding by Ignatius.

There are other omissions and faults in the Press that the Reader is referred
to the Errata for, without his consulting which, I am not accountable for them.

I am farther to say that there is one thing in this Preface that I need not
apologize for, and wherein I have done an Act of common Justice, namely, in
Celebrating the Heroical Virtue and Morality of this present Pope, that were
signalized as I have mentioned.

Almighty God can make the Chair of Pestilence convey health to the World, and
can preserve any Person in it from its mortal Contagion.

But the truth is, I was the more concerned to do the Pope the right I have
done, because I observed, that after that Credit of the Popish Plot began to
die, that depended on the Credit of the Witnesses, several Persons attempted to
put new Life into it, by their renewed impotent Calumnies cast on the Character
of the Pope, and as appeared by a bound 8o printed in the year 1683, called The
Devils Patriarch, or a full and impartial Account of the Notorious Life of this
present Pope of Rome, Innocent the 11th, etc. Written by an EMINENT Pen to
revive the remembrance of the a^most forgotten PLOT against the life of his
Sacred Majesty and the Protestant Religion.

What AVTHOR was meant by that EMINENT PEN, I know not in the least. The
Preface to the Reader concludes with the Letters of T. O. The vain Author
having throughout his Book ridiculously accused the Pope of immorality and
scandal, and of being a friend to Indulgences, and of favoring the loose
Principles of the Jesuits, and of contriving the Popish Plot and carrying it
on in concert with the Jesuits, concludes by saying in p. 133. This Pope had
great hopes of re-entry into England by his hopeful Plot: hereupon Cottington
's bones were brought to be buried here, etc.

It was high time then for People to be weary of the Martyrocracy when the Plot
came to be staruminated by Cottington's bones, and the pretended immorality of
so great an Example of severe Virtue as this Pope, and when the belief of the
Testimony against some men as Popish Ruffians was endeavored to be supported
by the Childish Artifice of making a Ruffian of the Pope himself.

But indeed long before the Edition of that trifling Book, many things had
occurred so far to shake the testimony of the Witnesses, as that it grew
generally the Concordant voice of the Populace, that on a supposal of several
of the same Persons being again alive to be tried on the Testimony of the same
Witnesses before the same Judges, it would not have prejudiced a hair of the
heads that were destroyed by it, and particularly in the unfortunate Lord
Stafford's Case.

I have in two or three places of this Discourse, speaking of the Papal
Hierarchy, called it Holy Church, its old known term, and by which I meant no
reflection of scorn: nor would I laugh at any Principle of Religion found among
any Heterodox Religionaries that the dying groans of the holy Jesus purchased
them a liberty to profess.

But it is no Raillery to say, that the Artifices of any dis-loyal Popish and
Protestant Recusants, that have so long made Templum Domini, usurp on the Lord
of the Temple and his Vice Gerents, that is, Kings and Princes, will support no
Church: and that as it has been observed of some Free Stones, that when they
are laid in a Building in that proper posture which they had naturally in their
Quarries, they grow very hard and durable (and if that be changed, they moulder
away in a short time) a long duration may likewise be predicted to the Arts and
Principles of reason applied to support a Church as they lay in the Quarry of
Nature, and where the God of Nature laid them for the support of Princes and
their People, and e contra. In fine, therefore since the Principles of the
Church of England are thus laid in it as they were in that Quarry, none need
fear that they will be defaced by time, or that a lawful Prince of any Religion
here will accost it otherwise than with those words of the Royal Psalmist, viz.
Peace be within thy Walls, and Prosperity within thy Palaces.

AN INDEX Of some of the Principal Matters Contained in the following DISCOURSE
IN ALETTER TO THE Earl of ANGLESY.
HIS Lordship is vindicated from mis-reports of being a Papist, and an account
given of his Birth and Education, and time spent in the University and Inns of
Court, and afterward in his Travels abroad, Page 1, 2, 3. An account of his
first eminent public employment as Governor of Ulster, by Authority under the
Great Seal of England, p. 4. An account of his successful Negotiation with the
then Marquess of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland* for the Surrender of
Dublin, and all other Garrisons under his Command, into the Parliaments hands,
p. 5. An account of his being a Member of the House of Commons in England, and
of the great Figure he afterward made in the King's Restoration, ib.
Reflections on the Popular Envy against the Power of a Primier Ministre, ib.
and p. 6, 7, 8. Remarks on the Saying applied in a Speech of one of the House
of Commons, against the Earl of Strafford, viz. That Beasts of Prey are to have
no Law, ib. Reflections on the rigor and injustice of the House of Commons, in
their Proceedings against the Earl of Strafford, p 9. The Usurpers declared,
that tho they judged the Rebellion in Ireland almost national, that it was not
their intention to extirpate the whole Irish Nation, p. 10. The Author owneth
his having observed the Piety and Charity of several Papists, p. 11. The Author
supposes that since all Religions have a Priesthood, that some Priests were
allowed by the Usurpers, to the transplanted Irish, p. 13. An account of the
Privileges the Papists enjoyed in Ireland, before the beginning of the
Rebellion there, and of the favor they enjoyed in England before the
Gunpowder Treason, p. 14. Observations on the Pope's Decree, March the 2d,
1679. Condemning some opinions of the Jesuits and other Casuists, in Pages 15,
41, 50, 51, 52, 53, 201. The great goodness of the Earl of Anglesy's nature
observed, and particularly his often running hazard to save those who were
sinking in the favor of the Court, p. 16. The Authors observation of the
effects of the hot Statutes against Popery and Papists in Queen Elizabeth 's
and King James his time shortly ceasing, ib. The Authors Judgment that a
perfect hatred to Popery may consist with a perfect love to Papists, p. 19. He
expresses his having no regret against any due relaxation of any Penal Laws
against Popish Recusants, p. 20. An account of the Earl of Anglesy, and others
of the Long Parliament crushing the Jure-Divinity of Presbytery in the Egg, p.
29, 30. The outrage of the Scots Presbyterian Government observed, p. 29 The
People of England did hate and scorn its Yoke, in the time of our late Civil
Wars, ib. Remarks concerning infamous Witnesses, and their credibility after
Pardon of Perjury, or after Crimes, and Infamy incurred, p. 33, 34, 35. at
large, and p. 204, 205. The incredibility of the things sworn in an Affidavit,
by such a Witness against his Lordship, p. 35, 36. The Principle in Guymenius,
p. 190. Ex tractatu de justitia and jure, censured, viz. licitum est Clerico
vel Religioso calumniatorem, gravia crimina de se vel de sua Religione spargere
minantem, occidere, etc. p. 37. Cardinal D' Ossats Letters very falsely and
ridic^lously cited by an English Priest of the Church of Rome, for relating
that the Gunpowder Treason Plot was a sham of Cecils contrivance, p 38. Father
Parsons one of the greatest Men the Jesuits Order has produced, p. 40. D'
Ossat in his Letters observed to have given a more perfect Scheme of the whole
design to hinder King James his Succession, then all other Writers have done,
ib. Observations on the Author of the Catholic Apology, with a reply, etc*
speaking of his not believing that Doleman's Book of the Succession, was writ
by Father Parsons, and that Parsons at his death denied that he was the Author
of it, and on Cardinal D' Ossat in his Letters averring, that Parsons was
Revera the Author of it, and that Parsons made application to him, in order to
the defeating King James his Succession, unless he would turn Catholic, p. 41.
D' Ossat's observing that Parsons in that Book, does often and grossly
contradict himself, ib. D' Ossat's commending our English Understandings, for
so soon receiving King Jame, and so peaceably, after the death of Queen
Elizabeth, ib. The Author grants that Papists may be sound parts of the State
here, as they are by Sir William Temple in his Book observed to be in Holland,
p. 44. The vanity of some Papists designing to raise their Interest by Calumny
and Shamm ib. The Pope's said Decree of the 2d. of March, accuses the Jesuits
and other Casuists, of making Calumny a Venial sin, p. 45. The nature of a
Venial sin explained, ib. The Jesuits Moral Divinity patronizing Calumny, is
likely to be fatal to their Order, p. 47. 49. The Author's opinion that they
can never recover the wounds given them by the publication of the les
Provinciales, etc. ib. and that much less those given them by the Popes said
Decree, p. 50, 51. Observations on that Notion of Moasieur Descartes and Mr.
Hobbs, That the faculties of the mind are equally dispensed, and on the natural
effects of that Notion, p. 58. The Author remarks some Shamms and Calumnies
used by some Protestants, and their contending with Papists therein, p. 59. An
Antidote mentioned for Papists and Protestants, to carry about with them in
this Pestilential time of Shamms, ib. A vile Shamm or Calumny used against
Papists, as if they intended to burn the Town of Stafford, and other great
Towns, is referred to in one of Janeway's printed Intelligences, p. 60.
Animadversions on Parsons his Book of the Succession, p. 60, 61. It Is for the
honor of the Roman Catholic Religion observed, that Harry the 4th of France,
after he turned Papist, continued kind and just to his Protestant Subjects,
notwithstanding the Popes endeavors to the contrary, p. 62. The Authors grand
Assertion, viz. That whatever alterations time can cause, yet (humanly
speaking) while the English Nation remains entire, and defended from Foreign
Conquest, the Protestant Religion can never be exterminated out of this
Kingdom, p. 64. Mr. Hooker's Propliecy of the hazard of Religion and the
service of God in England, being an ill State after the Year 1677, p. 65. The
defections of the ten Tribes from the time of David, punished by a Succession
of 10 ill Kings, p. 66. The words in Hosea, I gave thee a King in mine anger
falsely made by Antimonarchical Scriblers to refer to Saul, ib. Dr.
Stillingfleet's Sermon cited about the uncertainty of what the fermentations
among us may end in, ib. Dr. Sprat's opinion cited, That whatever vicissitude
shall happen about Religion in our time, will neither be to the advantage of
Implicit Faith or Enthusiasm, p. 67. Historical O^servations relating to the
Papacy from p. 67, to p. 77. The Papal Power formerly pernicious to the
external Polity and Grandeur of England, p. 77, 78. Queen Elizabeth said by
Townsend to have spent a Million of Money, in her Wars with Spain, and laid out
100000 l. to support the King of France, and 150000 l. in defense of the Low
Country, and to have discharged a Debt of 4 Millions, She found the Crown
indebted in, ib. How by her Alliances She laid the Foundation of the vast
ensuing Trade of England, whose overbalance brought in afterward so much Silver
to be Coined in the Tower of London, p. 78. The Sums Coined there from the 41
st year of her Reign, to May 1657, ib. England alone,* till the Peace of
Munster in the year 1648, enjoyed almost the whole Manufacture, and best part
of the Trade of Europe, by virtue of her Alliances, ib. The same Month of
January, in the year 48, produced the signing of that Peace, and the Martyrdom
of the best of Kings, and the fatal diminution of our Trade, ib. Queen
Elizabeth had what praemium of Taxes from Parliaments She pleased, ib. King
James told the Parliament Anno 1620, that She had one year with another 100,000
l. in Subsidies, and that he had in all his time, but 4 Subsidies and 6
Fifteenths: and that his Parliament had not given him any thing for 8 or 9
years, ib. In Harry the 3 d's time, the Pope's Revenue in England was greater
than the Kings: and in 3 years time the Pope extorted more Money from England,
than was left remaining in it, ib. In Edward the 3 d's time, the Taxes pa^d to
the Pope for Ecclesiastical Dignities, amounted to five times as much as the
People paid to the King, p. 79. By a Balance of Trade then in the Exchecquer,
it appeared that the Sum of the overplus of the Exports above the Imports,
amounted to 255214 l. 13 s. 8d. ib. Wolsey's Revenue generally held equal to
Harry the 8 th's, ib. Why the Pope never sent Emissaries to Denmark and Sweden,
and some other Northern Countries for Money, and why probably in no course of
time that can happen, he will send any to England on that Errand, ib. and p.
80. In the 4 th year of Richard the 2 d, the Clergy confessed they had a 3 d
part of the Revenue of the Kingdom, and therefore then consented to pay a 3 d
of the Taxes, ib. Bishop Sanderson mentions the Monastic Revenue, to be half
the Revenue of the Kingdom, ib. The not providing for the augmentations of the
poorer livings in England, observed to be a Scandal to the Reformation, p. 81.
Of 8000 and odd Parish Churches in Queen Elizabeth's time, but 600 were
observed to afford a competent maintenance to a Minister, and four thousand
five hundred Livings, then not worth above 10 l. a year in the Kings Books, ib.
During the late Usurpation the Impropriate Tithes saved the other, ib. A
Million of Pounds Sterling commonly observed to accrue to the Popes per Annum,
from Indulgencies, p. 87. An account of the Compact between some of the most
eminent Presbyterian Divines, and the long Parliament, by which the Parliament
was obliged to settle on the Ministry all the Church Lands, and those Divines
engaged to promote the Parliaments Cause, and of the result thereof, p. 88.
Observations on the Calculations of the Monastic Revenue, made in the year
1527, by Mr. Simon Fish, in his Book called, The supplication of Beggars, and
which Calculations were much valued by Harry the 8 th, p. 90, 91. Not only none
of our Monkish Historians, but even of our polished and ingenious ones made any
Estimates of the Numbers of the People in the times they writ of, ib. A
Calculation of the Number of Religious Persons, or Regulars in England, at the
time of the Dissolution of Monasteries, p. 92. A Calculation of the Numbers of
Seculars as well as Regulars, that then lived in Celebacy, ib. The Author's
Calculation of the Number of the Levites, and of their Quota of the Profits of
the Land, p. 93. A Calculation of the Ebb of the Coynage of England, from May
1657 to November 1675, p. 102. A particular Account of Cromwell the Usurpers
depressing the Trade of the European World, p. 103. The Kings of Spain impose
Pensions on Eccles^astical Preferments to the 4th part of the value, p. 104.
The proportion of Papists, and Non-Papists, by the Bishops Survey in the Year
1676, is 150 Non-Papists for one Papist, ib. The People in the Province of
Holland, reckoned to be 2 Millions 4 hundred thousand, ib. The People in
Flanders in the Year 1622, reckoned to be 700,000, p. 105. Amsterdam in the
Year 1650, reckoned to have in it 300000 Souls, ib. An Account of what the
Inhabitants of Holland in the Year 1664, did (over and above the Customs and
other Demesnes of the Earls and States of Holland) pay toward the public
Charge, namely, to the States of Holland, to the Admiralty of the Maze, to the
Admiralty of Amsterdam, to the Admiralty of the Northern Quarter, ib. The
number of the Inhabitants of Venice in the year 1555, ib. An Account of the
Political Energy of the Reformation in England, p. 107. The Revenue of the
Kingdom of England quintuple, in the year 1660, to what it was at the time of
the Reformation, p. 108. A Calculation of the Revenue of the Church, holding in
the year 1660, the same proportion of increase, ib. The Customs of England when
Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, made but 36000 l. per Annum: and were since
1660 farmed at 400000 l. per Annum, and have since then made about double that
Sum, p. 109. The yearly Revenue of the whole Kingdom of England computed, ib.
Queen Elizabeth wisely provided for the enlargement of the Trade, and Customs
of England, ib. The Numbers of the People of Spain, p. 111. The knowledge of
the Numbers of People in a Kingdom is the Substratum of all Political measures,
ib. An Animadversion on the Author of la Politic Francoise, ib. There were
about 600,000 Souls in Paris, shortly after the year 1660, p. 113. An
Animadversion on the Calculation of Malynes in his Lex mercatoria, ib.
Animadversions on the Calculations of Campanella, as to the numbers of the
People of France, p. 114. Lord Chief Justice Hales his Observations of the
gradual increase of the People in Gloucester shire, corroborated by the Author,
p. 115. The Author believes the Total of the People of England, to be very much
greater, than any cautious Calculators have made it, p. 116. Observations on
the Numbers of the People of England, resulting from the returns on the late
Pole-Bills, and the Bishops Survey, ib. and p. 117, 118, 119. An account of a
Tax of Poll-Money in Holland, in the year 1622, p. 117. Some illegal
Proceedings in Queen Mary's Reign remarked, p. 119, 120. The Authors opinion
that any Roman Catholic Prince that may come to inherit the Crown, will use
the Politics of Queen Mary, as a Sea mark to avoid, and Queen Elizabeth's as a
Landmark to go by, p. 122. Eight hundred of the empty new built Houses of
London, have been filled with French Protestants, ib. A high character given of
Edward the 3 d, a sharp Persecutor of the excesses of the Power of the Pope and
his Clergy, and who saved the being of the Kingdoms. Trade, and Manufacture,
and patronized Wickliffe, and the Authors opinion that any lawful Prince of the
Roman Catholic Religion, that can come here, will uphold the falling Trade of
the Kingdom as he did, ib. Occasional Remarks on the Numbers of the People in
the old Roman Empire, p. 124. The vanity of the fear of any ones erecting
another Universal Monarchy, p. 125. Campanellas Courting Spain, and afterward
France with that Monarchy, remarked, ib. Observations on the fate of the
Spanish Armada in 88, and of the Numbers of its Ships and Seamen, and likewise
of the Numbers of the Ships and Seamen then in Queen Elizabeth's Fleet, p. 127.
She claimed no Empire of the Ocean, either before 88 or afterward, ib. The
Shipping and Numbers of our Seamen in 12 years after 88, were decayed about a 3
d part, p. 128. An account of the French Monarch's Receipts and Expenses in the
year 1673, ib. The Authors conjecture of the result of the Fermentation about
the Regalia in France, p. 129. The things predicted in the Apocalypse, are with
reference to exactness of number and measure, p. 130. The Origin of the name
Fanatic, ib. The Author asserts this as a Fundamental Principle for the quiet
of the World, as well as of a man's own Conscience, viz. That no man is
warranted by any intention of advancing Religion, to invade the right of the
Sovereign Power that is inherent in Princes by the Municipal Laws of their
Countries, ib. The Author gives his Judgment of the set time, (humanly
speaking) for the extermination of Presbytery here being come, p. 133. Of the
illegality of the Scotch Covenant, p. 134. The Assembly of Divines here would
have been Arbitrary in Excommunication, ib. The first Paragraph of the Covenant
introduced Implicit Faith, p. 135. The Author of the Book called, The true
English Interest, computes that 300,000 were slain in the late Civil War in
England, p. 138. Observations on his Majesty's and Royal Brothers Exile into
Popish Countries, caused by our Presbyterians, and even out of Holland into
France, and out of France into Spain, p. 138, 139. Presbyterians are obliged of
all men to speak softly of the danger of Popery, p 139. An account of the
present Numbers of the Papists in England, and some Historical Glances about
the gradual decrease thereof in this Realm, in several Conjunctures since the
Reformation, from p. 139, to p. 154. The late Earl of Clarendon occasionally
mentioned with honor, p. 147. The Authors judgment that the growth of Popery,
and of the fears thereof will abate under any Conjuncture of time here that can
come, from p. 153 to p. 157. In December 1672, the Protestants in Paris mere
but as one to 65, p. 157. Observations on the late Conversions in France, ib.
The Author explains what he means by the expression of Religion-Trade, ib. The
Author's Assertion that the World can never be quiet and orderly, till its
State be such that men can neither get nor lose by Religion, from p. 158 to
160. Animadversions on a Pamphlet aiming at the overthrow of the Clerical
Revenue of England, and called, The great Question to be considered, etc. p.
160, 161. The Author asserts the present Clerical Revenue of England to be
reasonable and necessary, and very far from excess in its proportion; from p.
161 to p. 167. The Author's reason why he does usually in this Discourse call
Popery an Hypothesis or Supposition, and not it, or our former Presbytery, in
gross by the name of Religion, from p. 168 to p. 170, and after. The Author's
Assertion, That Papists as well as others of Mankind, have a Right and Title to
the free and undisturbed worshipping of God, and the Confession of the
Principles of Religion, purchased for them by the blood of Christ, p. 170. The
Author distinguishes Principles of Papists, Socinians, and Presbyterians into
Religionary and Non-religionary; and shows to what Principles the name of
Religion is absurdly applied, from p. 168 to p. 172. The Author observes it in
many Papists, who have deserted the Church of England, that the rational
Religion they were first educated in, has had the allurements of the Natale
solum, that they could never wholly overpower, p. 174. An Observation of three
of the Nobility that went off from the Church of England to that of Rome: but
receded not from the Candor of their tempers, and that neither of them
perverted their Wives or Children to Popery, and that the eldest Sons of them
all are eminent Sons of the Church of England, and make great Figures in the
State, ib. Turen after his being a Papist, as kind to his Protestant Friends as
formerly, ib. The Author shows, that none need be afraid of any Roman Catholic
Prince who was formerly a Protestant, from p. 174 to 177. Nonconformist
Divines not scrupling the lawfulness of what the Conformists do: but were
ashamed to confess their error, p. 175. It Is a shame for such Divines to
censure the belief of Religionary Notions in a high born Prince, p. 176. By the
falsity of such Divines Principles, as many hundreds of thousands were here
stain, as were bare hundreds put to death, in the inglorious Reign of Queen
Mary, ib. A Confutation of one Argument brought for London's being desig^edly
fired by many Popish Persons, p. 181. The Author's Judgment that the
fermentation that has been in the Kingdom, will not prove destructive but
perfective to it, p. 183. The Author's Judgment that all Policy Civil or
Ecclesiastical, will be accounted but Pedantry, that Postpones the
Consideration of the building Capital Ships, and their Maintenance and
Equipage, p. 184. That Religion-Traders are really of the Trade of Beggars, p.
184. More concerning the breaking of the Trade of Beggars, and of
Court-Beggars, ib. The reason why our English Mininisters of State, have not
writ their Memoires, as those of France have done, p. 185. The Author of the
present State of England, observed to say in Part 2d, that the yearly Charge of
his Majesty's Navy in times of Peace, is so well regulated, that it scarce
amounts to 70,000 l. per Annum, p. 185. What the Lord Keeper Bridgman in his
Speech to the Parliament in the year 1670 says, that from the year 1660, to
the late Dutch War the ordinary Charge of the Fleet communibus annis, came to
500,000 l. per Annum, and that it cannot be supported with less ib. The Author
believes that the ordinary Naval Charge has in no years since, amounted to
less than 200,000 l. per Annum, besides the vast Charge in building new Ships
and rebuilding old, and the Charge of Summer and Winter Guards, and of Convoys
and Ships against Argier, p. 186. Since the year 1669, the King has enriched
the Kingdom with a more valuable Fleet than it had before, ib. The manifold
payments to the Usurpers amounted to one entire Subsidy in each Week of the
Year, and what the Kingdom paid before, exceeded not usually one Subsidy, or 15
th in two or three years space, ib. The nature of our old gentle way of
Assessments called Subsidies, ib. Instead of the demanding of 5 Members from
the Parliament, above 400 were forcibly secluded from it, ib. Taxes afterward
levied in the name of a House of Commons, when there were no Knights of the
Shire for 26 English and 11 Welsh Counties, and but one Knight of the Shire in
other 9 Counties, and only the full number of Knights of the Shire for 4
Counties, and when York, Westminister, Bristol, Canterbury, Chester, Exeter,
Oxford, Lincoln, Worcester, Chichester, Carlisle, Rochester, Wells, Coventry
had no Citizens, and London 1 instead of 4, and Gloucester and Salisbury alone
had there full number: and when by a parcel of about 89 permitted to fit, the
whole Clergy as well as Layety of England was taxed, ib. and p. 187. The
Usurper by his own Authority only, laid a Tax of 600,000 l. per Month on the
Nation, p. 187. He afterward had a giving Parliament that Calculating the
Charge of the Nation, found 400,000 l. per Annum, necessary for the Navy and
Ports, and settled on him in all 1,300,000 l. per Annum, ib. Their helping him
into the Power to break the Balance of Christendom as he did, has entailed on
the Nation for ever, a necessity of laboring hard to support the public
Government, ib. A Descant on the saying of Dulce bellum inexpertis, from p. 187
to p. 189. A Calculation of the number of the People now living, who are
inexperts: i. e. who are now alive, that were born since the year, in which our
Wars ended, or were then Children, viz. of such years as not to have
experienced or been sensible of the miseries and inconvenience of the War: and
a Calculation of what numbers of those who lived in 1641, are now dead: and
what proportion of those now living, who lived in that time of the War, did
gain by the War: and of the number of such inexperts in Ireland and Scotland:
p. 188, 189, 190. The Usurpers seized into their hands about a Moiety of the
Revenue of the Kingdom, p. 190. It Is observed that presently after the
discovery of the Gunpowder Treason, the Parliament gave King James 3
Subsidies, 7 Fifthteenths and 10 ths of the Layety, and 4 Subsidies of the
Clergy: and what they amounted to. The Author shows how just and natural it was
for the Parliament believing that Plot so to do, p. 191, 194. An intimation of
the reason of so much hatred in France against the Earl of Danby, p. 192. The
Authors belief that the future Warlike State of Christendom, will necessarily
prompt all Patriots, instead of studying to make men unwilling to promote
public supplies, to bend their Brains in the way of Calculation, to show what
the Kingdom is able to contribute to its defense, and how to do it with
equality, ib. The judgment of Sir W. P. that if a Million were to be raised in
England, what quota of the same should be raised on Land, Cattle, personal
Estate, housing, ib. The Judgment of the same Author cited for the second
Conclusion in his Political, Arithmetic, viz. that some kind of Taxes and
public Levies may rather increase than diminish the Commonwealth, p. 193. An
account of the exact Roman Prudence in the equality of Taxes under the Ministry
of the Censors appearing from the Civil Law, ib. The great care and exactness
of the leading men in Queen Elizabeth's Parliaments to Calculate the Levies,
and to render the same equal, ib. The disproportionate Taxes laid by the
Usurpers on the Associated Counties and others, have caused the weight thereby
to aggrieve many of those places ever since, ib. Lilly the Astrologer
complaining, that whereas he was Taxed to pay about 20 s. to the Ship money, he
was in the year 1651 rated to pay about 20 l. annually to the Soldiery, ib.
The Author's belief and reason about Republican Models necessarily growing more
and more out of fashion, p. 194, 195. Observations on the great Clause of
proponentibus legatis in the Council of Trent, p. 195. The preserving of
orderly proportion in the Revenue of the Prince and the Priest, and with
respect to number weight and measure under the times of the Gospel, agreed on
by Divines to be referred to by Ezekiel in Vision from the 40th Chapter to the
end of his Prophecy, p. 196. How Augustus his great Tax or Pole helped to
confirm the Christian Religion, p. 197. The Author's opinion that future,
legal, and equal Taxes will have the effect of strengthening the Protestant
Religion, ib. Observed that the Parliament may be justly said to be indebted to
the Crown, for that great part of its Patrimony Queen Elizabeth alienated to
secure the Protestant Religion, ib. The fears of Popery further Censured, p.
198. Ridly and Latimer Prophesied at the Stake, that Protestancy would never be
extinguished in England, p. 198. Roger Holland prophesied at the Stake at
Smithfield, that he should be the last that should there suffer Martyrdom, ib.
Observations on the Natural Prophesying of dying men and its effects, p. 199.
The Vanity of Men's troubling the World by Suppositions, ib. and p. 200. It Is a
degree of madness to trouble it by putting wanton impossible cases, p. 200. The
Author without any thing of the Fire of Prophecy, and only by the light of
reason presageth, that the excessive fear of Popery as we^l as its danger will
here be exterminated, ib. The justice of the Claim of King Charles the first,
to the Title of Martyr asserted, p. 201, 202, 203. The Author judges that some
vile Nominal Protestants by the publication of many Seditious Pamphlets, have
given the Government a just Alarm of their designs against it, p. 203. Of
Papists and Protestants being Antagonists in Shamms, p. 204. Mr. Nigh cited for
representing the Dissenters, acted by the Jesuits in thinking it unlawful to
hear the Sermons of the Divines of the Church of England, p. 204. False
Witnesses among the Jews allowed against false Prophets, p. 205. The Earl of
Anglesy's Courage and Justice asserted in the professing in the House of Lords
his disbelief of such an Irish Plot, as was sworn by the Witnesses, tho the
belief of the reallity of such a Plot had obtained the Vote of every one else
in both Houses, ib. Above 2000 Irish Papists in the Barony of Enishoan demeaned
themselves civilly to the English during the whole Course of the Rebellion, ib.
Several eminent ingenious Papists in England, and Foreign parts celebrated for
their avowed Candor to Protestants, p. 206, 207, 208, etc. D' Ossat's
acquainting the Pope, That if his Holiness were King of France, he would show
the same kindness to the Huguenots that Harry the 4th did, p. 208. Cromwell
being necessitated to keep the Interest of the Kingdom divided, was likewise
necessitated to keep up all Religions according to the Politics of Julian, p.
211. Of the Papists calling King James Julian, ib. The Author inveigheth
against the Calumny of any Protestants who call any one Apostate, for the
alteration of his Judgment in some controvertible points of Faith between
Papists and Protestants, ib. The Author's Reason why it is foolish to fear that
any Rightful Prince of the Roman Catholic persuasion that can come here, will
follow the Politics of Julian, ib. It Is shown that any Protestant Usurper here
must act a la Julian, ib. The Usurper Cromwell shown to be a Fautor of Priests
and Jesuits by the Attestations of Mr. Prynn and the Lord Hollis, p. 212, 213.
The danger of Popery that would have ensued Lambert's Usurpation, p. 213, 214.
How true soever any Usurpers Religion is, he must be false to the Interest of
the Kingdom, p. 214. Observed that the Kings long Parliament by the Act for the
Test, did enjoin the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to be taken, ib. Those
Oaths lay on the Takers an Obligation to the Kings Heirs and Successors without
any distinction of the Religion true or pretended of such Heirs and Successors,
ib. Mr. Prynn's Book called Concordia discors printed Anno 1659, to prove the
Obligation by those O^hs to the King's Heirs and Successors, commended, ib. The
Author mentions the Reasons that induced him to write Casuistically concerning
such Obligation: and promises to send that his Writing to his Lordship, ib.
The Author judges that he ought not to be severe to any Papist before he has
a Moral certainty of such Papists having imbibed any of the Principles
imputable to P^pery that is unmoral or inhumane, ib. The Author observes that
few or no Writers of the Church of Rome have lately thought fit by their Pens,
to assert the Inheritable Right of Princes, without respect to any Religionary
Tenets they may hold, p. 215. The Author thinks that for a Protestant at this
time to write for the devesting any Roman Catholic Prince of his Property and
Right of Succession, when few or no Writers of the Church of Rome, either do or
dare for fear of offending the Pope, employ their Pens for the preservation of
such his property and right without respect to to any Religionary Tenets he may
hold, is like drawing against a naked man, ib. D' Ossat affirms, That the Pope
and the whole Court of Rome hold it lawful to deprive a Prince of any Country
to preserve it from Heresy, ib. An Animadversion on a late Pamphlet concerning
the Succession, ib. Reflections on the House of Commons Proceedings in the
Exclusion Bill, ib. and p. 216. The Author gives an explanatory account of the
tempus acceptabile, he in p. 25 mentions, p. 216. His Majesty's constant
contending for the Protestant Faith celebrated, and likewise his Justice in
preserving the property of the Succession in the Legal Course by all his
Messages to the Parliament, p. 217. The unhappy State of that Prince who shall
for fear of the Populace, do any Act of the Justice whereof he doubts, and much
more of the injustice whereof he is fully convinced, p. 217. at large. The
Caution to the Angel of the Church of Philadelphia applied to such a Prince,
viz. Hold fast that which thou have, that no man take away thy Crown, ib. at
large. It Is not only Popery but Atheism in Masquerade to do an unjust Act to
support Religion, p. 218. King James disavowed the Act of his Son-in Laws
accepting the Title of King of Bohemia, ib. An Observation that in the
Common Prayer in King Charles the 1 sts time, relating to the Royal Family, the
Prayer runs for Frederick Prince Palat^ine Elector of the Rhine, and the
Lady Elizabeth his Wife, ib. The Author observes that in the Assembly's
Directory the Lady Elizabeth is styled Queen of Bohemia, p. 219. An Account of
the Governments avowed sense in King James's time, that any of the Princes of
England ought not by becoming Roman Catholic to be prejudiced in their Right
of Succession to the Crown, ib. The same sense of the Government in the time of
King Charles the 1 st, ib. The Parliament during the Civil War projected not
any prejudice to the right of Succession, on the account of any Religionary
Tenets, p. 220. Mention of somewhat more to confirm the claim of King Charles
the 1 st, to the Title of Martyr, beside his Adhesion to Episcopacy and its
Revenue, ib. An account of the Protestation of the Nonconforming Ministers in
the year 1605 relating to the King's Supremacy, wherein they assert the Royal
Authority inseparably fixed to the true Line, whatever Religion any Prince
thereof may profess, p. 221. The Author pe^stringeth the Protestant would be's
and new Statists of the Age that would for Religionary Tenets bar any of the
Royal Line from the Crown, ib. and p. 222. The Protestants in France now about
2 Millions, p. 222. Their Loyal Demeanor to Harry the the 4 th, after he became
a Papist, ib. His condition after he became one, ib. An account of the Apology
for John Chastel the Scholar of the Jesuits assassinating him^ and of the
Positions in that Apology, ib. The A^ology affirms, That Excommunication for
Heresy does quite take away any Regal Right: and that Henry of Bourbon cannot
be called a King by reason of his Conversion, p. 223. An account of the
Gunpowder Treason out of Thuanus, and the Tenets that the Traitors had imbibed
from their Confessors, and particularly, That Heretical Princes by being
reconciled to the Church of Rome recover not a Title to their Crown: and that
by such reconciliation they only save their Souls: and that Heresy bars the
Heretics Line from the Succession, etc. p. 224. Observations on the Millenary
Petition in the beginning of King James's Reign, ib. Observations on the
Papists Petition to him about the same time, p. 225. Dr. Burnet's History of
the Reformation commended, p. 226. The reason why the Author would have more
severity shown to a Seditious Protestant than a Seditious Papist, p. 231. Mr.
Fox referred to about his Question, Whether the Turk or Pope be the greater
Antichrist, p. 232. An account of the Popes being Pensioners to the Turk, p.
234. The Author observes in the famous Hosius of the Church of Rome, a viler
Blasphemy than any he remembers in the Alcoran, p. 235. Observations on the
Loyalty of many Papists in France to Harry the 4 th, when he came to inherit
the Crown, and remained a Protestant, and under the Papal Excommunication, p.
236. Harry the 4 th, an expected Protestant Successor, was Primier Ministre to
Harry the 3 d a Papist, ib. An Argumentative Speech of an Archbishop of France
to prove, That Harry the 4th ought not for his Religion to be debarred from the
Crown, ib. Maimbourg reflects on Calvin for his instigating the Magistrates of
Geneva to burn Servetus, ib. and p. 237. Dr. Peter du Moulin cited for saying,
That in the time of the late Usurpation, the Jesuits were the principal
directors of the Consciences of the English Papists, ib. A Book published Anno
1662 observes, That of the Papists in England, 7 parts of 10 were Gentlemen and
People of great Quality, ib. The Author believes that the more ingenious and
modest sort of Jesuits, will by Natural Instinct be more and more ashamed of
the turpitude of the former Principles of the Jesuits: and particularly of the
13 th, 14th, 15th. 30th, 32d. contained in the Popes Decree before mentioned,
p. 238. The Author judges that all bloody and rebellious Principles owned by
any who call themselves Protestants must naturally by shame and fear decay, ib.
Mr. Cranford a Presbyterian Divine cited for saying in a Printed Sermon at St.
Paul's, in the Year 1645, That in 80 years there did not arise among us so many
Blasphemous Heresies under Episcopacy, as have risen in these few years since
we have been without a Government, and that above 160 Errors have been here
since broached, and many of them damnable, ib. and p. 241. A Speech in a late
Parliament referred to for observing that according to the best Calculation,
the Dissenters could not in the last Elections for Knights of the Shire bring
in above 1 in 20 into the Field, ib. The present Gentlemanly temper appearing
in the People of England observed, as to the not having r^sentments against any
men or their Converse by reason of their asserting Controverted Points capable
of the name of Religion, p. 241. The great Controversy about Easter now
slighted, ib. The Terms of Omo-ousios and Omoi-ousios will make no more
fermentation in the World, p. 242. The word Heresy now generally here reduced
to its quiet Primitive Signification of an opinion without reference to truth
or falsehood, ib. Our Courts Christian do no more prosecute men for being
Heretics, than for being Usurers, ib. There is now a more valuable libera
theologia in England, then was under the Usurpation, p. 243. The Obligation our
Land has received from the Royal Society mentioned, ib. The knowledge of
Anatomy enriched within this last Century, a 3d part, ib. There were in the
Year 1599 reckoned in Christendom, 2,25044 Monasteries, ib. By Herod's
Infanticidium a Million and 44 Thousand slain, in the account of Volzius, p.
214. In 45 years the Spaniards in America put to death 20 Millions of Indians,
ib By the growing Populousness of Mankind we must naturally hear more and more
of Wars and rumors of Wars, p 245. In the beginning of the Reign of the Royal
Martyr, England not afraid to contend with both France and Spain, ib. 2,50000
l. per Annum Calculated to have been formerly at a Medium for 76 years gained
to England by the Balance of its whole Trade, p. 246. The Author en passant
Calculates that England has for late years gained double that Sum by the
fashion of Crape, ib. Ten times as much spent on the Law or Physic here as on
the Clergy, p. 247. By the Calculations of Cardinal Pool there were more
Colleges and Hospitals in England then in France, which (he said) exceeded
England by two 3ds in the numbers of People, as in Lands, p. 248. The Author
observes that in the Code Louis published in the Year 1667, the Method enjoined
for the registring the Christenings and Burials in each Parish in France, is
better contrived than that used in London, ib. It Is supposed that the
publishing the Observations on the Bills of Mortality about three years before
in London, might occasion the aforesaid exact registring of the Christenings
and Burials in France, and moreover the registry of the Marriages by the Code
Louis enjoined, p. 249. The Registring of the Births and Burials is as old as
the ancient times of the Romans, and introduced among them by Servius Tullius,
ib. The pruden^e of the Code Louis remarked in the numbering of the Regulars and
Seculars there enjoined, ib. Sometime before the year 1588, the number of men
in Spain being taken by secret Survey, there were returned a 11 hundred and 25
thousand and 300 and 90 men, ib. A Computation out of Thuanus of the Expenses
and Receipts of Lewis the 13 th for the Year 1614, ib. The Expenses and
Receipts of that Crown were more than quadrupled in the year 1674, p. 250. A
Calculation of about a 3d part of the Current Coin of England yearly carried
into France, ib. A Descant on the saying so much in vogue, viz. Res nolunt male
adnimistrari, and an account of its Original, ib. The Author supposes that a
more important Linen Manufacture will here happen from the many French
Protestants here lately planted, than was the Woollen one here introduced by
the Dutch whom Duke Alva's Persecution brought hither, p. 251. Remarks about
the general sowing of Hemp, and Flax here, and about the designed settlement of
the same proving Abortive in several Parliaments, ib. The French King in the
last War did forbid the Importation of Sail-Cloath to England, ib. A presage of
the future happy State of England and the Authors Idea thereof at large, ib.
and p. 252. An account of the Rough Hemp and Flax and Sail-cloth and all other
Manufactures of Hemp and Flax yearly brought into England, and from what
Countries, deduced out of the Custom-house Books, p. 254. All the Hemp and Flax
sown in England, is observed to be bought up by the years end, p. 257. Almost
as much Hemp and Flax yearly brought into Amsterdam, as into the whole Kingdom
of England, ib. The Authors judgment of the effects of the necessity that will
drive us on to the Linen Manufacture, ib. An Account of the fine Linen lately
made by the French Protestants at Ipswich: and of the Flax by them sown, ib.
The Author's Censure of the excessive Complaints of the danger of Popery, ib.
His belief that the future State of England will make men ashamed of their
passed fears of Popery, ib. The Vote of the House of Commons for the recalling
the Declaration of Indulgence carried by the Party of the Nonconformists, p.
258. Most of the Papists of England in the Year 1610, computed to be under the
guidance of the Jesuits, p. 260. Many Popish Writers have inveighed against
Gratian the Compiler of the Decrets of the Canon Law, ib. That Law never in
gross received in England, ib. Binds not English Papists in the Court of
Conscience, ib. A Tenet ridiculously and falsely in the Canon Law founded on
Cyprian, ib. Gratian's founding it on Cyprian gives it only the weight it could
have in Cyprian's Works, p. 261. Pere Veron's Book of the Rule of Catholic
Faith, cited for Gratian's Decrees, and the gloss claiming nothing of Faith,
and Bellarmine's acknowledging errors therein. ib. One definition in the Canon
Law, and gloss held by all Papists ridiculous, ib. The Author thinks he has
said as much to throw off the Obligation on any Papists to obey the Pope's
Canon Law as they would wish said, ib. He thinks himself morally obliged in any
Theological Enquiry to say all that the matter will fairly bear on both sides,
ib. Heylin and Maimbourg cited about the firing of Heretical Villages in
France, p. 262. Parsons and Bellarmine cited by Done for rendering some things
obligatory that are said by Gratian, p. 263. The Author expects that the
growing populousness of England will have the effect of rendri^g men less
censorious of any supposed Political Errors in the Ministers of our Princes, p.
265. Mr. Fox cited for his Observation of many Excellent men falsely accused and
judged in Parliament, and his advice to Parliaments to be more circumspect, ib.
The Author minded by that passage out of Fox to reflect on the severity in a
late Parliament in their Votes against the King's Ministers, ib. The injustice
of the Vote against the Earl of Hallifax, p. 266. The Earl of Radnor
occasionally mentioned with honor, ib. The Constancy of the Earl of Anglesy to
the Protestant Religion further asserted, p. 267. Mention of his Lordships
being injuriously reflected on in a Speech of Sir W. J. ib. The
unreasonableness of the Reflections on the Lord Chief Justice North, for
advising and assisting in the drawing up and passing a Proclamation against
Tumultuous Petitions, ib. The great deserved Character of that Lord Chief
Justice, p. 268. throughout. A reflection on the popularity of Sir W. J. and on
the ^^^essive Applause he had from the House of Commons after his Speech for
the Exclusion-Bill, p. 269. Sir Leolin Jenkins mentioned with honor, ib. The
Cabal of Sir W. J. observed to be full of fears of the Exclusion-Bill passing
and their not knowing what steps in Politics to make next, ib. The Earl of
Peterborough at large mentioned with honor, ib. and p. 270. A further Account
of the Authors prediction of England's future happy State, ib. and p. 271. The
Author observes that the most remarkable late Seditious Writers have published
it in Print, That they feared the next Heir to the Crown only as Chief
Favorite to his Prince, and that they judged that the Laws would sufficiently
secure them from fears of his power if he should come to the Crown, p. 271. An
Assertion of his never having advised his Prince to incommode any one
illegally, and of his not having used his own power to any such purpose, ib.
The Author judges such Persons to write but in jest, who amuse the People
about being Lachrymists by that Princes Succession, ib. The Author reflects on
our Counterfeit Lachrymists for not affecting as quick a prevention of any
future growth of Popery, as was (...) care of in Scotland, p. 272. He observes
that few or none in Scotland fear that Popery can ever in any Course of time
there gain much ground, ib. The Papists in that Kingdom estimated to be but
1000, ib. The Author believes that the fears of Poperies growth will be daily
abated in England, and in time be extinguished, ib. More Popish Ecclesiastics
observed to be in Holland, then Ministers in France: and that yet none in
Holland pretend to fear the Papists, ib. The Authors judgment of the Dissenters
Sayings being usefully published, ib. Some Notes on the Geneva Bible seditious,
ib. The same Tenet of firing Heretical Cities that is in the Popes Canon Law
founded on the 13 th of Deuteronomy, is chargeable on our late Presbyterians,
ib. The Assemblies Annotations cited to that purpose, ib. The Church of England
illuminates us with better Doctrine, p. 274. Bishop Sanderson cited for that
purpose, ib. Calvin as to this point did blunder as shamefully as our
Assemblymen, p. 274. Several of the Calvinistick and Lutheran Divines imbibed
the error of Hereticidium from the same mistaken Principle of Monk Gratians,
ib. The Presbyterians here fired the Church and State with a Civil War, ib. The
Authors belief that there will never be any new Presbyterian Synod in England
nor General Council beyond Sea, ib. The Popes Pensions in the Council of Trent
that sat for 18 years, came to 750 l. Sterling per Month, ^b. The Author
predicts the extermination of all Mercenary Loyalty in England, ib. The reason
of such his Prediction, p. 275. The Lord Hyde first Commissioner of the
Treasury mentioned with honor, ib. What the new Heaven and the new Earth is
that the Author expects in England, ib. The reason that induced false Prophets
to foretell evil rather than good to States and Kingdoms, p. 276. at large. The
same applied to our Augurs who by enlarging our fears and jealousies and their
own fortunes thereby, rendered the Genius of England less august, ib. The
Authors measures of the future State of England are taken only from Natural
Causes, and Natures Constancy to it self, p. 277. A short account of several
great Religionary Doctrines having naturally pierced through the sides and
roots of one another, p. 279. The Religion of the Church of England has
naturally pierced through the sides and roots of Protestant Recusancy, ib. The
numbers of the Non Conformists are daily decaying, ib. There were in the Year
1593 judged to be in England 20000 Brownists, ib. The Gross of the Numbers of
NonConformists always consisting chiefly of Artisans and Retail-Traders in
Corporations, p. 281. They were very numerous there before the King's
Restoration, ib. A new way by which their Numbers and Potency may easily there
be diminished, ib. The Author judges the continuance of the old Laws against
Protestant Recusants to be necessary, p. 282. The Lord Keeper Puckerings Speech
of the ill behavior of the Puritans in 88, referred to, ib. The prudence and
justice of the King's Measures asserted, as to the not repealing the Statutes
against Protestant Recusants, ib. The Peace of Munster observed to have removed
the popular fears abroad in Case of the Successions of lawful Princes differing
in Judgment from the Religion Established, p. 283. The Author of the Catholic
Apology with a Reply, cited for there not being one Priest, one Mass, one
Conversion more in England, in the year after the Declaration of Indulgence,
then in any year of trouble, p. 284. The Author mentions the soft and gentle
disposition of Bellarmine, p. 284. The Authors reflecting on the Principles of
the Jesuits with sharpness as the Pope and his Court of Inquisition have done,
ib. The Author disowneth all acerbity and rancour relating to the usage of any
Papists, ib. He observes that the putting Roman Catholic Priests here to
death, did propagate their Religion, ib. The Author observes that an English
Priest of the Church of Rome has done him the honor to adopt as his own many
passages of the Authors long since printed, that were disswasive of the use of
force in matters of Religion, p. 284. Observed that if it be not lawful for
every man to be guided by his private judgment in matters of Religion, it is
hardly possible to acquit our separation from the Church of Rome of the guilt
of Schism, ib. The Author not inclined to be severe to any Papist for being in
any Tenets that may properly be called Religion, guided by his private judgment
to receive the guidance of the Church of Rome, ib. The Custom of Authors of
large Discourses, publishing together with them a REVIEW, ib. He promises to
the Earl of Anglesy a REVIEW of this Discours^, p. 285. The Author will in a
short REVIEW explain some passages on occasion, and add others, ib. If he
doubts of any thing or shall alter his opinion of any thing therein, he will in
the REVIEW acquaint his Lordship why he does so, ib. The Author thinks that as
none but Cowards are cruel, so none but Dun^es are positive, ib.
C2 R
DIEV^ET^MON^DROIT
HONI^SOIT^QVI^MAL^Y^PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
Devon, Jan. 27. 1680. My Lord,
AS to the Candor of the English Nation that was formerly so very
extraordinary, and the whiteness and sweetness of the temper of the People of
England that did add to the representing it a Land flowing with Milk and
Honey, and to the making it like the Galaxy to have one brightness from
thousands of fixed Stars placed so high by Nature, that they could not suffer
the least Eclipse by the shadow of the whole Earth; we may well since the
Publishing of the horrid Affidavit of the Infamous Person, and so many valuing
themselves as the best of Men upon their believing what was sworn by the worst,
lament the temporary decay of so great a part of the Glory of the English good
Nature.

And they who knew your Lordship, (and consequently knew you to be a steadfast
approver of the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England) have reason
more particularly to be sensible of what concerned you in that calumnious
Affidavit, because the wretch presumed therein to fasten on your Lordship the
Sanbenito of a Court of Rome- Papist, and to represent you as a favourer of
Popery or the Papal Usurpations that were in Harry the 8th's time hence
exterminated, and as an endeavorer to stifle the Evidence about the Plot
notify'd by the Government for the recalling that kind of Popery.

Although I know no Christian more tenderly inclined then your Lordship to show
all Christian Indulgence to the Persons of Popish and Protestant Recusants, and
have sometimes observed your Lordship while you were wishing that none of the
New Articles of Faith in the Tridentine Creed were by any believed, yet out of
tenderness to the Persons of Devout and Loyal Papists, with great reason to
wish likewise that no Odium might come to such from the Name of POPERY for
their Profession of such Tenets as are held by the Greek and other Churches who
yearly Curse the Pope, and are so Cursed by him; yet none need doubt but that
your Lordship will as much as any man account it the opus diei by all due means
to oppose all plotted Designs whatsoever to retrive the Papal Power of Usurping
over the Crown, or Conscience. My Lord, there are some among us who would usurp
on and appropriate to themselves the Name and Thing of Protestancy, and would
be thought the only true Protestants, and would be Monopolists of all the heat
and light against Popery. But as I shall make bold to come in for my share with
them, so I shall yet acquaint your Lordship, that if I may in any part of this
Letter to you seem with any excess of Passion to reflect on Popery, I shall
before I take leave of you afford you such a Patriotly and Gentlemanly reason
of my warmth against it, (as I think) has not by others been given, nor
particularly by some Pedantick Anti-Papists, who render their Conversation
nauseous by their eternal talking of nothing but Popery, and while they are
neglectful of all the due means to prevent its growth.

These things being therefore premised, I shall in despite of the Affidavit,
say that I will be the last man in England who shall believe that my Lord Privy
Seal can be such a Court of Rome-Papist. I think it was St. Augustine, who
meaning well in a pang of Zeal, cried out on one occasion, Credo quia
impossible est: But I shall both as to the truth of any deposing or imposing
Doctrine, and of your Lordships believing it, ground my disbelief on the
impossibility of either. When I hear men say, they look upon it as an exerting
of a miraculous Power Divine that the Globe of the Earth hangs in the Air
without falling, I interrupt not their thoughts of devotion, but know that the
Earth which is balanced by its own weight, cannot fall but it must fall into
Heaven, Coelum undique sursum: And should any one tell me of your Lordships
falling into any gross erroneous doctrinal opinions, I who have long observed
the constant tendency of your understanding toward the Center of truth, cannot
apprehend any danger of your falling from it. So likewise when I hear men
impute it to the Divine Benignity that they were not made Flies or Toads, I
disturb not the Piety of their thoughts, but know that it was not possible to
make me, that is to say, endued as I am with a Rational Soul, to have been a
Fly or a Toad; which Creatures by their very Natures are devoyd thereof. And
thus tho sometimes some Protestant may turn such a Papist who has an
understanding swayed by secular Interests and sensual Appetites; yet in the
condition of that excellent manly understanding of your Lordships, which has so
absolute a Sovereignty over all brutish inclinations, whereby you and all
others whom Heaven has favored with such Endowments, do as much transcend
degenerate Mankind as they do Beasts, the Errors of such Doctrines will be too
gross for you to be able to swallow.

Nor is it more possible for your Lordship to believe such Popery acceptable
after you have surveyed the several parts of it with your penetrating Judgment,
unwearied diligence, and the incomparable Candor worthy of a lover of truth,
and indeed worthy of your self, then it was possible for Sir Francis Drake
after he had sailed round the Earth, to believe the Opinions of St. Augustine
and Lactantius who denied its rotundity. To celebrate your Lordships accurate
knowledge of, and constant Zeal for the Protestant Religion among the happy few
that have the honor of your retired converse, were to gild Gold, and to fear
the possibility of its appearing upon any Enquiry that you are not of that
Religion, is to think or fear that Gold can be destroyed.

I have upon my occasional debates with some Persons that would make you a
Papist whether you will or no, called to mind some discourse I had with you
long since, concerning your Birth and Education, and thereupon considering the
closeness of your Education in the Protestant Religion, have as much wondered
at thinking how it was possible for any Principles of such Popery to get into
your Mind, as at Wild Beasts getting into Islands. While I consider how the
first thoughts of Childhood ripening into Youth, are like the first Occupants
claiming and generally keeping possession during life, I am apt when I hear of
any man's owning any Brutish or Savage Tenets, to think of the Egg of such a
Crocodile, and from what Animal it came. And he that shall look back on your
Lordships beginning, will find you descended of Noble and Renowned Parents,
both by Father and Mother, who likewise were esteemed (as I may say) Noble
Bereans for searching into the Scripture, and thereupon owning the Protestant
Faith: In a word of a whole Family of Consessors, if Sir John Perrot Lord
Deputy of Ireland, your Great Grandfather, your Grandfather Annesley an Eminent
Commander at Sea, and a principal Undertaker in Munster in the Reign of that
blessed Queen Elizabeth, that great Statesman Francis Lord Mount Norris and
Viscount of Valentia a Faithful Servant to the Crown in many great Employments,
and among the rest, Principal Secretary of State, Vice-Treasurer, and Treasurer
at Wars in Ireland to two great Kings of Famous Memory, King James, and King
Charles the First, and the Family of the Phillipses of Picton Castle in
Pembrokeshire, out of which your Mother came, have their just respect allowed
them. Your Lordship being born in Dublin received there your Name in Baptism
at the Nomination of your Noble Sponsor Arthur Lord Chichester, who had been
Deputy of Ireland Eleven Years, and for whose Name the Protestants of that
Kingdom have still a great Veneration.

I remember you further acquainted me, that at your age of Ten Years the Scene
of your Education was removed to England, and that afterward you spent Four
Years in Magdalen-College in the University of Oxford, where you enjoyed the
Learned Conversation of Dr. Frewen then President of that College, and since
that Archbishop of York, and of Dr. Hammond, and from whom and other Persons of
that University, many have been made acquainted that your Lordship was then an
Ornament of that place, and an Eminent Proficient in all Academical Learning,
and that you there performed Exercise for your Degree with the general applause
of that place. And there where you came to that great Mart of Knowledge with so
great a stock of Natural Reason, and improved the same with so much Logic, and
conversed so many Years with the great Champions of the Church of England, I am
sure (if I may without affectation use a School Term) your Lordship could have
no Motus* primo primus to approve any Papal imposition upon Reason. I remember
that you told me, That your Father transplanted you thence to the Society of
Lincoln's Inn, where with unwearied steps your diligence it seems overcame the
craggy ascent of the Study of the Common Law of England: But where the pleasant
height of it Compensated your pain in the way, and gave you not the Landscap of
one Valley, but the Prospect of all the Land of the People of England beneath
it, fenced in with the enclosure of Property; of men, (according to the
Scripture expressions) sitting under their Vines and Fig Trees, and none making
them afraid, where the Pastures are clothed with Flocks, and the Valley covered
with Corn that they shout for joy, and sing, where our Oxen are strong to
labor, and no breaking in, nor going out, and no complaining in our streets;
and of a Numerous brave Nation not capable of being enslaved by any Wills or
Passions but their own.

And sure where you learned the Science of this Noble Law, that is, a Law of
Liberty, your self and your Brethren in that Honorable Society must needs
echo back that great exclamation of the Peers of England, Nolumus Leges
Angliae mutari, and not endure the servitude of the Law of the Pope, or which
is all one, his will.

Yet moreover such was my Lord Mount Norris his Zeal that you might by all
means imaginable be confirmed in your aversion against the Papal Usurpations
and Arbitrary Government, that he then sent you to Foreign Parts, that you
might see those Monsters you had here but read of, which occasioned your
traveling into France, Savoy, and many Parts of Italy. I have been told that
your Father the Lord Mount-Norris his Commands and his Concerns both Domestic
and Public called you from Rome to England toward the Year 1640. when several
Parliamentary Addresses and Remonstrances against the Papists, and increase of
their Power and Numbers had been made. The Thunder of the Parliament had then
at that time so cleared the Air of England from the infection of Popery, that I
suppose none will think you could be then tainted with it. And the Civil Wars
of England afterward breaking out, when both Parties appealed to God for the
decision of their Cause by the Sword, and contested with each other in Public
Declarations, about which of them was the greater enemy to Popery, it had not
only been very impolitick, but extremely ridiculous for any man at that time,
by being a fautor of the Papal Usurpations, to expose himself to the fencing
with two enraged Multitudes, which would have produced the same effect as would
a Iesuit's Preaching a Postilling Sermon here against the Yearly burning of the
Pope to the Populace employed in that Solemnity.

My Lord, I find my self her engulfed in writing a long Letter; and the truth
is, having a great concern for your Lordship's Honor, I am willing to take
pains to satisfy my self exactly by thus tracing your Lordship's steps on the
Stage of the World, that I may satisfy others so about your being as averse as
any one can be from supporting any Papal Power to invade the rights of
Conscience, or those of Princes. The Roman Historian speaking of Nero, says,
Tyrannum hunc per quatuordecem annos passus est terrarum orbis. And it may
truly be said, That England formerly has endured the Popes Tyranny, and the
Artifices of its Favorers for some Ages: But the Patience of Man has bounds,
and the Propagators of such Usurpation who had so long maintained a separate
Sovereignty here, the which is like an Animal living within an Animal, did find
that as the lesser creature is evacuated by the greater, or destroyed therein,
or does else destroy the greater Animal, it was so held to be in the case of
such Power among us, and as no doubt it always will be by your Lordship.

When your Travels were ended, and you had with the help of the Education your
Father gave you, saved him by your knowledge of the Lex terroe from falling as
a prey to Arbitrary Power, and thereby showed your self both a good Son and
great Patriot, the first Scene of public Employment wherein your Lordship
appeared with Eminency, was as Governor of Vlster by Authority under the Great
Seal of England; a Charge of difficulty, when the Forces from Scotland under
the Command of Major General Munro had so long ruled absolutely there, that the
English Interest had suffered a great eclipse and diminution. How you managed
Affairs during your Government there, and how by your Councils the most
pernicious and potent Rebel Owen Roe O Neil was opposed, and his design to
swallow up that Province and the Province of Connaught disappointed, and the
Protestant Interest in both united and encouraged, and under your Conduct and
Command the Titular Popish Archbishop of Tuam taken, and by the seizure of his
Cabinet and Papers, the Popish design upon Ireland discovered and broken, in
due time I doubt not you will more particularly inform the World. From that
Service your Lordship was upon the ill success of those Commissioners who were
first sent to the then Marquess of Ormond, employed to make the Capitulation
with the said Marquess then Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, for the Surrender of
the City of Dublin, and all other Garrisons under his Command, into the
Parliaments hands for securing them from the Irish Rebels, who had invested and
straightened the same: Which happy work was effectually accomplished by the
Articles made with the said Marquess already published to the World, And so the
Protestants Interest in that Kingdom made entire, and so considerable that they
daily gained ground of the Confederate Rebels, till at length they were wholly
subdued and vanquished. After those Articles concluded, and reception of the
said City and Garrisons, your Lordship was called back into England, where
being a Member of the House of Commons, you showed your self no less useful to
this Kingdom; And have since in Parliament and Council, and other great
Employments in both Kingdoms showed your self an Eminent Instrument both in his
Majesty's happy Restoration, who entirely trusted you with the Management
thereof, and in other great Affairs of State and Government to general
satisfaction, being never by those that knew you so much as suspected for Evil
Council, or want of Zeal and Faithfulness to your King or Country, but every
day gaining more the Love and Esteem of Protestants and Patriots, as you had
incurred the implacable hatred of the Popish and Arbitrary Factions. I cannot
here but observe, That a little before the Kings Restoration, the spirit of the
people universally showing its resentments so strong and vehement against
Lambert and his Committee of Safety, and against all the propounders of
projects of Government, that nothing but his Majesty's return to the Throne of
his Ancestors could quiet the people, and your Lordship then as President of
the Council by your great Wisdom Contributing highly to the dispatch of many
arduous and intricate Affairs requisite to make that great Revolution without
bloodshed, when things near their Center were moving so fast, it may well be
reckoned among impossible things, that your Lordship should now espouse the
Papal interest, when the Vogue, the Humor, the Sense, and Reason, and Spirit
of the People are bent against it, with as keen and strong and general an
antipathy as can be imagined. And when I consider that great real power you had
in the Kingdom at that time, testified not so much by your signing all the
great Commissions then for Military and Civil Employments, as by both the King,
and the best and wisest of the people in the Three Kingdoms putting themselves
in your hands, and having their eyes chiefly upon you as to the management of
the Political part of that mighty concern, I cannot but thinking of your
Lordship whom thus the King and Kingdom delighted to honor, apply to you these
words in Valerius Maximus, where he speaks of Agrippa Menenius, whom the Senate
and People chose Arbitrator of their differences, and to ^ompose matters
between them, Quantus scilicet esse debuit arbiter publicae salutis: Yet as
great as this Man was, he could have no Funeral, unless the people had by a
pole given the sixth part of a penny to defray his Funeral Charges: But your
Lordships case in one particular seems harder then his, for they who unjustly
go to take away your good Name, and to make a Papist of you, go about to bury
you alive.

Had your Lordship after the King's Restoration aspired after the power of a
chief Minister, or suffered any such to be committed to you, you must have took
it with the concomitance of universal envy, that has always in England been
fatal to such power, England having always thought such power fatal to it. It Is
the power it self of such a Minister that is looked on as a popular Nuisance;
and it is impossible for such a great Man by raising his power only to what he
thinks a moderate height, to keep it secure and lasting. For tho a Steeple be
built with firm Stone, great Art, and but with a moderate height, yet are there
Clouds charged with Lightning and Thunder, and moving in the Air sometimes not
higher than the top of such a Steeple, and the Pryamid or sharpness of such a
Steeple then (as I may say) tapping or broaching such a Cloud that comes that
way, is instantly Burnt and Thundered down* And the Multitude of the Primier
Ministres adorers, who are always pleasing or troubling him with their
sacrifices, do all with sudden confusion leave him when he begins thus to fall,
as if Thunderstruck from Heaven.

We find in Rushworth, that June the 13th. 4 Caroli, it was ordered upon the
Question, That the excessive power of the Duke of Buckingham, is the cause of
the Evils and Dangers to the King and Kingdom. And we may well suppose, that if
a Parliament does still as one man set themselves against a Monopolist but of
one little pedling commodity, that they will look on a Chief Minister as one
that would, or in effect does monopolize the Beams of the Sun, I mean the Kings
Eye, and as one that alone has the Kings Ear, and as one that is the great
forestaller of the Court-market of preferments.

And happy it is for a Chief Minister, that the way of Parliamentary
Impeachment has been in such ancient usage, for that rids the people of the
outrage of that Minister, and that Minister of the outrage of the people. Our
Stories speak How barbarously Cruel the brutish Rabble was to Dr. Lamb, called
the Duke's Conjurer, and the reason why the people hate those they call
Conjurers so much is, because, they think such have a power to hurt their
Children or Cattle; and the same reason makes them hate one that they look on
as a Kings Conjurer, who they think can hurt their Property, and one who on
occasion can raise up Domestic and Foraign Devils to molest them, and
especially if he cannot lay those Devils when he has raised them, and who can
if he will put the People to charge, and to the danger of starving to feed his
familiar spirits. When once the people find by any man's power, the fence of the
Law begun to be broken down, they will go in at the gap, and it is nothing but
the Law that secures a chief Minister, and them against one another. St. Austin
therefore does rationally in his De Civitate Dei, charge the miserable
condition of the Romans on the contempt and breach of their Laws; and says he,
people were promiscuously put to death, not by Judgment of Magistrates, but by
Tumults, Neque enim Legibus and ordine potestatum, sed turbis animorumque
Conflictibus Nobiles ignobilesque necabantur.

Your Lordship therefore when you had been a repairer of the breaches of the
Nation, and of the Law therein, and (in the Scripture expression) a restorer of
paths to dwell in, as easily and unconcerned gave up the great deposit^m of
power the King and Kingdom entrusted you with, as ever you restored the least
to a private person, and have ever since among the Counselors of your Prince
both endeavored to make your Country safe, by giving Counsel against any
Neighbor Nations being too powerful, and to make your self secure by your not
grasping more power than you saw in the hands of each of your honorable
Colleagues, as well knowing that any single Minister that shall here set up to
be a Dispenser of the Sovereign Power, had need either still wear a Coat of
Male and an Iron Breast Plate, or bind the whole Kingdom to the Peace. Your
Lordship can hardly look into ancient History without meeting Examples of the
People like the Leviathan playing in the Ocean of their power, and spouting out
their censures both with fury and wantonness, when they are dooming the great.
You know the Lacedaemonians did reprimand their Lyc^rgus because he went with
his head stooping, the Thebans accused their Paniculus for his much spitting,
and the Athenians Simonides because he spoke too loud, the Carthaginians
Hannibal because he went loose in his garments, the Romans Scipio because he
did snore in his sleep, the Vticenses Cato for his eating with both Jaws, the
Syllani Julius Caesar, for wearing his girdle carelessly, the Romans were angry
with Pompey for scratching himself but with one finger, and likewise for
wearing a garter wrought with Silver and Gold on one leg, saying that he wore
such a Diadem about his foot as Kings do on their heads, though yet it seems
the only cause of his wearing it was to hide a Sore place there. And in these
abovementioned cases we are not to think that those Ancient and wise people
who thought the rest of the world barbarous, could censure those persons so
barbarously for those senseless reasons, but out of a hatred to the persons
Censured, were resolved to strike at the first thing they met, how innocent
soever in it self, in persons they thought they had reason to represent odious.

A late Great Man, who in a Public Speech in Parliament rendered the English
tongue as having the Monopoly of the term good Nature, found that they had not
engrost the thing when they imagined that his Ministry Monopolized much of the
Regal power. And another eminent person, afterward a Minister to His Majesty,
Suffered as a favourer of the French, at whose imprisonment I have heard that
the Lov^re rang with as much joy and triumph as if they had carried the point
in a great fight at Land or Sea; and he likewise suffered obloquy as if
concerned in the infamous murder of Sr. Edmond Godfrey, from which he was
certainly as free as from having killed Julius Caesar: And how far the
embroidered garter about his leg, made him like Pompey, Envyed, I know not; But
as I said it is a chief Ministers power the people of England strike at, who may
not be unfitly resembled to Alexanders Bucephalus, that would let none but
Alexander ride him, nor could Alexander himself do it till by holding him
against the Sun he kept him from being frighted with the sight of his Shadow.
And when one Subject seems to be the representative Shadow of the body of the
whole people, the Sight of him frights them so as to make them uneasy to be
ruled, And therefore I think his Majesty did rationally provide for the public
Security when he signified His pleasure in a Speech in a late Parliament about
not Ruling us by a single Ministry.

I should not wonder if your Lordship were called a Papist if you had been the
possessor of any such power, that name being now the angriest the people can
throw at any one, as it was before the late Wars, when Archbishop Laud who
had writ so well, and so much against the Papists, fell under the weight of
that name, But really by the power of that chief Ministry he had in the State
of England after the death of the Duke of Buckingham. And at that time the
current definitions of a Papist, and of one who enjoyed Arbitrary Power were
the same, And the things made conve^^^ble, or Devils dancing in the same
Circle. And so likewise the Vouge at this time obtains among the populace who
cannot see through the hard words and things in definitions, and if you ask
them what is a Papist, they will tell you he is one that is for Arbitrary
Power, and asking them what is one that is for Arbitrary Power, they will say a
Papist. And in cases where the people do not think fit to begin with Execution,
Common Fame goes for proof against such a Minister, and the political whispers
of other Great Men who inspire them, go for demonstrations, and they think
knocking down Arbitrary Power with Arbitrary proof is a good baculi^um
argumentum ad hominem, or rather a Monster of power, for as such they look on
one of the People, who is so by the head higher then themselves. I know none to
have observed the constitution and customs of the Government of Venice better
then your Lordship, and there any one that is but Arbitrarily affected (as our
term is here, Popishly affected) is taken volly before he comes to the ground,
or at furthest, at his first rebound, and his head made a Tennis Ball before he
comes to be bandi'd among the people, I mean he is first Sumonarily dispatched,
or made away, and his plenary process is dispatched or made up afterward. Your
Lordship has in the course of your travels been there in person, but my eyes
have only beheld it as a traveller in Mapps and Authors: one of whom, namely
Boccaline in his Raggnagli di Parnasse Speaking of Venice says that the
dreadful Tribunal of the Council of ten, and the Supreme Magistracy of the
State-Inquisition, could with three ballotting balls easily bury alive any
Caesar or Pompey who began to discover himself in that well governed State. And
according to the Laws of that Country any aspirer of the first rate so sunk by
the shot of the ballotting balls, may be said to be killed very fairly, though
there was no more Citation in the case then in that of the Martyrdom of Sir
Edmond Godfrey, who yet according to the principles of the Canon Law was
likewise killed very fairly. I here allude to the Style of the brothers of the
blade, who when sworn at a Trial about one murdered in a Duel, usually depose
that he was killed very fairly, And indeed I have by a Neighbor of mine, who
is a Civilian, been shown it in a Civil Law Book called the Second Tome of the
Common Opinions, in folio, Book 9. p. 462. Printed at Lions, that Rebellis
impune occidi possit, and tunc demum probari and declarari quod erat rebellis:
And the Canonists do as I am informed by him all agree, that valet argumentum a
crimine laesae Majestatis se^ rebellionis ad heresim, and with good reason
according to the Popish hypothesis, for that, he that is a heretic, is a Rebel
or Traitor to the Pope, and therefore a Heretic by that Law may be destroyed
before his Process is made. But the Kings of England, like those of Israel, are
merciful Kings, and in the Laws of England, Justice and Mercy are still
saluting each other, and with as much kindness as they can possibly show
without embracing each other to death, and the meanest Commoners Life in
England becomes not a forfeit to the Law, but after a Trial by his equals; and
in this, our Law agrees with that gentleness and equity inculcated by Grotius
de Iure Belli and Pacis, Book 3. Chap. 14. Temperamentum circa captos,. 3.
where he says, Cato Censorius (narrante Plutarcho,) si quis servus Capital
admisisse videretur, de eo supplicium non sumebat, nisi postquam damnatus esset
etiam Conservorum judicio. Quicum conferenda verba, Job. 31. 13.

I must confess I was very much shock't with one expression used in a long
Speech by one of the managers of the House of Commons in the Trial of the Earl
of Strafford, wherein the saying That Beasts of Prey are to have no Law, was
applied to the Earl. I am sure that Wolfs and Boars are Beasts of the Forest,
as well as Hearts and Hinds, and in the Kings Forests where they are in his
protection, they are to have Law, and so likewise Foxes. To this Metaphor of
hunting of men in Parliament, there is an allusion in the printed Letter of Mr.
Alured in Rushworths Collections, 4o. Caroli, where it is said, That Sir Edward
Cook in the House protested, that the Author and cause of all their miseries
was the Duke of Buckingham, which was entertained and answered with a cheerful
acclamation of the House, as when one good Hound recovers the scent, the rest
come in with a full cry: So they pursued it, and every one came on home and
laid the blame where they thought the fault was. But yet by this saying of
Alured, it seems they thought they were to give him Law; and it is a brutish
thing to suppose that wild predatory Beasts have in the Kings Forests more
protection, and more exemption from being arbitrarily hunted down, than his
Liege people to whom he is sworn, have in the whole Realm in general, and in
his Courts of Justice in particular. That time seemed not so much (...): But
your Lordships knowledge in the Laws of the Land and in the Laws of Nations is
so universal and profound, that you can come to no Court in the World, but will
either find Law there or bring it: and your great knowledge of the Parliamentary
Transactions in all past Ages, cannot but secure you against any apprehensions
of not finding Law. For it has been rarely seen, that a House of Commons has
gone to hunt any man down tho with the Law, that was not a Nimrod a Mighty
hunter of our Laws themselves; and never was the House of Peers thought a Court
of Rigor and Cruelty, and as the Tribunal of Cassius was for its dire severity
called Scopulus Reorum. In the end of the famous Trial of the Earl of
Strafford, the House of Commons foresaw that the Lords would acquit him, and
therefore they broke up the Judicial prosecution against him, and proceeded by
Bill of Attainder, and shortly after broke in pieces on his Grave the Rule and
Standard of Treason they proceeded by, as Heralds break their Staffs at the
Funerals of Illustrious Persons, and cast them into their Tombs. Had I been
one of that Lords Judges* I should have consented that after he had been hunted
so long by the Prosecution for Treason, and was not Judicially convicted of it,
he should have had the privilege of a Hart-Royal proclaimed, of which Manwood
in his Forest Law speaking, says, That if the King does hunt a Stag he is
called a Hart-Royal, and that if he does hunt a Heart in the Forest, which by
chacing is driven out, and the King gives him over, as either being weary, or
for that he cannot recover him, then because such a Heart has shown the King
pastime, and is also Cervus eximius, and that therefore the King would have him
preserved, he causes Proclamation to be made in the adjacent Villages, that
none shall kill, hunt, hurt, or chase him, and hinder him from his return to
the Forest, and ever after such a Heart is called a Hart-Royal proclaimed. But
I think that an eximious man impeacht in Parliament and there acquitted, will
need no Herald to proclaim his worth, nor his deserving to be restored in
integrum to the Royal Protection and Favor, when that his own works have
praised him in the gates, that is, in the Jurisdiction where they were so
strictly scanned. My Lord, if any could prove your Lordship to be a Papist, he
need not call that accumulative Treason in you, nor need he go about by
torturing the Law to make it confess many Felonies to be one Treason, many
Rapes to be one false coming: But Popery in you would be plain downright,
palpable and rank Treason by virtue of the Statute of 23 of Elizabeth, Chapter 1.
which makes it High Treason for any person in the Dominions of the Crown of
England to be withdrawn from the Religion then established, to the Romish
Religion. That your Lordship has been bred a Protestant, and been so (as it
were) ex traduce, there needs no other evidence then the contents of this
Letter, and that you have not been withdrawn to the Romish Religion, you have
declared by the Series of your actings against it, that show your Mind beyond
the power of words: and it is by the help of that great Wisdom God has given
you, that our English World expects that a way may be found how to make it more
clearly appear to the eye of the Law when any others have been or are withdrawn
to the Romish Religion, a thing perhaps at present of somewhat difficult proof:
For without supposing that the Pope can or will give them dispensations to take
all Oaths and Tests that can be devised, does not a reserving some fantastic
sense to themselves, make nonsense of all Oaths, and that one word Equivocation
make them proof against all other words? Does not that with them sanctify, or
at least justify all other words they can use? May they not on these terms
safely swear there is neither God, nor Man, nor Hell, nor Devil, that is
meaning, not in a Mathematical point, or in Vtopia, and that they saw not such
a Man such a day, that is, not with the eyes of a Whale? And have not the late
dying Speeches of some of these Imposters, and particularly Father Irelands,
shown us, that in the points of mental reservation and equivocation they
persevere in the impudent owning of that which would unhinge the World, and
turn humane Society into a dissolute multitude? And do we not believe many to
be Papists, who we know have taken the Oaths and Tests? Has not a Papist some
Years since writ of the lawfulness of the taking of the Oath of Supremacy? I
speak not this, my Lord, to derogate from the Wisdom of our Ancestors that
appointed these discriminations, nations, and do think that when we have used
all the lawful means we can, to know who among us are Papists as certainly as
we do what is Popery, and to keep Papists from hurting us and themselves, we
ought to acquiesce in the Results of the Providence of God. But what all those
means are, tho I know not, yet I am apt to believe that your Lordships
comprehensive knowledge of men and things, and of the true interest of the
Kingdom has qualified you to tell your Royal Master and His Houses of
Parliament: nor do I believe that the difficulty of either finding out such
means and making practicable things be practiced will blunt, but rather whet
the edg of your Industry in this case, as being of Quintilians mind who Judged
that there was Turpitude in despairing of any thing that could be done. I think
his words are Turpiter desperatur quicquid fieri potest. ^Tis certainly the
interest of the King and Kingdom that the numbers of the Papists here, and
especially of those withdrawn from Protestancy to the Church of Rome should be
known, in the case of which Apostates, tho it be impossible without seizing on
the Papers and Archives of one certain Priest to see the Original Acts of their
Recantation of Protestancy, yet is it most certain and on all hands confessedly
true, that Eminent Overt-Acts of abhorrency of Protestantisme are always
required at the admitting one who was of that Religion into the bosom of the
Roman Catholic Church: which any one will be convinced of who reads the Letter
of Cardinal D'Ossat to Villeroy of the 20 th of October. 1603. from Rome, where
he gives his Opinion against the Queen of England being made Godmother at the
Baptism of Madam. That Cardinal who had incomparable skill in the Canon Law,
and the knowledge of all the Customs of the Papal See, and who had lived at Rome
above 20 Years, says in that Letter, I account it my duty to write to you
freely that that cannot be done without very great Scandal to good Catholics,
nor without the extreme displeasure and offense of the Pope. You presuppose
that the Queen of England is a Catholic: but Here we know the contrary, tho
some believe that she is not of the worser sort of Heretics, and that she has
some inclination to the Catholic Religion. And I will tell you moreover, that
tho she were in her heart of the Catholic Apostolic and Roman Religion as much
as the Pope himself, so it is that she having been bred up in Heresy and
outwardly persisting in it as she does, she cannot according to the Canons be
held for a Catholic in public acts of Religion, till she has first both viva
voce and by writing under her hand abjured all Heresy, and made profession of
the Catholic Faith. Nor was it ever known, that in the case of any Protestants
Apostasy to the Church of Rome, any Pope ever dispensed with those Canons, and
therefore it may well hence be inferred, That if evidence just so much as the
Law requires as to such Apostasy be given, that no superpondium or proof of
overt-acts more then necessary ought to be expected, for that overt Acts almost
impossible to be proved, may yet necessarily be presumed: but this by the way.
And therefore now further, my Lord, if fas est ab host doceri be advisable in
the case, as strict Circumstances may be required in the conversion of Papists
to our Church, as are in the withdrawing of any from our Church to theirs.
Indeed if I were a Member of Parliament, and any one there should be so happy
as to invent a way, and propound it whereby the present Lay-Papists in England
might let us have a Moral Certainty that they neither consented to nor
concealed the late Plot, and likewise that they did really detest all those
desperate Popish Principles that are fundamentally destructive to the Safety of
the King and Kingdom, and that they would harbor no Priests born in the Kings
Dominions, nor send any of their Children to be bred in Foreign Seminaries; and
on the contrary, that on occasion they would discover to a Magistrate any such
Priest, or one who sent his Children to such Seminary, and likewise any one
that owned any of those Pernicious Principles that strike at the heart of the
Civil Government, and that they would presently give his Majesty an account of
all their own Names, Places of abode, and Numbers of their Families, and that
they would not live in nor come to the Court nor into any of our Cities or
great Towns, without leave obtained pursuant to the Statute of the 35th. of
Elizabeth, Chapter 2. (wherein it is Enacted under several Penalties, That they
shall not remove above Five miles from their dwellings, and to give in their
Names to the Constables, Headborough, and Minister, etc.) and that the people
might be delivered not only from any danger by them, but any fears that might
fall on a wise man, either of their power or numbers increasing I should
joyfully entertain such an invention; But what way of that kind is practicable,
I am altogether ignorant, But do suppose that the present Laws, Oaths, and
Tests, ought to continue till with the Consent of His Majesty and Lords and
Commons in Parliament we are further secured.

I know that we ought to be much more vigilant over English Papists, then over
any Forrainers, for that it is a kind of a Rule that Angli nil modicum in
Religione possunt, and therefore that no Popish Priest who is a Subject to
England can with the public safety live here. Your Lordship has I think as
comprehensive a knowledge of the affairs of Ireland, as any man can have, and
therefore I shall here tell you that a Gentleman of Ireland told me that in the
times of the usurpt powers 'twas in the Act of Settlement for Ireland by the
Parliament declared, that it was not their intent after almost a National
Rebellion to extirpate the whole Irish Nation, but that after an exception of
certain persons as to Life and Estate, the Act orders some Irish to be banished
the Kingdom, and other Irish to be transplanted to some part of Ireland,
allowing them such proportion of Land and Estate there as they should have had
of their own elsewhere in Ireland if they had not been removed. What effect
that Transplantation had I know not, but I suppose it easier to remove a
handful of men from one corner of the Land to another, then 'twas to remove
almost a Nation: And do suppose there are some Papists in England as innocent
of this late Plot, as there were some in Ireland of that Rebellion, The Dean of
Canterbury does in his incomparable Sermon before the House of Commons on the 5
th. of November 1678 acknowledge the Piety and Charity of several persons who
lived and dyed in the Roman Communion, as Erasmus, Father Paul, Thuanus, and
many others who had in truth more goodness then the Principles of that Religion
do either incline men to or allow of. And so I think my self bound in justice
to Judge in that manner of some Papists of my acquaintance. Thus the Epicureans
of old tho their Principle of making happiness consist in pleasure was
detestable, gained this point, that many of their Sect were honest men: And so
much Tully acknowledged to be true, but with a Salvo to his exception against
their Doctrine Speaking of Epicurus and his Followers, L. 2. De Finibus Boni
and Mali: he says, Ac mihi quidem videtur quod ipse vir bonus fuit, and multi
Epicurei fuerunt and body sunt, and in amicitirs fideles, and in omni vita
constantes and graves, nec voluptate, sed officio consilia moderantes. It seems
to me that Epicurus was a good man; and many of his Sect have been and are
faithful in their friendships, and constant and serious men in every condition
of life: and managing the conduct of their life's by duty and not pleasure. But
then says he, hoc videtur major vis honestatis, minor voluptatis* and
afterward he says, atque ut caeteri existimantur dicere melius quam facere,
sic hi mihi videntur melius facere quam dicere: As much as if he had said, No
thanks to their Principles, but their honest inclinations, the force of honesty
showed it self more Predominant in them, then that of pleasure: and as other
men's Principles are accounted better then their Practices, these men's Practices
are better then their Principles.

It is I think Gods standing Miracle in the world, (who is able to make a
divulsion between the formal and the vital Act, namely, to make fire not burn)
to keep some men from undoing themselves and Mankind by the genuine
consequences of the Opinions they profess in matters of Religion: And thus it
is happy for the World, that Caliginosa nocte premit Deus nepotes discursus:
And he can by an Omnipotent easiness when he pleases, Divert a man's
understanding from seeing any firstborn consequence from his opinion, as well
as a more remote one. Moreover, the Divine Power does in the Government of the
World interpose it self sometimes between professed Notions or Principles
themselves, and man's intellectual faculties. Good men sometimes do not believe
even the existence of that and of some other divine Attributes, where the
things to be believed are to be seen by the light of Nature; And bad men
habituated to lying sometimes do at last believe the lies and shamms themselves
made, though yet for the most part it happens (what is perfectly worthy of the
Divine Power and goodness) when men are with Candor and purity of mind seeking
after Truth, that-Heaven does so influence their understandings, as that they
are not by false lights artificial seduced to believe any thing against the
light of Nature, nor given up by weak arguments to strong delusions. These
things considered, I think that that great Divine of our Age, the Lord Bishop
of Lincoln, has with a Noble modesty and charity in the Title of his
unanswered and unanswerable Book against Popery, expressed the Principles of that
Religion when really believed to be pernicious.

And having said all this, I need not trouble your Lordship or my self much
further about finding a way to prevent the Papists from troubling us, but do
suppose that the Papists themselves are most concerned to labor in such an
invention. And instead of their being led by any hellish Principles to destroy
any City of Course by Sinister means, That is by burning it, they may, if they
please, in their Devotion, address to Heaven for that favor to its old chosen
People on Earth mentioned in Psalm. 107. v. 7. And he led them forth by the
right way, that they might go to a City of Habitation. I suppose, that after so
eminent a Person as the Lord High Chancellor of England in his Speech at the
Condemnation of the Lord Stafford, made that great interogation, Does any man
now begin to doubt how London came to be burnt? and after the Vote of the last
Parliament the last day of their Sitting in these words, viz. Resolved, That it
is the Opinion of this House, That the City of London was burnt in the Year
1666 by the Papists, designing thereby to introduce Arbitrary Power and Popery
into this Kingdom, they will not think it strange that they should not be
permitted to live in any of our Cities again, till they have showed how orderly
they can live in one of their own: And therefore I think we may without breach
of Civility, or at least violation of justice, apply to them some part of the
words which I find quoted by Dr. Bramhall Lord Bishop of Derry in his just
vindication of the Church of England, out of Gers. part. 4. Ser. de pace and
unit. Graec. as the farewell Speech to the Bishop of Rome, when the Grecian
and all other Eastern Churches parted from him, whom they acknowledged only as
a Patriarch, Namely, We acknowledge your Power, we cannot satisfy your
Covetousness, live by your selves.

How it is in the case of the People of Switzerland, Papists and Protestants
living apart by themselves in several Cantons, cannot be unknown to your
Lordship: Nor that the Protestants and Papists when they there made their
League at first jointly to maintain their Liberties against the House of
Austria, then agreed upon this also, That if any of the Natives living in the
Cantons of either side should change their Religion, that then they should be
permitted respectively to sell their goods and transplant themselves to the
Canton whose Religion they embraced. But I shall tell your Lordship, That of
late the Popish Canton Switz did break this agreement, and would not suffer
some of their Native Inhabitants to partake of this freedom, and did confiscate
the goods of some Families that changed their Religion, and at the instigation
of the Friars and Jesuits they condemned some of them to death, and others to
the Gallyes which was the cause of a Commotion among them.

The Gentleman of Ireland who discourst somewhat to me of the Transplantation
of the Irish Papists, told me, it was into the Province of Connaught, and think
into the Inland parts of that Country, for to have trusted them to live in
Maritine Towns there, whereby they might have let in an invading Popish or
other Forrainer, were to have trusted them with the power of the Keys of the
Kingdom: And he further told me, That the transplantation was managed with much
satisfactory tenderness to those Papists, and that as to English and Irish, it
had partly the nature of a bargain that gave content on both sides, and secured
them against each other after all the mutual exasperations that had passed, and
when 'twas fresh in the memory of both English and Irish, that 'twas the
promiscuous and scattered dwelling of the English among the Irish before the
Rebellion that tempted the Irish to butcher them, and made the English Sheep
for the Slaughter; and when it was not likewise forgot, that in former Wars the
partition or distinction of the English Pale did secure the English inhabiting
within its district.

I asked the Gentleman if they were not stinted to a certain number of Priests,
and care taken that none of them should be Jesuits, and that the chief
Governor of the Country should know their Names, and whether any Priests
Natives of that Country were allowed them? as to which enquiries he did not
fully satisfy me: but I supposed, that since all Religions have a Priesthood,
that somewhat of that kind was allowed them, and that since the Order of the
Jesuits was invented in the Year 1540. by the Pope as a Poisonous Stumm to put
a new fermentation into the Romish Ecclesiastical Rites and Discipline, which
were almost dead with age; and like vina vetustate edentula, and quite
dispirited with the Thunder of the Doctrine of Luther, and the lightning of
Learning and Knowledge then flying through the World; and that that Order of the
Jesuits was (as it were) a Court erected to begin with execution, and to
confute gainsayers by cutting their Throats, No Jesuits were permitted to
officiate among those transplanted Papists, and considering that the Priests
Natives of Ireland were the known fomenters of that Rebellion, that both
English and Irish might rather consent to some Secular Priests bred in Holland
or France, being employed in the New Irish Colony, and who had no knowledge of
the Intrigues of the several Interests in that Country, and would not by
kindred or relation to any of the great Families there perhaps be tempted into
Factions.

I have heard from that Gentleman of Mr. Peter Walsh a Friar in Ireland and of
his endeavors in the Art of Cicuration of some of the Romish Clergy and Layety
who there were Wolfes (and that without Sheeps clothing) and reclaiming them
to Principles and Practices consistent with civil society, and what proficiency
his Disciples have made therein, I being a stranger to that Kingdom know not;
but according to that saying, bonus est quem Nero odit, have the better opinion
of him for those endeavors of his having been Crowned with the Popes
Excommunications.

It was a noble saying, I have heard of one of the House of Peers this last
Parliament, I hate not the persons of any Papists, but I am an enemy to Popery:
In like manner I should be glad that all the Mercy were shown them that were
not Cruelty to the Public; but they are to excuse any one that will not forget
that when they begun the last outrageous Rebellion in Ireland (which no words
need or can aggravate) they enjoyed there equal Privileges with the English,
if not greater, the Lawyers were Irish, most of the Judges Irish, and the Major
part of the Parliament Irish, and in all disputes between English and Irish,
the Irish were sure of the Favor; and any one would be inexcusable to this
Kingdom, who forgot that King James's unparalleled kindness to his Popish
Subjects in suspending the execution of Penal Laws against them, in sparing
their purses, in remitting the arrears of what they owed Queen Elizabeth for
pecuniary penalties, nay giving into their hands what money of theirs as his
due was in the Exchequer, was but the ^rologue to their intended Tragedy on the
Fifth of November. And what provocations they had to be ill wishers to the Life
and Crown of the last King, as appeared by the detection forementioned
presented to His Majesty by Archbishop Laud, and a Charge given against them
in Print by the Reverend Dr. Peter Du Moulin, which he offered to make good;
and ad quod non fuit responsum, let any one Judge who further does look on the
Parliaments Addresses in Rushworths Collections. And unless some of them had
loved ingratitude for ingratitudes sake, they would never have entered into
that Conspiracy against his now Majesty, whose Life is the delight of all
Mankind but theirs: And yet since according to that expression, that God is not
the God of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles, so it being true, that the
King is King of the Papists as well as Protestants, King of the Irish as well
as of the English, and a common Father to them all, it may be worthy of His
Royal goodness and a God-like thing in him to distribute to them all the
Kindness that would not undo themselves and others, as the Divine bounty
dispenses itself to the Sinful, yet with respect to the Government of the
World. And as the love of an Indulgent Father may be measured more by the
kindness he would show an obstinate son, (were he qualified to receive it) then
by what he does, who tryes all methods to reclaim him, by his Will Disinherits
him, and goes down to the shades below without revoking such a Will, and yet in
his lifetime with the tenderest bowels and softest language he was constantly
bemoaning that Sons being not a Subject fit or capable to participate in the
Estate equally with his Brethren; Thus too may the love of the Pater Patriae,
and of the Country it self be demonstrated to these our obstinate Brethren,
more by the Favor we do not afford them, then by what we do, having often seen
the truth of what Solomon says, that the prosperity of fools destroys them.

But, as I said before, I would be glad that the Papists themselves would try
to find out what way of security the Wisdom of His Majesty and His great
Council may acquiesce in, so that any bitter way may not be prescribed to them
by public Authority, as perhaps this of Transplantation or some other may seem,
and that persons of innocent Tempers and Principles may not be carried off,
with those of noxious ones, as all strong purging Phisic disposesseth the body
of some good Humors as well as bad: and I therefore wish, that they may rather
satisfy His Majesty that they have transplanted into their minds some such
Principles as are to be found not only in Protestant but Heathen Authors to
incline men to be Gods and not Devils to one another, (and those Principles
growing in the Soil of Nature when transplanted into the mind of a Christian,
are much more generous and improved, like the Vines on the Rhine transplanted
into the Fortunate Islands) and whereby a Protestant King may Sit securely in
His Throne, and His Protestant Subjects sleep securely in their houses, and
walk securely in the Streets without fear of the fate of Sir Edmond Godfrey and
Mr. Arnold, pursuing them upon a declaratory sentence that they are Heretics,
by a shabby Consult of a few ignorant Priests in a blind Cabaret, without
citing them to show cause why they should not be knocked on the head by
Villains who account themselves the Popes Sheriffs, and at the worst that
happens to them his Martyrs, a fate of Prote^^ants worse then they suffered in
the Dog Days of Queen Maryes Reign, (that Canicula Persecutionis as
Tertullian's phrase is) for then they were not murdered, but after a Trial for
their Lives and Liberty granted to recant at stake. Methinks when they consider
the Popes Decree made at Rome the second of March 1679. condemning some
Opinions of the Jesuits and other Casuists, (the which in Latin and English was
printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard
1679.) and see thereby that the Augean Stable of the Casuists being so full of
Filth that it could hold no more, the Pope to avoid the scandal of the World,
and danger to those Souls who by the practice of those Opinions were not at
that time sent to the place from whence there is no Redemption, (though yet as
the excellent Author of the Preface to that decree here printed judiciously
observes, That the Pope treats those Opinions very gently and mercifully, and
indeed does not declare them ill in themselves, or such a Nuisance to souls that
he could not dispense with) and when they likewise consider that most of those
Opinions if not all were Rules allowed by Jesuits or other Casuists for
Confessors and Penitents to go by in the securing of the great concern of
Eternity till that time, and that Guymenius with the approbation and permission
of his Superiors in the year 1665. favors most if not all of those Opinions
with a colorable gloss out of Councels, Fathers, Schoolmen and Divines, and
endeavors to throw off the Odium from the Jesuits for them, upon the whole
Roman Church, they should now be so awakened as thoroughly to examine both those
and other points in that Religion, supposing that some future Pope may declare
the Souls left in the lurch that hold some other Opinions recommended to them
by their Spiritual guides, without their having obtained a papal dispensation
to hold them.

My Lord, though I believe your Lordship to have ever had as keen an Antipathy
against Caballing with any Papists as good old Jacob showed he had against that
with Simeon and Levy, of which he said, O my soul come not thou into their
secret, unto their assembly, mine honor be not thou united, yet their
necessary applications to your Lordship in your administration of the Privy
Seal and their voluntary recourse to the hospitality of your noble and constant
Table, where any one in the habit of a Gentleman is allowed to be your Guest,
giving you opportunities of discoursing sometimes with Papists, I suppose your
advice to them to consult with one another in peace how to satisfy His
Majesty, that all bloody Consults being by them abandoned, he himself may enjoy
the Kings peace, and we his Subjects enjoy that Peace of the King which his
very Wild Beasts in the Forest enjoy, (as I said before) and where any of the
Inhabitants if they have lights in their Windows that may affright the Kings
Deer are liable to punishment by the Forest law, and that we being delivered
from the hands of our Enemies, may serve God without fear in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our Lives, and not be in danger of being in the
Kings Highway knocked on the head like Weasels or Polecats by base Ruffians
not worthy to feed the Dogs of our Flocks; I say I suppose your Lordships
advice backed with those reasons against Popery that you always carry ready
told, may especially at this time when the ecce duo gladii or two Votes of the
House of Commons in the last two Parliaments cannot be forgot by any of them,
occasion their offering that to the consideration of His Majesty and his great
Council, that may render the Kingdom safe from any hostility of their
Principles or Practices. Your Lordship has one advantage in giving advice
beyond most men I know, and perhaps no man is Master of that advantage more
then your Lordship, and that is your advice to any of Mankind, is the advice of
a friend; for both by your natural temper, and a habit that can plead the
prescription of sixty years for its continuance in your Soul, and a sharp edge
of Wit and Reason to justify your claim to it, so it is, that you are in a
constant readiness to show your self a friend to every Member of that great
Body, wishing his happiness as your own, extending the arm of your beneficence
as far as it can reach, to the remotest object without hurting your self by the
straining it, with a pitying Eye and a tender Hand, and forgiving Heart,
guiding unhappy men out of the very Labyrinths they had brought themselves into
by injuring you, accounting your mercy to be justice to Humane Nature, adorning
greatness both in your self and others with goodness, in the case of the
injured poor and weak making often the great and the mighty ashamed of their
oppression by your reason (and always with Language as soft as the yoke they
intended was hard) when you could not make them afraid of it by your power, and
blushing your self for the degeneration of Man's Nature, when you saw any that
shame could not divert from the turpitude of injuring their brethren of
mankind, and by your compassion alleviating that burden of the miserable that
they had sunk under but by your Fellowship in their grief, and never dispensing
either the Kings reproof or your own to offenders without moderation, and
respect to the frail state of Humanity, and without that mixture of benign
advice that gave the Malheurevs a plank after the Shipwreck of their Fame, and
very often running the hazard of drowning your self by helping to save those
that were sinking in the Favor of the King and Court, and when their fate was
such that all the rest of the herd avoided them as a wounded Deer. In a word
they that know your Lordship know that by arguments hard to be answered and a
softness of words and Temper almost inimitable you have Proselyted several
Papists out of their pernicious Principles, and have taught them goodness by
your example, and by your having that happy inclination that Hillel a Famous
Jewish Doctor who lived a little before our Saviors Incarnation so well
advised, Namely Be of the Disciples of Aaron, who loved Peace, and followed
Peace, and who loved Men, and brought them near to the Law.

Your Lordship by your being so well versed in our Statute Laws and Histories
is able to acquaint them with the Justice of our Ancestors in the making of
many fresh additional capital Laws (for sanguinary they ought not to be called
since just) against Papists upon the detection of several fresh horrid
Treasons, and particularly those against Queen Elizabeth and King James, and
that our Ancestors then having a great and violent indignation against Popery
and Papists made Laws with the dread of the Vltimum supplicium therein, and
further the anger of Man could not go. But it cannot escape your Lordships
observation that the violence of Passion not being capable of lasting long in
its highest rage how just soever and especially in the breast of an English Man
and a Protestant, those hot Statutes made only (as I may say) a hizzing like a
little fire thrown into Water, and as to their Execution went out presently.
Nor have I ever heard of any one that apostatized from the Church of England to
that of Rome who was as those Statutes ordain punished as a Traitor, merely for
so doing. And indeed since no Stratagems are to be used twice and especially
such as did not succeed once, I am highly pleased that on the Discovery of the
late detestable Plot there was so great a calmness in the minds, so general a
smoothness in the brows of the people, such an universal Spirit of Patience
forbearance and meekness every where visible in their Faces, even greater then
that which shone in the Minds and Faces of the Londoners when with composed
looks they saw their City newly made ashes, and had smelt the Incendiaries
almost as soon as the Fire, that none can imagine but who as eye witnesses
observed; And even on the fifth of November ensuing the Discovery of the Plot,
the two excellent Preachers desired to preach before the House of Lords, and
the House of Commons on that day when both an Old and a New Plot were staring
the Nation in the Face, happened to be with the Peaceable Genius of the
Christian Religion and of the People in that Conjuncture inspired in the choice
of that same part of Scripture that was their Text and contained the calm yet
severe reproof given by the Founder of Christianity to some of his Disciples
that would have been Commissioned to call for Fire from Heaven to consume the
inhospitable Samaritans, in one of which Sermons, namely that of the Dean of
Canterbury's, it is for the Honor of our Nation and Religion by him observed p.
31. of the Sermon, that after the Treason of this day, nay at this very time
since the Discovery of so barbarous a design, and the highest provocation in
the World by the Treacherous murder of one of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace a very good man and a most excellent Magistrate who had been active in
the Discovery of this Plot, I say after all this and notwithstanding the
continued and insupportable insolence of their carriage and behavior, even
upon this occasion, no violence, nay not so much as any incivility that I have
heard of has been offered to any of them. Thus for the words of this good and
learned man.

He that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he
has not seen? And the Religion that prompts them to destroy our bodies that
they see, makes them fearless in the damming of our Souls that they have not
seen, and even without giving us a minutes warning to make up our accounts with
God, and that too perhaps for extravagant lenity showed to some incorrigibles
among them, which was poor Godfreys case. But the calm temper of the
Protestants to them upon the Discovery of the Plot not breathing out any
Cruelty or new Severity against their Bodies or Souls shall always endear to
me the Protestant Religion.

And though those two great Votes of the House of Commons may seem severe to
the Papists, yet are they warning pieces only if they please, and not murdring
ones, and like the Arrows of Jonathan to warn David and not to hurt him; And
indeed only to warn them not to kill David, and not to hurt themselves, and in
effect a reasonable request or petition of ^wo Parliaments to them only to make
much of themselves, and like the lenity that accompanied the Divine threatening
of moriendo morieris restrained to their eating of one tree, so that no Flaming
Swords need fence up their way from the Tree of Life unless they please.

But though the Spirit of the people has not on the occasion of the late Plot
showed its angry resentments against the persons of the Papists by any outrage
or rudeness, and though our Parliaments have not on that occasion as those in
the times of Queen Elizabeth and King James made the Anger of the Statute Book
to swell with many Acts of Parliament against them, they are not to infer that
therefore the anger of the people diffusive or representative is over, but
rather the contrary, from its not having appeared violent. And indeed as that
heat of the body that is acquired not by an approach to a blazing fire, but
gradually by gentle exercise of the parts is most lasting and most agreeable to
its constitution, so is it with that heat of popular anger that is the Result
of the exercise of men's minds and of several labored intense thoughts most
durable and salutiferous to the body of the Kingdom. It has been observed by a
Man of no Vulgar intellectual Tallents Mr. Philip Nigh (a Man indeed of great
Sagacity in his Generation) as I find it in his Book called Beams of former
Light viz. We know that in near a hundred years the Reformation gained little
upon Popery and Superstition more then was gotten by the first assault, nay it
decayed and Popery grew under it so fast as at last we were almost returned
into the same condition that we were reformed from, and this (he says) may be
the cause why the first Reformation prospered no better, there were the like
severe, impositions and Laws made upon occasion of difference among the Protest
ants and then advantages were taken thereby, and many put out of the
Master-Role for Nonconformity who were of greatest courage and most faithful
Resolution against Popery and Superstition the then common Enemy. The
silen^cing and ejection of Ministers in Queen Elizabeth's days, reformation
being newly begun and the Enemies to it many, the friends and those that
faithfully engaged few, was looked on by the godly prudent of that age as very
unseasonable, yea the their crimes had deserved it, because of the searcity of
Preachers at that time. There is nothing more frequent in our Suffering
Brethrens writings that were then published against the Hierarchy then a
bemoaning the great loss to the cause and people of God thereby. I will mention
but one, considering the season (says Mr. Parker) though we were worthy, yet
should we least be deprived now when Popery rises like the swellings of
Jordan, yea makes invasion like an Armed man, when there are wanting many on
the other side in many Parishes to stand up in the gap against it.

Does not the Canon Law it self spare depriving for greater faults when there
is penuria sacerdotum and quando utilitas ecclesiae exigit. Thus far Mr. Nigh,
who whether he has assigned non causam pro causa or no, as to the Vigorous
increasing of Popery after the Reformation, I shall not say, and shall forbear
even with the tenderest and gentlest hand to touch the sore place of the
difference among Protestants till we are secured against the Rough hands of any
Esaws touching Gods Anointed. Nor shall I now debate of which persuasion among
Protestants should strike Sail to the others, till we have put off the
Fire-ship that has grappled us, but shall here say that I think one cause why
the Protestant Religion has not since its first assaults against Popery gained
ground of it proportionably was what is necessarily incident to humane Nature,
and even in the most generous, and particularly English Spirits after a great
overflowing of passion to find in themselves the lowest ebb to succeed the
highest tide, and our boiling blood to be the more dispirited afterward by
reason of its former heat, and for us instantly to fall asleep when our spirits
are taken off from the wrack that passion extended them on, and to try to
recruit our spirits again by the passion of Pity or Shame which we had wasted
by that of Anger, like men that after one excess refresh themselves by another.
And as the great expenses of War which is the passion of Anger raging in the
body of a whole Nation, Necessarily at last end in a peace that continues till
men's plenty blow them up into War again, so does the spending and wasting the
Treasure of our Spirits by Anger necessitate us into a quiet, that lasts till
being thereby recruited we are again capable to take Fire from a fresh
provocation and to trouble our selves and others; But as men grow older and
wiser they grow abler to moderate their passion of Anger, and make it like
Fire, not a bad Master but good Servant to themselves and the Public, not a
Fire that acts as natural agents ad extremum virium and so as anger acts and
rests in the bosom of fools (who are so far natural agents only as not guided
by reason) but as in the Breasts of the Wise, where reason rests and makes all
passions as its Messengers and Ministers, not unresembling what is said of the
most High that he makes his Ministers a flame of Fire, and so by Godlike men
who love others like themselves, their passion of Anger is made like a Guardian
Angel to themselves and others: and by thus according to that precept being
angry and sinning not, the fire of Anger in the Protestants here against Popery
having long been light and restless, is at last got to its proper Element where
it does not Levitate and where it has no burning but only a purifying quality,
and thus the hatred of the English Protestants against Popery may be said to be
as the Scripture expression is, a perfect hatred, being now come to its height
and proper Element, which perfect Hatred to Popery, may always consist with a
perfect love to Papists, and cinge not a hair of their heads more then a
Lambent Fire.

My Lord, I account that we do but Justice to the Persons of many of our
Roman Catholic Acquaintance in pronouncing of them, that they have no PLOT but
to get to Heaven, and to follow the last Dictates of their Practical
understandings as to the Mind of God revealed in the Scripture.

I shall tell your Lordship, that I entertaining my thoughts sometimes with the
great pacificatory ones of our Divines, have observ^d things there said with
sharpness enough against the Errors of Papists, and yet with great sweetness as
to the persons erring, and not only exempting these from odium in their holding
Problematick Tenets contrary to ours, but asserting their just liberty so to do.

And because one of our Church of England-Divines who has writ at that rate,
has done it with a graceful mixture of wit and frankness, I shall here
entertain your Lordship with some of his passages about it.

I intend here to refer you to an excellent Sermon of Dr. Ingelo's, Preached at
S. Paul's, and Printed A. 1659. and where in p. 129. he says, I am afraid that
Christian Religion will not recover for a good while, that honor which is lost
by the uncharitableness of the present Age. God grant that we may return
speedily to the sincerity of the Protestant Principles. We know not what the
Christian Religion is but by the Scriptures, and by them we may know, for there
it is plainly and fully set down. In things doubtful, if every Christian may
not interpret for himself; how shall we justify the Protestants Separation
from the Roman Church, not to have been a Schism, and, as the Papists say, an
Apostasy from the true Church? They interpret one way, and we another. And was
not the rigid imposition of their interpretations as infallible, one of those
good reasons for which we departed from them? But when we read these
Scriptures, They shall kill you, and think they do God service, and, By zeal I
persecuted the Church, and, They have a zeal, but not according to knowledge;
we may perceive that hot zeal may be accompanied with gross ignorance, and
great cruelty. Some that mean well, perhaps, may do shroud mischief, and
through impotence of Spirit, Inconsiderateness, ill Nature, narrowness of Soul,
want of Experience, and converse with wise Men, etc. may throw firebrarnds into
the House of God.

It is a strange device of pleasing God, to sacrifice his Friends to him, when
as he desires not the death of his Enemies. But those which kill them say, O,
but they are in error. Really it may be so, for it is a very hard matter for
such fallible creatures as we are, not to err in some things, etc. But those
are unmerciful guides, which kill plain-hearted Passengers, because they have
missed the way, when as it is likely that they, poor men, could not help it. I,
but they will not go into the way when they are bidden. Well, but will they do
it, when you have killed them? If they were out of the way, you have made them
for ever coming into it again. Since the wanderer did not hearken to you, it
may be that he knew nothing to the contrary, but that you were as ignorant of
the way, as himself. No, you had a Book of it, wherein it was fairly mapp'd
forth. That is, the Bible; and he had it too. But you understand it better then
he did. I cannot tell that. However, are you infallible also? If you be not,
you may be out of the way your self, and if it should chance to prove so, you
would be loath to be cudgelled into it again.

If you will glorify God, do as he does. What is that? He declares his will,
teaches us his Truth, engages us with a thousand mercies, to do our duty; and
notwithstanding we continue our disobedience, he awaits our repentance with a
God-like patience. Will thou go and do likewise? No, because they receive not
Jesus Christ, I will call for fire from Heaven upon them. Poor man! thou art of
a hot spirit, and would thou have it increased with flames from above? that
fire enlightens, warms, and so melts, but does not burn and fry men for their
Salvation. Take heed what thou do to others, etc.

The common style in so many men's Writings of Religionary Controversy is not
more vexatious then that I have now entertained you with of this learned Writer
is charming. And indeed as turbid as this interval of time is while Moral
offices are calling upon us in our several Stations by all due means to
withstand Papal Usurpations (and which men of sense generally mean by Popery)
yet as to the Tenets of Transubstantiation and Purgatory and others of that
Nature, however so much disgusted by the bulk of the Nation, such bulky and
voluminous Controversial writing of them, as was long ago in use, is nauseous
to the age, and the time spent in reading Matters Pro and Con writ of such
Subjects would now be judged as the diverting Men from regular action in
opposing any Papal Usurpations.

Who is at all concerned about extension or divisibility being the formalis
ratio of quantity, or at there being demonstration on either side, that hoth
the one and the other is so? But it is one man's extending his Confines on those
of another man's Estate, or his dividing a quota of it from him, that naturally
makes Controversy so hot and loud. When a man by pretending to illuminate
another about the next World stands in his light in this, and when a handful of
men would grasp all the Dignities of this World because of their expectance of
monopolizing those of the next (and which indeed should rather allay their
Ambition in this according to that Saying, -- Si tam certa manet gloria quid
properas?) here the hinge of the Controversy turns so angrily between so many
Protestants and so many Papists; tho yet I must here acknowledge, that as I
know Protestants enough, who neither repine at God's or his Vice-gerent's choice
of their Instruments, so I do Papists whose Moderation is known to all men, and
who are far from affecting any excessive overbalance of Power in the Services
of their Prince.

And were I for my Life to give our Roman Catholic Fellow Subjects the best
advice I could for their own Preservation, it should be their using all means
possible to convince the world, that they affected nothing of such a Paramount
Power, and aimed at no such thing. Aufer ut uterque securius dormiat, was said
by the Stoic to him that was taking away his Riches in the Night. I am sure I
shall never repine at it, if ever there should be a due or legal relaxation of
any Penalties that may seem sanguinary in making their Purses bleed, but shall
be content with its being out of the Power of such among them who affect a
growth of their interests under the Pope as a fifth Monarch, to render others
of them liable to Envy who only endeavor their growing in Grace under the Pope
as their chief Spiritual Pastor. And tho perhaps to advise any hot-Spurs among
them to part with Power, may seem durus sermo, as much as cutting off a Right
hand that has long offended themselves and others; yet if it shall appear that
by that means they will secure all the Hands and Hearts of Protestants thereby
for their defense, they will gain more then Cent per Cent in the Exchange: as
those who in our Savior's time forsook Houses and Lands for him, did according
to his promise gain a Thousand Fold by it in this life, by the Houses and Lands
of all other Christians then being at their service. It is chiefly by the
ab^enunciation, the studied and labored declining of Power, that the Jews
almost in all Countries Christian and Pagan are welcome Guests, tho yet by their
frugal living they Generally under-sel the Natives every where. Mankind has
such a sharp regret against Plotting the Ruin of any company of men who are
harmless and useful to the World, and in whom nothing but a Tame Humble quiet
innocence appears, that on the contrary they study to be their Protectors, to
be their Guards, their Watchmen, and men thinking God to be like themselves,
they think such people are Heavens care too. Therefore in the 88th.
Advertisement of Boccalin's Ragguagli, the Sheep sending their Ambassadors to
Apollo, desiring that they may be allowed to have sharp Teeth and long horns,
and not seem abandoned by that Divine Charity that has given offensive as well
as defensive arms to hurtful animals, by whom they often Suffered, and
sometimes by their very Shepherds who in Sheering them would cut their Skins,
Apollo told them, that no Beasts were so much the Favorites of him and of men
as they, for that whereas others with great anxiety were forced in the Night,
the time of rest and sleep, to seek their Food, that they could not do with
safety in the day, Men the Lords of the Earth bought at dear rates pasture
grounds for Sheep, and that tho men did make Nets, feed Dogs and lay snares for
hurtful Beasts, they employed Shepherds and Dogs to guard Sheep, and that no
Shepherds could deal ill with their Flocks without being chiefly cruel to
themselves, and that therefore their security lay in not being able to fright
their Shepherds.

Thus every one is naturally abhorred who attacks a Naked man, and from such a
one Lions themselves either through fear or generosity have made their Retreat.
The holy Writ affords us a memorable Instance of the Divine displeasure, in the
38 th of Ezekiels Prophecy against Gog and Magog, who are there branded as the
Invaders of a defensless City, It Is there mentioned in v. 10 th and 11 th. Thus
says the Lord God, it shall also come to pass, that at the same time shall
things come into thy mind, and thou shall think an evil thought; and v. 11 th.
And thou shall say, I will go up to the Land of unwalled Villages, I will go to
them that are at rest, that dwell safely, all of them dwelling without walls,
and having neither Bars nor Gates; and in v. 12 th, to take a spoil and to take
a prey, to turn thy hand upon the desolate places, that are now inhabited, and
upon the people that are gathered out of the Nations which have gotten Cattle
and goods that dwell in the MIDST (or navel) of the land. But it then follows
v. 14. Therefore Son of man Prophecy and say unto Gog, Thus says the Lord God,
in that day when my people of Israel dwells safely, shall thou not know it?
that is, thou shall know it to thy sorrow and by thy bitter experience of my
wrath, what it is to disturb my harmless and quiet people in the World. The
Comparing of the following 16 th and 18 th v. show this to be the meaning of v.
14 th. And I believe if any of the people of Gog and Magog were allowed by the
Law to live apart by themselves, they might in any defenseless City be as
secure from danger or fear of the Protestant Israel as they pleased.

It has been well observed by a great Enquirer into humane Nature, That a
restless desire of power after power that cease only in death, is a general
inclination of all mankind; and the cause of this is not always that a man
hopes for a more intensive delight then he has already attained to, or that he
cannot be content with a moderate power, but because he cannot assure the power
and means to live well which he has present without the acquisition of more:
And from hence it is that Kings whose power is greatest, turn their endeavors
to the Assuring it at home by Laws, or abroad by Wars. But as much as it is
the inclination of the unthinking or brutish part of Mankind, that power should
be like the Crocodile always growing, the soberer few do know, that power will
destroy it self if it shall be still ascending and has not a Center wherein to
rest and be quiet, just as fire would perish in nature and destroy it self, if
there were not an Element allowed it wherein to leave burning: And that
therefore Augustus wisely designed a Law de cohibendis imperii finibus, And
that the experience of Ancient and Modern times has taught the teachable part
of mankind, That great Empires have sunk under their weight, and have lost the
length of their power by the widening it; and that Kings whose power is
greatest (as was said) sometimes turn their endeavors to the Assureing it at
home by Laws, which by giving it some bound are like letters about the edges of
our coin, Decus and tutamen to it, the which makes it so Sacred, that 'twould
be both Treasonable and Ridiculous to clip it, and that as the Bees by their
King have given the world an instance in Nature of Kingly power, so they have
likewise another of Kings governing by the power of Laws. It Is a common
observation, That tho Bees are little angry fighting Creatures upon occasion,
and leave their stings in the wounds they make, Rex tamen apum sine aculeo est,
the King of the Bees is without any sting, and the curious work of the Hive
goes on with a great deal of Geometry, and idle Drones are thence as it were
legally expelled who would there invade property. Nor need the King of the Bees
(say the Naturalists) have a sting, for the whole Hive defends and guards him,
as thinking that they are all to perish if their King be destroyed.

And this would be the case of the Papists, if they would be content so to part
with the sting of their Power that it could not hurt either King or Kingdom,
and might not come to lose it self by so doing, they would have the Posse of
every County to defend them, they would have the Laws and the whole Hive of
English men to guard them, the very Anger of the Protestants would be a
defensive Wall of Fire round about them. It Is true, that wild Animals are by
their constant fears of danger habituated to more cunning then Tame ones of the
same species, but all their little cunning renders them not so safe as the
great wisdom and protection of the Law does the other; and ranging and
out-lying Deer thrive not so well as those that are in the Forests. And here
it falls in my way to observe, that the Kings cautioning by the Law of the
Forests, that the Mastiffs shall have the Power took from them of hurting the
Deer, may well insinuate into us the reason and equity of all our Laws that
hinder its being in the power of a man to be a Wolf to another, and of the
Power inherent by the Law of Nature in all Sovereign Princes to restrain any
undue Power of Subjects from violating the Public peace. As the Law of God and
Nature command both Justice and Mercy to be shown to Beasts, so does the Law of
England provide that any man's person and Estate should be seized into the Kings
hands in case of some wild cruelty to his Beasts; for he would appear in the
eye of the Law an Idiot or a Lunatic, that should put his Horses or Asses to
the Sword.

That which I mentioned of the Laws providing that the Mastiffs of any
Inhabitants in Forests shall not have Power to hurt the Deer, is called by the
Forest Law, Lawing of Mastiffs, or the Expeditating them, that is the three
Claws of their Fore-foot to the Skin are to be cut off; and thus they are to be
law'd every three years for the preserving the Kings Game, and the peace of his
wild Beasts. The Regarders of the Forest are to make a TRIENNIAL enquiry about
it and tunc fiat per visum and testimonium legalium hominum and non aliter,
that is not Arbitrarily, there must be legal Judgment upon legal Testimony, and
no Dog law'd without Judicial proceeding. This Forest Law made in the time of
our Popish Ancestors, did suppose; that the Kings Game could not be preserved,
nor the Peace of his Wild Beasts, by the Dogs being then either exorcised, or
their lapping a little holy water, or any expedient (as I may say) without
expeditation, which did ipso facto destroy their Power of destroying the Kings
Game and the Peace of his wild Beasts; and therefore that is the only valuable
Garranty we can have from those who without Law and against Law would hunt down
the King himself and his Tame Subjects, that the excrescence of their power
should be hambled or expeditated: but the modus of this I do again say ought by
them to be tendered to the Consideration of his Majesty and the Triennial
Regardors of the Kingdom. I am sure it is worthy the consideration of us
English, what the Learned Frenchman Monsieur Bodin tells us in his Book de
Republica Lib. 5. Cap. 6. Vna est tenuium adversus potentiores securitatis
ratio, ut scilicet si nocere velint non possent, cum nocendi voluntas
ambitiosis hominibus and imperandi cupidis nunquam sit defutura.

And now my Lord to give your Lordship a home Instance of Jealousy taking Fire
in some merely from the power of another to do them hurt, I will instance in
your self at this conjuncture of time. The nature of Jealousy renders it to be
a troublesome weed and yet such an one that grows in the Richest Soil of Love,
my meaning is, that it is a fear of Love not being mutual when one does love
intensely with desire of being so loved. My Lord, in the picture of your mind
that I have already drawn in this Letter, I have only done you a little right,
and not at all favored you, and it is but Justice to you to acknowledge that
the Protestant part of your Country has a singular love for you, with a desire
of being so loved by you; and it is in this Critical conjuncture of time that
your power makes them fear the love not to be mutual. Your Lordship knows, that
fear in people is an aversion with an opinion of hurt from any object, and they
soon hate those things or persons for which they have aversion: and fear of
hurt by power disposes men naturally to anticipate, and not to stay for the
first blow, or else to crave aid from Society and from others especially whose
concern may be the same or greater then theirs, and who are their
representatives, and to wish ill to those who make them sleep in armor, or to
stand in the posture of Gladiators with their weapons pointing, and their eyes
fixed on another, and to be still in procinctu, and all those passions sprung
from the Root of Jealousy, as far as they exceed the bounds of reason, are
degrees of madness. And tho man's life be a constant motion, and for the most
part in both a Rugged way and near Precipices, yet during that madness men are
still by their own Scorpions scourging it to make it move faster then the
regular and intended pace of Nature, and injuring themselves with their
passions, are content too to wound another through their own sides. And thus my
Lord give me leave to tell you, That it is a kind of a Complement from people to
a great good man of whose power and of whom they are jealous, when that it may
be said of them, that they are occasionally fallen mad for love of him.

One part of your Power, namely that wherein you are a Conduit-Pipe to convey
the grants of Honor and profit from your Royal Master, the Fountain of Honor,
it is possible for you to quit, and that with pleasure too, that you may have
time to quench your great thirst after knowledge in that great collection of
waters into which so many Streams of learning have met from all ages and
Nations, I mean your vast and choice Library. And I may well suppose that your
Lordship has now that sense of Greatness and of power by public Employment,
that Cardinal Granvel expressed at his retirement from the same, That a great
Man is like a great River, where many sorts of Creatures are still quenching
their thirst, but are likewise still muddying and troubling the Stream. Your
Lordship knows who said, th^^ actio est conversatio cum stultis, lectio cum
sapientibus. In the Scene of the busy World you are necessarily troubled with
the affairs of men whose being born was unnecessary to the world, and there
you are usually put to play at hard games well with ill gamesters, the jest
that fortune playing in humane aff^ires commonly puts on the wise to spoil
their busy sport: there you are sometimes deafen'd with Complaints of Mimick
Apes and grave Asses, of airy fools and formal fops one against another: but in
your noble Library you have the advantage of the still Music of the Tomb, you
have the weight of many dead Authors making no noise, you have Socinus and
Calvin standing quietly by each other, and some Authors content with the dust
of your Library who thought one Christian world not enough to trouble; it is
there you will avoid any trouble by Authors of gilded outsides intruding, nor
be molested as now by nonsense in fine clothes. You cannot now quietly enquire
after the fountain of Nile for the noise of its Cataracts, nor appease your
thirst after knowledge otherwise then tanquam canis ad Nilum for fear of the
Crocodiles of the World devouring you, nor have a view of the tree of knowledge
without a Serpent of envy circled about it, nor have time to look on the pieces
painted for eternity, nor to mind the Eclipses in the Heavens while you are
preventing your own being eclipsed in the Earth.

But my Lord, there is another kind of power inherent in you, and that you
cannot part with, such a power as King Charles the first in his Eikon Basil.
affixes to the Character of his favorite, when he says, he looked on the Earl
of Strafford as a Gentleman whose great abilities might make a Prince rather
afraid then ashamed to employ him in the greatest affairs of State. Your very
Reputation for power is power, for that engages those to adhere to you, who
want protection. Your Success in your past conduct of public affairs is
power, for it makes men promise to themselves good fortune while they follow
you. Your eloquence that fastens men's ears to your lips is power. Your great
knowledge in the Law whereby you possess that Engine by which you can be only
attacked, and whereby you have that fastness, where one-a-brest can keep down a
Multitude, is power. Your affability and good Nature that endear you to so
many, is power, and makes the hearts of men to be your Pyramids. And all these
sorts of power in you, which make every party wish you to be theirs, make up so
bright a beauty in your mind, as may well cause jealousy in that party that by
loving you, think they have Right to be again beloved by you; I mean the
English Protestants, who court you, and to whom you have so long engaged your
self, and especially when they shall find their Rivals boast of the kindness
you have for them; and that too at such a time as this, when the Protestants
seem to have the concern of one that is playing his last stake, and which only
can make him fetch back all he has lost; a time, when any one who pretends to a
cold harmless neutrality, does really intend an exulcerated hatred; a time,
wherein he that is not with us is against us, however it may have happened, that
in some lazy conjunctures when Papists and Protestants were half asleep both
here and in the Neighboring Continent, that then he that was not against us
was with us; a time, cum non de terminis sed de tota possessione agitur; A
time, wherein as in that of the tempest that happened to the Ship that carried
Iona among the heathen Mariners, we see almost all, namely the Papists calling
on their God, and the Church of England likewise, and the dissenters in the
several persuasions on theirs, with this difference, that no man is now asleep,
but all in it are waking, some at work to save the Ship, and others to bore
holes in it, as if they were concerned to have it cast away as being not owners
in it, and as if they had secured their own merchandise in it which they
purchased by the money they took up at Bottomry from Rome or its agents, and
knew how to secure themselves in the Cock-boat.

We have had dull and lazy conjunctures of time^heretofore, insomuch that many
years ago a Divine seemed to begin a Sermon on the Gunpowder Treason day
before a great Academick audience, as it were yawning and in his sleep with
these words, Conspiracies if not prevented, are rather dangerous then
otherwise: And thus the ingenious Comedy tells us of a Hero, that as he was in
the height of his passion with the greatest zeal making Love, instantly dropped
down into a deep sleep; but it is no time for yawning when the Earth begins to
yawn under us. And tho times have been heretofore influencing the Protestant
cause like the Sun in March that could only raise the vapors of Popery in the
body of the Nation and not dissipate them, it is now supposed to be otherwise,
and as I have heard that the Earl of Hallifax in his Speech in the house of
Lords having spoken of his hatred to Popery, excellently well added somewhat to
this effect, And we may now exterminate it if we will. And therefore with that
now, I think the ecce nunc tempus acceptabile festina and salvare, may be
applied to the Kingdom. And if as the Schoolmen tell us, Angels may dance upon
the point of a Needle, we may imagine many both good and bad ones dancing on
this point of time; it is on this moment the Nations eternity depends. Every one
now is as good a Conjurer as Friar Bacon, and can make a Brazen head say time
is; by which words I believe the learned Roger Bacon meant only, that in the
vessel of Brass wherein the exquisite chemical preparations for the birth of
gold were labored, the nick of opportunity was to be watched under pain of the
loss of all the fire and Materials, and art and labor, according to that of
Petrus Bongus. Ibi est operis perfectio aut annihilatio, quoniam ipsa die immo
hora, oriuntur elementa simplicia depurata quae egent statim compositione,
antequam volent abigne, as I find him cited by Brown for it in his vulgar
errors, where he further says, Now letting slip this critical opportunity, he
missed the intended Treasure, which had he obtained, he might have made out the
tradition of making a brazen wall about England, that is, the most powerful
defense and strongest fortification which Gold could have effected.

My Lord, my opinion was asked in a letter from a very honest Gentleman and much
your Lordships Servant, Whether you should not do your self and your Religion a
greatdeal of Right, by printing in this juncture some of the excellent and
large discourses you have formerly writ against Popery? and the substance of
the answer I gave him was to this effect, That tho I would not diswade your
Lordships now publishing any thing relating to the tenets of that pretended
Religion that might import Protestants to understand more clearly then they
did, in which way they have been advantaged by the Bishop of Lincoln's Book
against Popery, yet that I thought the great bulk of Popery could no more be
destroyed by notions and arguments, then a capital Ship could be sunk with
bullets, for that supposing they did all light between wind and water, the
Papists have thousands of Plugs ready to be clapped in there, and thousands of
men in that great vessel ready to apply them, and tho I thought there was a
time for writing of Books, it was when there was a time for reading them, that
is, when people had time to read them, but that now the most curious works of
Whiteakers, and Jewels, and Rainoldses, would be no more regarded, then
attempts of showing the longitude would be to Navigators while under the attack
of a Fireship as I said, or while they were making their way through the body
of an Enemies Fleet. I know that it is said to be an old Sybilline Prophecy,
that Antichrist shall be destroyed by paper viz. Antichristum lino periturum,
but alas, that way is now as insignificant in the case, as to think that the
dominion of the Sea can be built up by Seldens Mare Clausum, or destroyed by
Grotius his Mare Liberum, or any way but by thundering Legions in powerful
fleers.

Indeed our paper pellets that the press since its license has shot against
Popery, I mean the innumerable little sheet-pamphlets that have come out
against it may find time to be read, and to give us diversion, but the Papists
looking on their Church as a great First-Rate Manned with Popes and Emperors,
and Princes, and Fathers and Councels, and innumerable Souls there embarked in
the Sea of time for the great Voyage of Eternity, do account our little
Protestant honest Sheet-authors firing at them daily to be only like the
Yacht-Fan Fan's attacking De Ruyter.

But my Lord, there is another Reason why a person of your Lordships great
Power and Abilities should not at this time embarrase your self with writing,
No not those defenses of your innocence, which yet perhaps may be necessary to
be done for the use of those who know you not hereafter when the heat of the
day and your Services in this critical juncture shall be over, and would now
show as meanly as if a General in the time of Battle having some dirt or dust
lighting on his face, should while he was among the bullets employ his barbers
washballs to cleanse it, and that too when the fate of the battle seems to
totter and is near decision one way or other, and while there is hardly room
for the Quid agendum to wedge it self in, and he that says consider is almost
a foe, (and therefore once when a great Commander had no way to save himself
and his Army but by their swimming with their horses through a River to attack
their Enemy, he did only to that question of quid agendum put to him by his
Officers, suddenly echo back the reply of agendum, and with his horse took the
River) and while now it is with us as on board a Ship in the time of Fight, or
of a Storm when they are Fighting with the Elements, and the Master or
Steersman orders any thing to be done, the case will bear no dilatory answer of
words, and the answer there is, Done it is; I say, after all this, that there
is a reason which in my opinion renders any man's writing unnecessary now either
to the World or himself, and that is this, That words and Language the which
formerly having the stamp of common usage and of reason on them passed as
current coin for the Signification of men's minds and as a medium of commerce,
are in this juncture as useless that way, and of as little value as lether
coin called in: and this Age wherein both the word and thing called shamme,
has been brought in use, and shamme calls it self an answer to that great
question, What is wit? tho with as little reason as if a lie should call it
self an answer to that old great question, What is truth, has enforced those
that do not love to be shamm'd upon, not to measure men's actions by their
words, but their words by their Actions. And tho a man's written books are
called his works, yet have I observed an occasion of Sarcasme given thereby,
when one speaking of a particular Divines excellent writings, said he loved his
works, but hated his actions. And written works are now indeed but actings as
when a man does agree gestum in scena on the Stage of the World, and for them
he finds but only a Theatrical applause, Nor so much as that, when like the
Actor crying O heavens, he looks down on the Earth.

As he is always accounted but a smatterer in knowledge who is a pedant, or
petty-Chapman in words, so he plays but at small games in politics, who is a
pedant or trader in words, or who indeed will give any thing for them. He who
does verba dare has bad morals, and who gives any thing else for them has bad
intellectuals, and according to that old Monkish verse they said, Res dare pro
rebus, pro verbis verba solemus. The only real security therefore that the
World has for its quiet, is men's only giving a seeming belief to seeming
professions and protestations; for as Air out of its place makes Earthquakes,
so if the articulate air of men's words gets beyond my hearing into my belief,
it may there raise those commotions of passion that may make me trouble both my
self and the World, and particularly by the passion of jealousy
beforementioned, on my desire where I have a kindness that it should be
mutual, and when positive words brought me into the fools paradise of believing
it possible, a thing perhaps not possible in nature, that two bodies and minds
whose faculties must needs be different, should have an equal intenseness of
love for each other, no president of friendship, particularly that of Jonathan
and David, having shown it, and in the conjugal love the passions of the weaker
Sex being observed to be the strongest, and that of jealousy as well as Love
jealousy particularly being most potent in minds most impotent, and in persons
most diffident of themselves. And this may in some sort console your Lordship
after all your restless endeavors to merit the love of all your Countrymen if
it be not exactly mutual. But this by the way.

The great names of Protestant and Religion began to adorn each other in the
year of our Lord 1529, when some of the Electors and Princes of the Empire with
a protestation opposed the Decree relating to the Mass and Eucharist, made at
Spiers, and when some of the Capital Cities of Germany joined with them to
protest the same thing. But every one knows that a protestation is a revocable
thing, and that a Protestation contrary to actions revokes it self. And that
the word Protestant, has not been in the World as the Poets term is of calling
grass green, or the like, otiosum epitheton, I believe the Papists will grant:
and it is not one Protestation made and not revoked either by words or actions,
that can make that term consistent with our Religion, or render a man worthy to
be called one. It Is not a good continual claim to our Religion that yet is for
land we are disseis'd of that is made only once a year whilst we live: No; the
Protestation that the Protestant Religion requires, is such a continual one as
is reiterated, upon every fresh act and attempt of the Papal Religion against
ours; it is not a going to our Cells, and saying, Lord have mercy upon us, but
it is our watching in our Stations, and our showing no mercy to the principles
of Popery that are always attacking the quiet of the World either by Storm or
Siege, or undermining; it is like the Protestation required when the defendant
has declined a Judge, that must be made toties quoties as any new Act is done
by the Judge, without which the first Protestation grows insignificant: it is
not one Act of protesting the Popes Bills of Exchange for good money we paid
him, and his giving us bank-tickets upon purgatory, or giving us some
fantastic Saints pretended Hair or Nails ( protested with so much scorn by
our Popish Ancestors in Henry the 8th's time, that a piece of St. Andrews
finger covered with an ounce of Silver pawned by a Monastery for forty pound,
was left unredeemed at the dissolution of it, which showed that that commodity
would even then yield nothing, and was a mere drug in Scotland (of which
Country he is called the Saint Protector) but it is further like a protestation
against the Sea at the next Port made toties quoties goods in a Ship are
damnified by its rage, which the law requires the Skipper to make, or else
leaves answerable for the damage. And if a poor Tarpauling who must always
plough the Sea for his bread during life, and there still contest with the
angry Elements, shall when he comes on shore by a protestation bid defiance to
the pride of the whole Ocean, he deserves not the name of a Hero that
Safe-guarded by both the Land and the Law of the Land, shall not on occasions
offered continually have the courage to protest against the damages both his
King and Country have from the Rage of Popery. My Lord, I have been the longer
in discoursing of the insignificancy of words, or indeed ought, but the
emphasis of works requisite to show a Protestant faith at this Juncture,
because I am sure you are willing (as you may well be) to join issue on that
point, and to be judged a Protestant in man's day by your works, as you must in
Gods stand or fall by the Test of them, at the last Audit, and to appear a
Protestant too by works above the poor level of a dull opus operatum, by works
that represent the continual employment of your life with an Heroical vigor,
and your going from strength to strength (as the Scripture expression is) in
the defense of Protestancy, by works that speak you like the heavenly bodies
incessant in your influence, and having rest only in Motion. It Is not without
wisdom ordered by the Pope, That no men shall be Cannonised till after death
for fear of Apostasy; nor then likewise, unless it shall appear that they
wrought Miracles. And the truth is, our people were all so far born with Popes
in their bellies, as to this point, that they will not now Cannonize any Great
Men for Protestant Saints, unless at this time they do Miracles; and indeed I
think they have reason to insist on their doing as great miracles for our
Religion, as any Papal Saints dead or alive have done against it. And when I
consider the real Great Things that have been by the heads and hands of your
Lordship and other Noble Persons performed for the Statuminating of the
Protestant cause, and enabling us to say to our underminers with the confidence
of the Psalmist, As a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering fence, I do
think you may expect with Justice that which is greater then our praise, the
acclamations of our blessing, as Aristotle says, that to heroic qualities in
men not praise, but pronouncing blessed is due ((...)) and as St. Paul says,
it is more blessed to give then to receive.

And here, my Lord, going by this exact Rule of measuring things by things, and
not by words, your Life has enabled me to give the strictest Aeropagus of
Censurers the world can produce, and who would damn the use of Proems and the
art of moving passions by words, an irrefragable instance how you have secured
the Nation formerly from being enslaved to and by Popery, and at that time when
we seemed to our selves as secure from it as from Mahumetanisme, which was when
you were the great Conductor of the Public Councels in the Conjuncture that
brought in the King, and hindered Lambert's usurpation of the English Scepter,
who tho at that time he was not generally suspected to be a Papist, was on very
rational grounds believed to be such then by many very knowing particular
persons; and that too to be not only a Papist, but a Iesuited one. He was at
that time suspected by some for having advised at a military cabal of the then
great ones that the Cavaleers should be Massacred, a cruelty that could enter
into no breast but one abandoned to Jesuitisme. And as on such a Monster your
Lordship then had your eye on him: and of his being such some of the
depositions and examinations took about the late plot have been very particular
and satisfactory. Nor is his having petitioned some few years before the
discovery of the late Plot, That he might have his Liberty, and of a very great
Roman Catholic Lord's having then offered to be security for his quiet
demeanor, Now unknown, so that the Kingdom then escaped falling into Popery
before the danger was by it apprehended; like the Man who in the Night escaped
that of Rochester Bridge, and whom the light of the following day almost
confounded with his deliverance. Your Lordships activity and prudence appearing
in the public Councels and in your Secret correspondences, to the defeating of
the councels of that Romish Achitophel, and seizure of his person, will no more
be forgiven you by the Papists of England, then it either by the Papists of
England or Ireland will be forgiven or forgot that you showed your self a true
Father of your Country in Ireland, in the Conduct forementioned of that great
Affair of the Metropolis, and many Garrisons of that Kingdom being wholly put
into the hands of the Parliament, rather than the Child (as I may say) should
be divided between any of his Majesty's Subjects, and the Pope the pretended
supreme Father of that Country, and that you preserved it to come into the
hands of the true Supreme One.

Your Lordship and other well-wishers to the Crown then were not of the humor
of some of our young vulgar Protestants, who as the Papists parrots, have been
by them taught to speak it commonly, That they love a Papist better than a
Presbyterian. It Is sinful not to love the persons of both, but ridiculous to
love the Yoke of either opinion; and it seems his late Majesty of glorious
Memory, and his Council, and his noble Lieutenant of Ireland, and your Lordship
thought it safer for the Crown, for Ireland to be trusted with that sort of
disobedient Children that depended on no foreign Ecclesiastical Head, then on
such as did. And it is to be acknowledged to your Lordships care of the freedom
of your Country, that when you sat in the long Parliament till you and other
Members thereof were torn thence by Cromwell's Soldiers, you crushed the
Iure-divinity of Presbytery in the Egg by its being ordered to be settled only
for three years, so that it saw it was to be expeditated at the end of three
years, and had no power to trample upon the consciences of others, and in
effect had but a tolleration. I think that no Church Government at all is
better then that rigid one of Presbytery intended then by some Zealots. As the
good and learned Dean of Canterbury said in his Sermon on the Fifth of November
before the House of Commons, That as to Popery, 'twere better there were no
revealed Religion, and that humane Nature were left to the conduct of its own
principles and inclinations, then to be acted by a religion that inspires men
with so wild a fury, and prompts them to commit such outrages, etc. and there
renders Popery worse then Infidelity or no Religion, and so indeed in fact the
Kingdom had then no Church Government paramount at all in it, and instead of
the imagined fierce pedagogy of the Scotch Presbytery that made every Levite a
Rabby Busy, every Pulpit Rhetor a Consul, and every Lay-Elder Major General of
the Parish, we had a tame insignificant Government admitted only to probation
for three years, and were no more hindered of the freedom of a Gentleman's
Conversation thereby then by the Government of the forementioned Presbyter John
in the East, and England was then not only free from the charge of Peter Pence,
Legatine levys, oblations, contributions for the Holy Land, and both charge and
trouble from all the Papal Courts and Masses Anniversaries, obits, requiems,
dirges, placebos, Trentals, lamps, but from all contumacy fees in spiritual
Courts, and from those Courts themselves of which yet the yoke is very easy
compared with either that of the Papists or Scotch Presbyters; and our
condition, as to ecclesiastical discipline, was like that time or conjuncture
of liberty, that Father Paul in the History of the Council of Trent refers to,
speaking of the time when a certain custom prevailed, says, il, che come e un
uso molto proprio, diove si governa in liberta, quale era all hora quando il
mondo era senza Papa, That it was a custom very proper where they governed
with liberry, which was when the world was without a Pope.

I never heard of any man that was gored with the horn of our Presbyters
excommunication, nor of any dissenter from them, that was tied up for them out
of their horn of plenty of Church power to force a drench of Doctrine down his
throat, and much less of any dealt with in that way mentioned by Spotswood, in
his Observation, that the Devil would not be feared but for his horn, referring
to the horning in Scotland, that is, the seizure of all a man's goods when the
horn blew, after he was excommunicated by the Presbytery.

There is no doubt but that some of the Divines of that persuasion were bribed
to it by an expectation of power to oppress, when that the great Revenues of
the Church were denied them; And thus the Pope keeps his Guards in Rome only
with the pay of privileges, but instead of their riding the People, the
Parliament rid them, and with that caution as they of old did who rid on
Elephants in battle, which great animal being observed to be then unruely
sometimes and to endanger both the riders and their camp, and it being known
that their receiving a Con^usion in one part about their head, would presently
dispatch them, their riders had always a hammer with them ready for that use
on occasion.

He therefore that says he loves popery better then the Government of
Presbytery as it was de facto settled or rather permitted in England, and when
they that would have its maypole for them to dance about had it, and those that
would have none, had none, says that he loves a fiery and tormenting furious
Church Government that would make Mount Sion to be still belching out fire like
Aetna better then none at all: that he loves a Hirricane better then being a
while becalmed: that he loves the Church government that was like coloquintida
in the pot, rather then that of the Presbyter, which was here but like Herb
John, and that he fears a Mastiff who was not only hambled and whose jus
divinum was lawd, and whose spleen was cut out by the State Surgeons more
then an incensed hungry Lion of Rome: that he likes a Government better that at
best is like a Peacock, that is all Gaudery and damned Noise and nothing else
except pede latro, that is, all Ceremony, and devouring all with ceremony, then
a Government that with its looks can neither allure nor fright, and which we
could pinion as we pleased, and play with till we could get a better in its
Room. Whether a Papist was to be loved better then a Puritan was a vexed
question in the time of Queen Elizabeth and 'twas resolved then in the
affirmative only by the Pensioners of Rome and their dependants.

The Learned Author of the Book called Certain considerations tending to
promote Peace and good will among Protestants, does in p. 13. quote our famous
Gataker for relating that Dr. Elmor Lord Bishop of London in Queen Elizabeth's
time, when one in a Sermon at St. Paul's Cross inveighing against Puritans,
rendered them worse then Papists, sharply contradicted that censure, saying,
that the Preacher said not right therein, for that the Puritans if they had me
among them would only cut my rochet, but the Papists would cut my throat, and
that his Successor Dr. Vaughan Lord Bishop of London, when another in the same
Pulpit too showed the same eagerness in representing the Puritans worse then
Papists, expressed the same sense with his predecessor concerning it, and
wished that he had had the Preachers Tongue that day in his Pocket. It was (it
seems) then the good fortune of London, to be blessed with Bishops renowned for
their great zeal for the Protestant Religion, and with such a one it is at this
time enriched and dignified, I will not say Bishop of it only by divine
permission, but miseratione divina, the Style I have seen of Bishops in some
ancient Instruments, it is out of the Divine Compassion that such an eminent
Protestant City has such a Prelate. Nor do I intend by the just praise paid to
this great and good man, to lessen the worth of others of the Fathers of our
Church, of which number I have the honor to be acquainted with others who
endeavor the extermination of Popery, with as courageous a zeal as can be
wished, and no doubt but the text of Scripture in the Title of my Lord Bishop of
Lincolns book, namely, Come out of her my People lest ye be partakers of her
Sins and Plagues, is by the whole Church of England, looked on as a seasonable
alarm, and no doubt many of this our Church who have writ with so much various
learning and strong Reason against Popery, know that if that ever be de facto
and by law paramount, the Church of England will be ipso facto crushed thereby
out of all its visibility. The thought of this brings that Scripture to my
mind, viz. Matthew 21 v. 44. and whosoever shall fall on this Stone, shall be
broken, but on whom soever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder. And if
the Church of England by only falling super hanc Petram, I mean heretofore by
the Empty Project of some for the Uniting Rome to us, was broken and
disjointed, therefore if ever it shall come under the Stone of the Roman
Catholic Religion, and it be thereby made possible for the Stone to fall on
it, the Church of Rome will then grind it to powder. Its former falling on the
Rock could only break it into the pieces of Presbyterian and Independent, and
other separate Churches, but that Rocks falling on it will not break it into
pieces but grind it to powder as was said; and perhaps Papists then from this
place of Scripture would form as good a title by divine right to crush our
Church, as they did from the super hanc Petram in the 16 th of Matthew for the
building of theirs. But this by the way.

And now putting the Question who are to be loved best, either the Popish
Priest and Levite that helped to wound Ireland formerly when it fell among
Thieves and Rebels, or those compassionate Samaritans who put it on their own
Beast and poured Oil into its Wounds, and took care of it till it was restored
to its true Owner? I suppose a Protestant will say the latter, and will account
that no fire should be called to fall on the heads of such hospitable
Samaritans, and that others should be spared, who instead of pouring Oil into
our Wounds, did it into our flames when they burnt our City.

Your Lordship has shown your self a compassionate Samaritan to Two Kingdoms
to which your heali^g principles and practices have been beneficial, and in
this you have out done him in the Parable who did not stay to see the effects
of the gentle Medicaments of Oil and Wine he bestowed on his Patient's Wounds,
but your Lordships long attendance on the affairs of the Public brought you to
see the Languishing Kingdom revived, and to have at once both its Head and
Senses restored when Providence made our Sovereign to be his repenting Peoples
choice. But, my Lord, these Kingdoms have not yet done with your Skill, and may
have Wounds that require your Wine and Oil, the Lions Heart, and Ladies Hand; I
mean such Tenderness and such Courage, and so great Judgment as you have
formerly shown, A Raging Acute Disease that has been long not only besieging
but storming a man's vital parts, and with extreme difficulty at the long run
repelled by Nature, does yet commonly leave such dregs in his spirits that
depress and enfeeble them in the remainder of Life, and a man come to himself
after a long madness, labors still under a dejection of his spirits both by
grief and shame, thinking of the arrear that he is in to God, the World, and
himself, by his former madness: and this is the present state of England after
its former state of distraction; and men with shame now look on their former
Physicians, and some are apt with that Merry Madman in the Poet, to be angry
with those that took pains about their being cured. It Is true indeed, the Kings
Restoration cured us of our Civil Wars, yet may a man be cured of his Wounds,
and afterward dye of the Fever his Wound put him into; and our condition is
such, that it is some degree of Heavens Mercy to us, that our Fever is
continuing, for no man can dye in a Fever, as no man can dye without one: And
our spirits are so sunk under the weight of the Disease we have long languisht
under, that our Stomach cannot endure any Cordials, or especially the same
long: and certainly that strong Physic that would at first have cured us, would
now kill us. Yet now in this conjuncture several of our Political Physicians
seem by their retirement to have given us over, as if they were of Hippocrates
his mind, who said, that a Physician should not discredit his generous
Medicaments by employing them on a desperate Patient.

Methinks it is pity that any of our Pilots should quit the Helm in a Storm, and
that they should not (as Cicero's expression is) Sententiam tanquam aliquod
navigium ex Reip. tempestate moderari. Those words in Prove. 1. A man of
understanding shall attain to wise Councels; some read, Vir saepiens
gubernacula possidebit; I presume not to Censure any man, but I hope that no
cross Winds will ever make your Lordship leave the Helm, but rather invite the
continuance of your Skill in beating and tiding it out (as the Sea phrase is)
and in not overshooting the Port. Your pacific Genius and great Wisdom have in
several angry conjunctures produced an unexpected calm by your offering
unexpected Expedients, a Talent that is indeed very rare and conducive to the
quiet of the World, as leading Potent Parties from their declared Opinions
without the shame of a seeming retreat.

It happens still in Navigation, that what makes the Passenger merriest, makes
the Steers-man most thoughtful, Namely the sight of Land: And therefore tho I
and others who make no figures in the government of the Kingdom seem to be glad
at our sight of land, that is the extermination of Popery from England after we
have been so long nauseated and Sea-sick with it, yet it is now our occasion for
the skill of such a Pilot, as your Lordship is greatest when we are endangered
by some Protestants of narrow Spirits and Principles as by Shelfes or brevia
and syrtes, shallow waters, and by little Rocks or breaker's just covered with
water and which are only to be discovered by the swelling roughness of the
water they occasion. It has pleased Divine providence to cast your Lordships
whole life of Action into difficult times such as are called in the New
Testament (...) and translated perilous times, And such as Cicero calls Maxima
Reipublicae tempora, and difficillima Reip tempora. Your life has been a
continual contestation with principles pernicious to mankind, and you have
been under your Prince a Nutritious pater for the most part to men who have like
froward and unquiet Children been crying for each others properly in things
civil, and in Religion, and have thought themselves persecuted when they could
not persecute others; Nor have you been too much a Latitudinarian as to Church
discipline, Nor of too narrow a Spirit or principles as to any Protestant
Dissenters. And I think Envy never charged you for giving any advice that
tended to the injuring the balance of Christendom, or the power of England in
settling it, or the persuading us to love some of our Neighbors better then our
selves. You who are so far from offending any weak brother, That you are ready
with the Apostle rather to abstain from eating flesh while the World stands,
and therefore will much less kill or devour him, and lest of all will you
offend a weak Brother-Protestant Country or help any else to devour it: and
will not injure any of those Countries that you visited abroad (when the world
and you saw one another) by projecting their Mischief. And therefore as I find
in the Prolegomena of Grotius de jure belli and pacis that Themistius, speaking
to Valens the Roman Emperor he told him that Kings if they would be guided by
the Rule of true wisdom they must non unius sibi creditae Gentis habere
rationem, sed totius humani generis, and esse non (...) tantum aut (...) sed
(...), so it may be justly said that the Counselors of Kings should always
advise them, not to take care only of the concern of their own people but of
the happiness and quiet of all mankind, and not only to be lovers of the
Macedonians, or lovers of the Romans, but to be lovers of Men. I never heard
your Lordship reproacht for having any interest contrary to that of your
Country or indeed to the repose of Christendom. And as in Nature we see all
heavy bodies tend by their own Center to the Center of the Universe, so have I
still thought that your Lordship always endeavored by the pursuing your own
good to pursue that of the Kingdom, and that your endeavors of promoting the
good of your own Country have tended to the good of the World: And that in
every Scheme of your Politics whether Civil or Ecclesiastical policy you have
took your Model from the Great Architect of Nature doing things fortiter and
suaviter and with regard to his works of which it is said in the 8 th of Wisdom,
Mightily and Sweetly does she order all things.

And he that builds so, is a Workman that need not be ashamed either of himself
or of his work, that is both strong and fair: such a Councellor need not be
a^hamed of his Council. It Is one of the worst sort of Reproaches to which a
Councellor at Law can be exposed, to be called a crafty Counsel, that is, one
who secretly gives advice for the perverting of Justice and the law; and to do
that vile thing is more odious in a Counselor of State: And of this subject
when I formerly discoursed to your Lordship, I remember you were pleased to say
it of your self to me, That you had a great aversion from giving whispering
Council, to your Royal Master, and that it has been your humble motion to him,
to command his Council to give him their advice in writing.

Your Lordship is by one particular accident a necessary subject for the Worlds
compassion, namely by your having outlived most of the eye witnesses of the
many memorable things you have done for the World. If the people of England
your Contemporaries were six Millions at the time of your birth, five of those
Millions are now lodged in graves, persons above the Age of Sixty making but a
sixth part of Mankind. I reading lately in Tully de Senectute, was pleased with
what he says of old men both de facto and de jure praising themselves: he
says there, videtisne ut apud Homerum saepissime Nestor de virtutibns suis
praedicet? Tertiam enim jam aetatem hominum vixerat: he had lived almost 300
years when he went with the other Grecians to the Trojan War, and where he gave
such weighty advice, that Agamemnon said he should make quick work of the
taking of Troy if he had ten such Counselors as Nestor was; Quod si acciderit
non dubitat quin brevi Troja sit peritura. He never wished, says Tully, to
have ten Ajaxes. It seems the General thought that an old Commander would be
weighed down with a tenth part of an old wise Councellor. But Nestor had buried
all those thrice over who were born with him, and he lived to see his
Countrymen doubled once and a half (200 years being the space judged for a
Nations doubling) and if he would have his Atchievments in his first Century
Celebrated and witnessed, he must be his own Herald and witness in his own
cause. I will not apply Nestors case to your Lordships, as to your doing right
to your self by praise, for you have no more occasion to do that then Tully had
who says there, Nihil necesse est mihi de meipso dicere, quanquam est id
quidem senile aetatique nostrae Conceditur: But do think that any Protestant
Prince who can say he has ten such Counselors, and resembling your Lordship
in the experience of near fifty years spent in the affairs of State in critical
times, and with success, and equal to you in all ^orts of Learning, and in the
knowledge of the Law and public Records, and in Eloquence and Courage, as well
as in the hatred of Popery, he may add, Quod non dubitat quin brevi Roma sit
peritura. i. e. without such dilatory Troy Sieges as have been formerly laid to
it. He says elsewhere, Apex senectutis est autoritas. Quanta fuit in L.
Caecilio Metelio! quanta in Attilio Calatino, in quem illud elogium unicum, Vno
ore plurimae consentiunt Gentes, populi primarium fuisse virum.

And this Authority or Reverence of old age is so weighty, that it seems
reasonable that in the criminating one that has this badge of Nature there
should be what Tully calls authoritas testimonii, and any single witness had
need to have an allowance se primarium fuisse virum that would convict such a
man; for diamonds are not to be cut but with the dust of diamonds. It Is not for
nothing that the Scripture cautions the not receiving an accusation against an
Elder but by two or three witnesses, and I am told that the Canon Law requires
seventy two Witnesses to convict a Cardinal who is a Bishop accused of any
crime but heresy, and forty four in the conviction of a Cardinal Presbyter,
and twenty six to convict a Cardinal Deacon, and seven to convict any Clerk.
And therefore I think that it was a commendable tenderness and worthy of
English Judges in a Trial at the King's Bench, to acquaint the Jury, that they
are to weigh and consider the credibility of witnesses pardoned for perjury;
and both the Judges of the King's Bench and Common Pleas resolved it, That the
credit of such a person was left to the breast of a Jury. The Bishop of Rome
who claims that Monarchiall power which is potestas restituendi in integrum
Sententiam passos, and quandoque absolvendi paenam and non infamiam quandoque
and poenam and infaniam abolendi, and who as Aquinas says (2. 2 ae q. 68. ar
4.) potest infamiam Ecclesiasticam remittere, yet allows the Schoolmen to
apply distinctions to that privilege of his, and to interpret it of infamia
Iuris, not Facti, for labem illam quae turpi facto annexa est, nemo delere
potest, as Soto concludes De Iustit. and Iure l. 5. q. 5. ar. 4. No man who
ever he be can wash out that stain of infamy which by Nature is inherent in a
foul wicked Act, because (says he) ad praeteritum non est potentia, when the
infamy is inherent by the Nature of the fact and not positive by Law. But still
our merciful Laws of England allow a person after a pardon for the infamy of
perjury, to be a witness, reserving his credibility to the Jury, and who may
after the former crime obtain to be belived by them, when they shall have found
that he has acquired an habit of virtue by the series of many actions in his
following Life, no man being supposed able in a desultory way to leap out of a
rooted habit of Vice into an heroical habit of Virtue, and so e contra; for
that nature does not pass from one extreme to another, but per medium. It Is
true indeed, in case of Treason where the life of both the King and Kingdom is
struck at, and of which there is rarely any detection made but by participants
in the Crime, one who would be repelled from being a Witness, is welcome as an
accuser, and the barking of a dog is allowed to alarm us of thiefs; and as we
say against Pirates, omnis homo miles est, much more may every man be an
accuser against Traitors. Thus I have heard that in the case of heresy in the
which (as I said before) the Canon Law orders the same proceedings and rules as
in Treason, a Layman is allowed to be a competent accuser of a Clergy man: And
as by all Laws any man is allowed to be an accuser who prosecutes an injury
done to himself or his Kindred, so I am told, that by the Canonists Haereticum
accusans dicitur suam suorumque injuriam prosequi (and in that case a notorious
enemy is allowed to be an accuser) for that a heretic is said to strike at the
Foundation of all Laws divine and humane. Nay according to the Canonists, the
Pope who cannot be accused of any crime but heresy, may be accused of that,
and even by a heretic, and that with good reason according to their
hypothesis; for that the Pope being a Bankrupt in the Faith by heresy,
attempts to break all the innumerable Priests, Monks, Friars, Nuns, etc. that
get their bread by that Religion. No wonder therefore that the Canonists agree
that heresy is to be cut off in the beginning; and they cite out of Timothy,
that it does eat as a Cancer, and the eating of heresy even in the breast of a
Pope must needs be troublesome to the whole body of Clerical and Monastical
Papacy, as a Cancer or Wolf that would eat up all their bread, and therefore
in the single case of heresy the Pope himself according to his own law may be
convicted by two Witnesses, and be thereupon deposed. But tho it may be
supposed that as the Civil and Canon Laws do leave the credibility of witnesses
very much to the Judges, so our common Law does to Juries, and that in many
actrocious Criminal causes, every man is not allowed to be an accuser of an
illustrious person, and that we ought to be very tender and reserved in the
taking up an ill report against the meanest of any of our Neighbors of
mankind; yet its otherwise as I said before in the case of Treason, which is
like a pestilence walking in the dark, and seldom known before it is incurable,
and before it is ploughing up the whole Land of a Country into graves. We are
not to quarrel with the birds of the Air who tell who in his Bedchamber curses
the King, because they are not Eagles. We are to be glad of the happy Augury,
and to thank God and them for their saving the Imperial Eagle; and to be well
pleased with either Tame or Wild-geese that save our Capital. If any Fleet
comes to invade us, we are not to be very nice in diffecting the Morals or
outward estate of him who fired the Beacon. Your Lordship has heard how Owen o
Conally an obscure person (as Sir. John Temple styles him in his History of the
Irish Rebellion) came to the Lord Justice Parsons about nine of the Clock at
Night before the intended seizing of Dublin Castle, that was to be on the
following day and discovered the detestable Conspiracy to him, with the names
of the chief Conspirators, when the disguise of wine had made him seem hardly
intelligible or credible. And when it falls out that a Country is faved by
wholesale through a detection of Conspiracies presented by persons who cheated
their Countrymen formerly by retail, that is, by persons who had been vile and
infamous, it ought to be accounted as an instance of the divine benignity to
some of the most wretched and sinful Members of Mankind, who have been long
industrious in tearing out of their hearts what relics they could there find
of the divine image, and who had long acted only Devils parts on the Stage of
the world in punishing and being punished, then to invite them to an
opportunity of changing the Name of Malefactors into that of being blessings to
the World, and not only of being their Countries benefactors but (as it were)
founders, and to gain good Consciences, and good names, and what rarely happens
to others to have an after-game allowed them to play for Reputation, and to
have it said of such an one on the occasion of the shame of his past life
stimulating him to bring both glory and safety to his Country, si non errasset
fecerat ille minus. By the account that I had sent to me from London of Matters
in some affidavits relating to your being called Papist, your Lordship has the
greatest advantage that any man can desire who has any things sworn against
him, by persons how credible soever, namely the incredibility of the things
themselves. For can it be thought that your Lordship would out of your own
Mouth judge your self a Traitor, that is, one reconciled to the Church of Rome,
and forfeit your Life and Estate, and attaint your blood in the presence of a
young man you had never seen before? and is it likely that the Irish Papists,
who, as Sir John Temple observes in his said history, have such a kind of dull
and deep reservedness, as makes them with much silence and secrecy to carry on
their business, and whereby the design of the last Rebellion which was so
generally at the same time and at so many several places to be acted (and
therefore necessarily known to so many several persons) was without any Noise
brought to such maturity, as to arrive at the very point of Execution, without
any notice or intimation given to any two of that huge Multitude of persons who
were generally designed (as most of them did) to perish in it; And the Irish
Papists having been then (as he says) tongue-tyed by an oath of Secrecy, I
say is it likely that they now designing Mischief if they did hope by your
Lordships help to promote it, that they would trumpet forth your Lordships name
in their public Masses, and use such speaking trumpets about your name and
their enterprise as should be heard all over Ireland and England? And who can
believe it to have the shadow of Veri-similitude that your Lordship should give
Commission to any to offer one of the Kings witnesses (and particularly Mr.
Dugdale) your house as an Asylum to retreat to after they had for the turpitude
of lucre retreated from their Principles, their Consciences, their Oaths? I
never see any man sworn as a Witness in a cause, but I think of the saying of
St. Austin upon those words of St. James, Above all things my Brethren swear
not, Namely Falsa Iuratio exitiosa est, vera Iuratio periculosa est, Nulla
Iuratio secura est; and I have as it were a little cold shivering on me, while
I see a man about what he knows of the property of a tenement staking his
title to a Heaven and a Crown of Glory; I have then such a concern for another,
as I have when I see a great Ship just launching off the Land into the water,
and do then apprehend an immortal Soul launching it self into the great Ocean
of Eternity, and am afraid of its being overset. But when I think of a man's
having honestly sworn already and in the greatest concern, namely in the
detection of a Conspiracy against his Kings Crown and Life, and consequently
having invoked the Omnipotent God to be conditionally his Revenger, his
Executioner as well as Judge, and further think of any one that shall tamper
with such a witness and offer him a great Sum of money as his viatical expenses
to hell to swear contrary to his former oath, and by that New Oath to renounce
his expectation of a Crown of Glory in Heaven, and to endanger his Princes
Crown and Life on Earth, and to attempt a Mortal wound on Gods Viceroy in the
dominions of his Soul, I mean his Conscience, I have both all possible horror
overwhelming my thoughts on such a tremendous instance of the degeneration of
Man's Nature, and I have all the compassion imaginable for your Lordship on one
of Mankindes pretending to think it possible that your house should with your
consent be turned into a denn for such a Monster.

An Areopagite was discharged from the Seat of Judicature, because he threw
away from him a small bird that fled to him from the pursuit of a great one;
and it was therefore supposed that such a judge always carried cruelty in his
breast for that charissimum Deo animal called Man: and such is the
compassionate tenderness of your Lordships mind toward injured and persecuted
Mankind, that one of those may be allowed to Nest within your house as freely
as a poor bird without it, But birds of Prey, I mean Romes Vultures, and either
suborners or witnesses suborned to recant, have no plea for your Shelter; and I
am confident rather then your house should be a cage for any such unclean
birds, you would be content as the expressions of the Prophet are, that the
Satyr should there cry to his fellow, and that the Schrich Owl should rest
there, and that the wild Breasts of the Desert should also meet there. Your
Lordship sees what a preferment the Papists designed you: for that after
(according to some of the Narratives of the Plot) Sir W. G. was designed Lord
Privy Seal, you were to be a providore for a suborned cast witness, and a
Iackal or provider for the roaring Lion that walks about seeking whom he may
devour: In fine, my Lord, they designed your Lordship to be an entertainer or
an Host for the Devil. But your Lordships name being taken in vain by those who
would have retained Mr. Dugdale to take Gods so, and the Devils tempting any to
undertake for your house being a Sanctuary to a devil, are not new things for
wonder, when you please to consider that the Devil presumed to undertake for
Almighty Gods protection, when he tempted the Son of God. It seems the showing
to Dugdale the several Kingdoms of the Earth where he should be safe, could not
prevail with him to be a fugitive from his Conscience; and tho it appeared in
several Trials, and particularly my Lord Staffords, the temper desired to have
him, and that he was sifted, winnowed as wheat, Yet neither his Faith nor the
faith of his Testimony failed him, after all the cribration thereof, and all
that was gained by the endeavored suborning him against himself, as well as
others against him, was only the fate of the Thrush, who is sometime birdlimed
and took by his own excrements.

Is it not then an example of rare modesty, that the diabolical tempters should
be the accusers of the Brethren, I mean of some of the Kings witnesses that
would not be Bribed from attesting the truth in the case of their Political
Father? The Age wants not the instance of an honorable Person, who courting a
Lady in order to marriage, thought her at last not worthy his farther amors,
yet who because he did once profess to love her, he fought one who reproached
her virtue: But his example is not more herocial than is the practice infamous,
for such who courted some of the Kings Witnesses both by importunity and gold
to espouse their interest, and when both were totally and finally rejected,
make it the the most studied part of the Romance of their Lives to dishonor
them, and to shamme inventions of New Tragicomic Plotts upon them, but Plots so
damned dull, as to be seen through in the opening of the first Act, and Plots
that were most thin where the Actors cried to themselves like Bays in the
Rehearsal, Now the Plot thickens, and where nothing of the three Unities was
regarded, and which no marvel if they brought such confusion still to the
Actors, as the Story makes to have once happened to the old Red-Bull Players at
the Tragedy of Doctor Faustus, when they complained that they had one Devil
more than their Company, and when they said a quarter of the house was carried
away. Your Lordship out of a generous indignation that such Whifflers in
Politics should think to lay a tax upon the belief of the Kingdom both without
Act of Parliament, and without Sense (and indeed contrary to the sense of
several Parliaments) did during a Paroxysme of the Gout, cause your self to be
carried by your Servants to be present at Council, when the Papists pretended
Presbyterian-Plot was there to be considered. And if it be true what Mr. Hobbs
says in his ingenious History of the Civil Wars of England, [That Monsieur du
Plessis and Dr. Morton Bishop of Durham writing of the progress of the Popes
power, and entitling their Books, one of them, The Mystery of Iniquity, the
other, The Grand Imposture, were both in the Right; for I believe there was
never such another Cheat in the World] the Mercury of that cheat being
sublimated into the invented cheat of that Plot, was too nauseous and strong
for the belief of the Kingdom to be able to swallow. We may therefore be very
well allowed to put the old great interrogtory of Cicero to these Catilines,
How long do you abuse our patience? especially considering how much to windward
we are of them by the detection of their real Treason, and do see both the
smoke of our gunns, and those of their own they fire at us annoying them, and
while we have had the just advantage of Plaintiffs against them and whereby
their recrimination against some of our great number has seemed only dirt
thrown in their own defense, and at worst but Catilines accusing of Cethegus,
and considering that we know it only proper to he Religion to justify the
Maintaining the dignity of holy Church by Lies and calumnies. Thus Guymenius a
famous Popish Doctor ex tractatu de Charitate Proposit. 7. p. 176. cites
Bannez. 2. 2. quaest. 70. art. 3. dub. 2. for asserting that per modum defensae
and ad infringendam contumeliosi authoritatem, potest secundum quosdam absque
lethali crimen falsum illi objici, and that it is only a venial Sin to object a
false crime to an unjust witness, and twenty Doctors are there mentioned for
the making this a probable opinion. And therefore if it be lawful for a man to
make shamm-accusations where he has only a private concern, it is meritorious
to do it in the case of holy Church: therefore he said very right according to
the Popish hypothesis, gaudeo s^ve per veritatem sive per occasionem Romanae
ecclesiae dignitatem extolli. Joseph. Stephanus de Osc. pr. in epist. ad lect.

Guymenius p. 190. extactatu de justitia and Iure, Propositio. 1. Cites both
Fathers Schoolmen Divines and Casuists of several orders, and even holy
Scripture for the asserting this proposition, viz. Licitum est clerico vel
religioso, Calumniatorem gravia crimina, de se vel de sua Religione spargere
minantem occidere, quando alius defendendi modus non suppetit: A principle of
Religion calculated only for Ballies and Hectors, and therefore no marvel that
such were observed to flock from so many parts of most Countries in England to
London in and since the year 1678. like Ravens in expectation of the Carcases
of Protestants, and such miscreants are to the Jesuits their Triarian bands
upon occasion, and who in the Out skirts of London are a noisome Pestilence,
and not enduring nor being endured to live in the Country.

But from the said last Cited proposition of Guymenius, the proposition that
contained the enacting Law Sir Edmund Godfrey fell by, I infer, that since
there is a par or proportion between a good name and life, that such who
account it lawful for a particular Clergyman to Murder even a Popish Layman
who shall but threaten to caluminate him, will account it meritorious by
Shammes to Murder the fames of those who shall threaten to accuse holy Church.

And it seems as men try experiments on Creatures they account vile, they
experimented both these propositions on Godfrey, for after they had basely
killed him, they would have shammed off his blood and the guilt of it upon
himself, when they pierced his dead body with his own Sword; a barbarous and
infamous sort of cruelty and which brings to my mind what Dr. Done in the
preface to his (...) referres to in the Notae Mallon. in Paleot. Part. 1. cap.
2. viz. that the Church in her Hymns and Antiphones does often salute the
Nails and Cross, but the Spear which pierced Christ when he was dead, it ever
calls dirum mucronem. And here because some of them drive an eternal trade of
butchering and shamming, and then in effect Stabbing their own Shamms of Plots,
I shall Entertain your Lordship with one egregious instance of a Priest of
theirs being abandoned to a reprobate or injudicious sense of shamming, in
making by a ridiculous Lie a famous Cardinal and profound Statesman perhaps as
the World has bred, and one of singular Piety and great modesty, to render the
Gun-Powder-Treason a Sham Plot, and thereby wounding the Fame of both the
understanding and morals of their great dead Church Hero, as barbarously as
they did the Corpse of Godfry. And this instance I refer to, is in a Book called
The Advocate of Conscience liberty, or an Apology for Toleration rightly
stated, and writ with Learning and Wit, and Artifice enough ad faciendum
populum by a Priest of Romes Church an English man, and printed in the year
1673. In page 325. He represents the Gunpowder-Treason to be a Sham Plot
contrived by Cecil, and to prove this, Cites D'Ossats Letters, Book 2d. Letter
43. And the date of that Letter was from Rome, March the 29. 1596. And the date
of the last Letter there is from Rome in December that year. The
Gunpowder-Treason Plot was to have been on the 5 th of November 1605. And on
D'Ossats marble Tomb in Rome his Epitaph mentions that he dyed Anno 1604. so
then he is made by that Author to have known that Treason to have been a
Sham-Plot Eight years before it was to be executed, and to have permitted many
Papists for want of his sending a line of News of the Shamm, to be shamm'd out
of their lives, and the Roman Church to be shammed and anniversaried out of its
credit in England.

But if they reproach any as they did Cecil on the pretense of the persuading
some of their wild principles into the decoy of a plot, a thing I think
detestable as what implies a tempting or inviting of a Man to degenerate from
himself, they have no reason to be angry with but only to pity men that
receive infection from their principles, and from this particular one, That
it is lawful for a good end to ensnare men into acts of Sin. Many Casuists and
Divines are brought by Guymenius for this purpose, p. 184. in the 9th
proposition ex tractatu de Charitate, and under which proposition he quotes
Sotus de Sec. memb. 2. quaest. 2. a little before the fifth conclusion where he
enquires, an liceat and expediat aliquando perditum hominem permittere in
pejora prolabi crimina, ut ignominia peccatorum confusus, facilius resipiscat
and emendetur. And he answers licet nobis aliquando permittere peccatorem ad
tempus in pejus cadere ut cautius resurgat.

The 9th proposition there is Maritus qui uxorem adulteram suspicatur potest e^
occasionem offerre ut in adulterio deprehensam corrigat. Lay man. Iesuita. lib.
2. tract. 3. Cap. 13. number. 5.

But in p. 205. extractatu de justitia and Iure; Propositio 4. The correction
that may be lawfully used is assigned, it being there said, that non peccat
maritus occidens propria authoritate uxorem in adulterio deprehensam: the which
he says Sa the Jesuit represents as a probable opinion, And which Hurtado he
says positively defends, Tom. 1. resol. moral. tr. ulti. res. 5.. 7. n. 204.
so that if a Protestant Statesman had inveigled them into a plot and then
hanged them for it, his politics had squared exactly with their Morals. And
even as the calling of a Rat-catcher is a lawful calling, tho some of that
profession have had no certain way to take Rats but by the use of one
experiment, namely, first, to provoke them to fly in the Artists face;
according to the said principles is the calling of a Statesman both lawful and
laudable who deals so with such as he judges to nibble at Treason. But this by
the way. And now to let your Lordship see how some of their Divinity is
particularly but a labored Sham in the case of Treason, and even but a mocking
at Sin, I shall divert you with a known Author among them making men play with
the bait of Regicide, as he is hooking them into it: And it is Mariana the
Jesuit, as I find him Cited by Dr. Done in his forementioned book p. 135. He
quotes there Mariana de Rege l. 1. c. 7. for cautioning against a King being a
self-homicide by drinking poison prepared and ministered by another he being
ignorant; for after he concluded how an heretical King may be poisoned he is
diligent in this prescription.

[That a King be not constrained to take the poison himself, but that some
other may administer it to him, and that therefore it be prepared and conveyed
in some other way than meat and drink; because else, says he, either willingly
or ignorantly he shall kill himself] so that he provides that the King who must
dye under the Sins of Tyranny and heresy; must yet be defended from concurring
to his own death; tho ignorantly, as tho this were a greater Sin.

Is not this pleasant to see any of them catching of Kings in a Theological
Mousetrap, and playing with them like Mice before they devour them? to see them
sweeten a Cup of poison for a King with their damned Church Sophistry, and to
sham men as licorish Flies to be Swallowed up in the Cup? I wish that some of
the most considerable of the Grandees of the Church of Rome could Answer this
accusation of their shamming, otherwise than by committing it de novo: for if
they say that some of their Doctors write against this and other crimes as well
as some for them, as particularly some write against the use of equivocation;
And as Father Parsons the Jesuit writing against King James's succession,
another English Jesuit namely Creswel writ for it, and so that when some of
their Doctors break the Churches head, others presently gave it Plasters, is
not this a fearful, shall I say, or Contemptible sham? Do we not know that the
discipline of their Church is as exact as any Military discipline can be, by
which alone it has preserved it self so long in being, and that none among
them can publish books without passing several Courts of Guards of Superiors,
nor contradict one another in rules of practice, more than Trumpeters of an
Army dare sound a charge or a retreat but when commanded to it? And what a face
of something like sham the present Popes declaration about some opinions of the
Casuists carries with it, I have already mentioned; and does not every one know
their avowed doctrine de opinione probabili, Namely, that tho an opinion be
false, a man may with a safe conscience follow it by reason of the Authority of
the teacher, and that a Confessor is bound to absolve the penitent when there
is but one opinion for his being absolved, tho, he believes that opinion not
only improbable as to the principia intrinseca, but false.

In Sum, according to the old observation of Poperies prevailing, by having
that in it which may fit the temper and humor of every individual person, and
to be like Manna answering every man's taste, whether he has a gusto for
miracles, or even for starving or abstinence, for business, or retirement for
Life or for death, for Honor or for begging, it may to these be added, that if
any one affects to be a Ruffian or one of the Popes Sheriffs as aforesaid,
there is a most ample field in the killing of Kings, firing of Towns,
Massacring their Inhabitants for the talent of such a Pavure diable, and indeed
incarnate one to expatiate in, and if any account it a luscious thing to be
cheated or to be shammed as some few, or to cheat or sham as many think it,
behold a Religion made for the nonce in that point too. But while they are thus
playing with all things Sacred and profane, he that sits in the heavens has
them in derision and leaves not the Protestants to fall finally as a portion to
Foxes, such who turned tail to tail carry firebrands between them, and their
shammes do only enter on the Stage of the World to be instantly hissed off.

My Lord, I have not been rash in Censuring either the principles or practices
of some Roman Catholics as aforesaid. And particularly I well know, that even
the most ingenious of our English Papists cannot now in this Conjuncture endure
to hear of Father Parsons his book writ by him to Invalidate the Right of King
James to succeed Queen Elizabeth, principally because he was (as Father Parsons
thought) an heretic. A very great Man that Jesuit was, and so Considerable,
that one of our eminent Divines in his Sermon in print, gives him this
Character; That he was perhaps one of the greatest men that the order of the
Jesuits has produced.

And methinks 'twas pity he should play at such small game of sham, when he
published that book, as to entitle it to Doleman, an honest secular Priest whom
Parsons hated, and to make him odious, laid the brat at his door.

Moreover, a kind of inglorious sham it was, that Creswel, who was Parsons his
fellow Jesuit, writ (as I said) at the same time for King James his Right to
the Crown, not out of any desire he should enjoy that Right, but that on all
events they might have something to say in apology for their Society, and bring
Grist to its mill. For if King James had not come to the Crown of England, the
honor of hindering his Succession had been attributed to Parsons; and Creswel
the Jesuit expected the Credit for his writing on the Event falling as it did.
Thus I remember to have heard a Passage of two Astrologers, who on the day
before the former great Prince of Parma was to throw the die of War, agreed
together to predict luck to him perfectly contrary to one another, that so they
might save the credit of their art, by one of the artists being in the Right.

The Author of the book called the Catholic Apology, with a Reply etc. (and
which book I think the Author of the Compendium mentions as one of the books
writ by the Roman Catholics of England since the Kings Restoration) says p.
366. speaking of Dolemans book, For Dolemans book who wrote it God knows,
Parsons denied it at his death, and I believe he was not the author, because in
several of his works he speaks very much to the advantage of King James. But as
to Father Parsons having in that Conjuncture been of the Spanish faction, and
having applied his whole soul and strength to hinder King James's Succession,
and his having writ that book the Great forementioned Cardinal, namely D'Ossat,
(who in several of his Printed Letters gives the World a more satisfactory and
particular Scheme of the whole design to hinder that Kings Succession to the
Crown of England, than I know any or all else to have done) says among his
letters (printed in folio at Paris 1664.) in that in book 7th Anno 1601. a
letter to the King, letter 131. what may be thus rendered in English, viz. It
may please your Majesty to remember, that since the year 1594. there was a book
printed in the English language that the Spaniards caused to be made by an
English Jesuit called Parsons, and 'twas by the way of the low Country
dispersed about England etc. And further in the 7 th book p. 301. in the letter
to Villeroy, letter 133. what he says of that book of Parsons, may be thus
made English, and from that book of Father Parsons one might draw reasons in
favor of his Majesty, which would be more weighty then those he deduceth for
the King of Spain and his Sister, the said Father Parsons does contradict
himself very often and very grossly, as it happens to all persons in passion as
able as they are, who are not guided by truth and by reason, but transported by
Interest and by passion. And in the last letter of the 8th book, and to
Villeroy from Rome the 30th of December 1602, he speaks of Father Parsons
having made application to himself to desire that there might be a treaty
prepared from Rome between the Pope, the King of France, and the King of Spain,
to agree among themselves of a Catholic, that may Reign in England after the
Queen, be it the King of Scots if he will turn Catholic, or be it some one
else etc. But there in p. 367, year 1603, letter 174. from Rome to Villeroy,
and on April 21st, it appears that all the Machinations of the hot Iesuitical
heads against King James his Succession were overturned by providence, for he
there says that the Queen was no sooner dead, then that the King of Scotland
was in England peaceably received, and the Controversy of King James his title
evaporated; and for the honor of our English understandings he there says,
Les gens de cet Isle la ont bien Monstre qu' ils scavoient fair leurs affairs
entr' eux tossed and seurement, and que ceux de dehors se sont fort mescontez en
leurs desseins and esperances. i. e. the people of England have well shown that
they knew how to do their own business among themselves quickly and safely, and
that others abroad took very wrong Measures in their designs and hopes.

I have here said enough to entertain your Lordship with the View of their
unreasonableness, who would impose on us, That Father Parsons wrote not that
Impious and Treasonable Book, and likewise with the more pleasant View of Gods
Confuting it (as I may say) by the happy determination of his overruling
Providence.

And Now because I would make it appear to your Lordship, that I have not been
unjustly severe to the Jesuitical Principles, in rendering them such as are the
sturdy extravagances of those offals of Mankind, called Bullyes and Hectors, I
shall entertain you with one Instance of a Bravado of threatening from one
English Jesuit to all Protestant Crowned Heads, a bravado that is like the
High Water Mark, to show in words how high it is possible for the foam of the
raging Sea of Anger to reach, and it is in a Letter of Campian the Jesuit to
Queen Elizabeth's Privy Councellers, printed afterward at Triers, 1583. as I
find it Cited in that most learned Preface of my Lord Bishop of Lincoln's to
the Book concerning the Gunpowder Treason, in the Year 1679, and it is thus in
English, viz. That all the Jesuits throughout the World have long since entered
into a Covenant, to kill heretical Kings any manner of way: and as to our
Society know, That we Jesuits who are spread far and wide throughout the whole
World, have entered into an holy Covenant, that we shall easily overcome all
your machinations, and that we shall never despair of it as long as any one of
us remains in the World. Lo here a Drawcansir, that will not only snub all
Protestant Kings, and take the bowls from their mouths, and beat out their
Brains with them himself, but he says there is a Society or Corporation of
such brethren of the bladed Ecclesiastical, who have entered into a Covenant or
Association to murder all Protestant Kings, and that every single Member of the
Corporation should have that dead-doing talent of Valor that should awe and
subjugate the Protestant World. And here then, my Lord, every Jesuit values
himself on being a Mutius Scaevola; and more than Three hundred of these new
Romans, or so many thousands of them, I mean all of them, according to Campian,
have Covenanted to destroy every Porsenna that lays siege to Rome: but in that
time of Queen Elizabeth there was an industrious Gentleman who feared not the
terror of these Huffes, but with his secrecy and silence did reduce these mad
dogs into the Condition of neither barking nor biting in England, I mean Sir
Francis Walsingham, of whom it is said in Cotton's Posthuma, That his bountiful
hand made his intelligences so active, that a Seminary could scarcely stir out
of the Gates of Rome without his privity. And no wonder then if Campian was
soon brought to the end of a Traitor here in England by the Care of one of
Queen Elizabeth's Privy Councellers in the Year 1581. who did both defy and
scorn that Rhodomantado address, wherein the Jesuit did Goliah-like, defy All
Protestant Kings and their Armies, and as if he would give their flesh to the
Fowls of the air; but the event showed his own flesh was so given as a
Traitors, to that use here in England.

It was a kind of a bravado in the great Archimedes, to say, Give me where to
stand, and I Will shake the Earth. He well knew no such place could be found. The
Jesuits it seems would have every one of their Order to be an Archimedes, and
able to shake the Earth as he pleased, and the hypothesis of Popery they know
offers them a place divided from the Civil and Imperial Government where to
stand with their Engines, namely the Ecclesiastical, but things will not be ill
administered, and holy Church it self will sink into the Earth, if its
Foundation be not laid as God and Nature would have it, and the Man who stands
for the place to be an Archimedes, and to Move the Earth, will soon find his
fate of being dissolved into his own little dust, and that among the artificial
lines he is making. It seems that boasted association or Covenant of the
Jesuits did help to occasion another among the Protestants in Queen Elizabeth's
time, which was ratified by Act of Parliament in the 27 th of Eliz. which was
about three years after the death of Campian, who was Convicted of High Treason
by virtue of the Statute made in the time of our Popish Ancestors, namely in
the 25 of Edward the Third, and thereupon executed, and yet by the Romish
Church made a Martyr, tho (as I said) convicted on that Statute. But according
to this thundering denuntiation of War against all heretical Kings by Campian as
the Jesuits Herald, and his boasting when he did put on his armor that every
one of his Order should be like an Alexander an adequate match for at least one
World of heretics, the author of the Compendium needed not by his Rhetoric to
reflect on my Lord Bishop of Lincoln's Candor and gentleness in saying yet if
it be a breach of Christianity to crush the bruised reed and of generosity also
to trample upon the oppressed, I wish his Lordship may be found guilty of
neither etc. for behold any single Jesuit according to Campian tho but like a
reed shaken with the wind is able to bruise all Protestant Scepters, and any
little toe of that Order can trample all Heretical crowned heads to dirt, and
the Number of the Papists in England if reduced to the least of Numbers is not
according to Campian to be slighted, if one of them be a Jesuit, for that that
one Jesuit will carry the advantage of odds against all Protestant Kings and
Princes; that one may say my Name is legion, for we are many: but as that
legion-spirit could not without the Divine permission ruin a herd of Swine off
from a Steep place, so neither can all the legions of Iesuited evil Spirits in
the World drive a King and Kingdom from Precipices at their pleasure: And Queen
Elizabeth in spite of all the arts and power of Rome outlived eight Popes, and
lived to change all her Counselors but one, all her great officers twice or
thrice, some Bishops four times, and died full of years, and did see and leave
peace upon Israel.

And now I shall Entertain your Lordship with a further Reason of my charging
the present Popes declaration aforesaid about some opinions of the Casuists, as
carry with it a face of some thing like shamme: and my reason is grounded on
what was said in a public Sermon before an honorable Audience, namely, that
the propositions of the Casuists therein were not Condemned by the Pope in the
Consistory, which would have made the Censure more authoritative, but by the
Pope and Cardinals of the Court of the Inquisition, upon which a remarkable
thing followed: the Iefuites in France who were much provoked at this Censure,
moved the Procureur de Roy, or Attorney general at Paris to put in a Complaint
against the publishing that Decree, since it came from the Court of the
Inquisition, which not being acknowledged in France, nothing Flowing from that
authority could be received in that Kingdom: upon which the decree was
prohibited and suppressed.

And may not the English Popish Priests say the same thing, the Inquisition was
never received in England, and therefore that declaration of the Popes obliges
us not here, and we will prohibit and suppress it as much as we can! No doubt
but the present Pope fearing that the Noisome and Infectious smell of those
Opinions of the Casuists being more offensive to the minds of Men, then any
snuff of a Candle can be to their Nostrils, they were ready to cry for the
removing of the Candlestick of his Church out of its place, went about to
extinguish them in the most Summary Manner that he could, and therefore
attempted to do it by the Court of the Inquisition; well knowing, that in the
Consistory of Cardinals all proceedings are so dilatory, and the old magi there
so used to do every thing pian piano, that they would consume many pounds of
new Candles in debating whether or no and how the old snuff should be removed,
and perhaps would have thought to have contented the World in the mean time
with giving it some perfumes: but the Pope being afraid of the Jesuits,
perhaps as sometimes the Grand Signior is of his Ianisaries, does not for fear
himself should be extinguished by them, so far (as I may say) follow the light
within him, as to throw away or tread out that snuff of those opinions as
containing a malum in se, or declare any of them to be ill as contrary to the
principles of the law of nature, in which case neither he nor God himself
indeed could have dispensed with them, tho yet any honest and ingenious Heathen
would on the least occasion given, have declared them so, As Cicero and Seneca,
and many others have done; and which had the Pope done and the Jesuits or any
Papists persevered in the making those principles the Rules of practice, his
Kingdom had thereby been ipso facto divided against it self, and a diffinitive
sentence had been thereby given by the Pope, that all who had died owning those
principles and practices, had been sunk for ever into the burning lake.
Therefore, as I said before, I hope this declaration of the Popes such as it
is, will give an alarm to our English Papists to deal seriously with their
Souls, and to consider as if it were for their eternities, these and other
Principles of their Religion, and that if they will not be thereby persuaded to
be almost Protestant Christians, yet to be altogether Masters of as good Moral
Principles as the Heathens I named; and If any of them can but give us a Moral
certainty of their Principles being but such, I shall never repine at any
favor that any new Law may afford to such of them.

If therefore any of our Lay Country men Papists not guilty of the late Plot
shall desire to be heard, and to say any thing toward this effect, some of us
have heard of these principles before mentioned as owned by our Casuists and
Priests and Confessors, that are now thus condemned by the Pope, and we did not
believe that those our spiritual guides did own such Principles, but now our
Eye sees by the condemnation thereof that they were before owned and made
rules of Practice; Wherefore we hope that who ever do own them, will abhor
themselves and repent in dust and ashes; and others of us did formerly think
them Consistent with the Christian faith and the peace of Kingdoms and with
humane Society, but we now abhor those principles and repent in dust and ashes;
We are ready to let the King and Kingdom and the World have a moral certainty,
that we desire no power to change the Religion in England by Law established,
and we are willing to receive Instruction from any that shall be appointed by
public Authority, to give it to us, concerning what other principles beside
these Condemned by the Pope are inconsistent with Religion or the public
Peace; and in case any shall offer to give us dispensations either for
principles or practices contrary to those, we renounce as inconsistent with the
public peace; we shall be so far from accepting of such dispensation, that we
shall detect the offerer thereof before a Magistrate, as much as we would an
enemy to His Majesty; We are ready to give active or passive obedience as to
all the Laws in being; We believe not the Bishop of Rome to have more power in
His Majesty's Realms by Gods word, then any other foreign Bishop, as was by
Acts of Parliament and public Recognitions declared in the Reign of Henry the
8 th. We are willing to render the Kingdom as secure from fear of us and our
obtaining power, as are the States of the United Provinces from those of our
persuasion in Religion among them; We are willing to let you see, that the same
Basis that shall be your security, shall likewise be ours.

A great part of our number has we fear given too much cause of jealousy to
the Kingdom of their affecting pre-eminence therein, we are sorry for it, and
hope it will be so no more;

I say such Papists as these are the bruised reeds, I would not trample on, and
would make no noise to interrupt their being heard to the effect above
mentioned. And since what has been done, may be, and Sir William Temple in his
Impartial Observations on the United Provinces of the Netherlands, chap. 5.
says of the Roman Catholics there, that tho they are very numerous in the
Country among the Pesants, and considerable in the Cities, yet they seem to be
a sound piece of the State, and fast jointed in with the rest: and have neither
given any disturbance to the Government, Nor expres'd any inclinations to a
Change, or to any foreign power, either upon the former Wars with Spain, or
the latter Invasions of the Bishop of Munster; it is I say possible therefore
for them to become sound pieces of the state there. And if the end of all their
shamme Plots be what is usually that of Comedies, and Romances plots, a
Marriage, I mean their espousing the true Interest of the Kingdom, I for my
part shall never forbid the bannes of the Matrimony, nor enter any Caveat
against the license for it granted by lawful authority; provided they give due
security as in that case against such a precontract with Rome, that may null
their contract with us.

It Is an old Common Observation, That whelps without any care bestowed on them
will see at the end of nine days, tho born blind, and that if they are much
tampered with by art to be forced to see sooner, they are blind for ever: and
therefore I hope that the forbearance of our Church in this latter Age to
tamper with them, by disputes, or Catechizing, or Compelling them to be present
at the public worship, will with the help of Time and Nature, and their
experience of their inability by all their shamme Plots to put out our Eyes,
conduce to the opening of theirs.

Alas, what advantage is it by all their artifices that they can hope both to
gain and keep here, I mean for any considerable time. A trick of art is like a
Monster in Nature, ill-lookt, and short lifed; and it is obvious to every Eye,
that the higher Scale got up by accident, is more ready to pop down again, then
it was before, while it hung in its due poise. And while they do by art and
contrary to Nature in any Conjuncture hoist up their Interest high in the Air,
the artificial motion endures not there long to be gazed at, and while it is
there visible, it is beheld by thousands of vigilant Marksmen, who know it is
easier to hit the mark shooting upward then downward.

We find it is notorious out of the present Pope 's said Decree of the Second of
March last, That the Jesuits and other Casuists were Encouragers and Patrons of
Calumny, by those Principles of theirs he therein Condemns, and namely, That
Probabile est non peccare mortaliter qui imponit falsum crimen alteri, ut suam
justitiam and honorem defendat: and si hoc non sit probabile, vix ulla erit
opinio probabilis in Theologia: i. e. It is probable that he does not Sin
Mortally, who fastens a false Crime on another, that he may defend his own
Justice and Honor; and if this is not probable, there is scarce any Opinion
probable in Divinity.

The Jesuits have by this Opinion given us the alarm that they make Calumny not
contrary to the Law of God, but only beside it, for that is the Popish account
of a Venial Sin; and moreover, that it is a small and very pardonable* Offense
against God or our Neighbor, and no more than an Idle word, and that it Robs
not the Soul of life, and that it may be remitted without hearty Penance and
Contrition, and only with the Sacraments, Holy Water, and the like; these being
the Popish Received Doctrines of the Nature of Venial Sin.

And thus they may be false Imputations and Testimonies rob the Bodies of
Protestants of life, without bereaving their own Souls thereof, and this is
owned by them as a first Rate probable Opinion in that Great Science called
Divinity, that Great first Rate of all Sciences, as relating to the honor of
God; but most certainly we have very great Reason to pity the Persons of those
who have such low and grovelling and ridiculous Conceptions of the Supreme
Being, as to think to add any thing to the brightness of his Perfection by that
Sacrifice with whose smoke they endeavor to blind the eyes of some of their
Brethren; while they are with its flames consuming the Bodies of others, and to
think to tickle him with the straw of Praise, while they rob Men, and that the
using of Fraud can be worthy of God, which is scorned not only by Gentlemen,
but even generous Beasts (it being proper to Foxes, and not to Lions to
practice it) and that tho the Dice of the Gods always fall luckily (according
to the old Adage) that false ones are to be used for their Honor, or that any
one is to be a falsarius for the Glory of the true God, and that since the
Roman Heathens thought it Essential to the Justice of their Laws, and the
honor of Human Nature to term him a falsarius who but concealed Truth in the
Case of Men, it can be worthy of the Divine Nature to encourage false
asseverations in Ordine ad Deum, and that it can be any Honor to infinite
Wisdom to out-wit silly Mortals, or to infinite Goodness, to set it self off by
the putative or real faults of any one, and that since as the Philosopher said
long ago, it is the greatest Scandal to a Governor imaginable (...), to lay
snares for those that he Governs, to think that the Great Governor of the World
can have honor from the laying of Nets and Springes by Man Catchers; In fine,
to think that after the Divine Compassion to Men had under the Mosaic
Dispensation so long signalized it self against Idolatry, because 'twas a
Cheat, and for that an Idol is nothing, it can be consistent with the Divine
goodness now under the Economy of the Gospel (of which the Restoring of Humane
Nature was the Great intent) to encourage inhumane Arts and Artifices, to make
it degenerate to the old Cheat of Idolatry again, and which was the worst
extremity of it, the immolation of Men under the pretext of Religion, a Cheat
of Idolatry, that the Blessed Jesus designed by the offering of himself to
exterminate out of the World as an unnecessary thing, and by his dying breath
to make it evaporate for ever.

There was no guile found in his mouth, and his followers were only then wise
as Serpents, while they were innocent as Doves: and the first Crying in the
Cradle of the Puer Hebraeus of the holy child Jesus, was as Thunder to strike
the old Equivocating Oracles Dumb, that had so long cheated the credulous World.

When he branded the Scribes and Pharisees with sharper language, he calls them
Hypocrites; He alarms us of false Prophets coming in the Masquerade of Sheeps
clothing; tells us, That he who calls his Brother fool, shall be in danger of
hell fire, and therefore he may much more fear that danger who makes a Fool of
him, and plays the Knave with him; he Commands us not to Calumniate or kill,
but to bless those that curse us, which is more than to praise them, as I said
before of blessing being the tribute due to Men heroically Virtuous.

To show that he intended nothing of Artifice in the Propagation of his
Doctrine, a hated Publican, and a few poor Fishermen, and a Tent-maker are used
in his Embassy to the World, men not likely to be able Mentiri pro patria
coelesti, if such a Commission as Go Cheat all Nations, had been given them.

And lest it might be thought that with Oratorical Harangues that he or they
led Men by the Ears, as an implicit faith is said to lead them by the Nose, he
used no honey of Phrase, or sting of Epigram, no Politic Remarks, nor scarce
more lenocinium of words, than is in He that has an ear to hear, let him hear.

He tells us, That for every Idle word we must give an account, and therefore
certainly abhorred Equivocation, which makes all words and speech Idle, and of
no effect; and since, as I think, 'twas truly said, Eloquentia non nisi stultos
Movet, Eloquence moves none but Fopps; he did, as I may say, put that generous
Complement on men's understandings, not to Commission his Ministers to try to
sooth men out of one belief into another by bribing their imaginations with the
excellency of speech, or the enticing words of man's Wisdom, but the contrary.

He thought it worthy of God to be worshipped by the world in Spirit and in
Truth, and not to increase the number of his Homagers by Lies, Legends, and
Impostures. It was for the honor of the Christian Religion that the Son of God
chose to take flesh in the time when Augustus Reigned, when the Roman World
being freed from a long Civil War, had leisure to ^^ltivate the Arts of Wit and
Reason, and had brought them to their highest Perfection, and took not the
advantage of a dark and barbarous Age to surprise the World in, as afterward
both Papism and Mahumetanism did, and it is therefore no Marvel if either of
those two Hypotheses of Religion, did in one Point so much resemble the
Christian Religion, in so soon with its ferment levening so Great a lump of the
World.

But the Christian Religion came not into the World like a Fireship with
prepared smoke to blind men's eyes, as it was assailing them: No, for to the end
that the Christian revealed Doctrine might like a great Pyramid be conspicuous
to the whole world, and last together with it, and reach from Earth to Heaven,
the Divine Providence was long laying its Foundation very deep in Nature, and
very wide in the world; I mean, Justice and Reason so agreeably to Humane
Nature then at their height appearing in the Laws of the Roman Empire, and its
subjugating the World, and its reducing Mankind to the Law of Nature first
imprinted on Man's heart, were by the Care of Heaven used as previous in
qualifying the World to receive the Glorious Superstructure of the Christian
Religion, the which would certainly not have been so much as res unius aetatis,
if at that time when the Roman Laws inculcating the Natural Cognation between
all Mankind, and placing Actions that wound Piety or Reputation, or good
Manners in the Number of things Impossible, and intimating their abhorrence of
Collusion, Combining, Circumvention, and Disanulling things done thereby, and
branding of those acts that do fraudem facere legi, and rendering that to be but
a pitiful innocence that is but as good as the Law requires, and making him in
the eyes of the Law to be still in Possession of any thing, who is actually
trickt out of it, quia pro possessione dolus est, providing against Calumny by
an Oath in all litigations, and when a person is rendered to do a thing
infamously, expressing it by dolo facit, having the regard of Pudor,
verecundia, Humanitatis, ac Religionis ratio, and other such words of the like
charming signification, which were like Trees in the Body of the Roman Laws,
planted as thick by one another as they could well stand, the Christian
Religion had in the Congruity of its Precepts to Humane Nature come short of
those of the Romans, who as Cicero says, did not Calliditate ac Robore, sed
Pietate ac Religione omnes gentes nationesque superare, and especially if in
those against Calumny, Fraud and Circumvention, the Christian Faith had not
reached as high as the bona fides of the Heathens, and much more, if the Model
of Christian Morality had been in that Knowing Age like that of the Jesuits in
this.

But certainly since it has often proved fatal to the Ministers of Kings to
be, or seem wiser than their Masters, the Jesuits by affecting in their
Platforms of Morality to be wiser than him, who in the style of the Scripture,
of God is made to us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, may
easily take a prospect of their ruin; and as the Serpents trying to out-wit
Heaven, and its Poisoning the Morals of our first Parents with its subtlety,
made the Scene of its motion to be in the Dust, and it to be more accursed than
any brute Animal, such is likely to be the fate of this Serpentine Order after
they have been by their subtle Casuistical distinctions so long nibbling at the
Sacred word, a thing the old Serpent did, and tempting Men in a fool's
Paradise, according to their several Palates by their Tree of the Knowledge of
Good and Evil, I mean the Experiments of Vice, by their pretended Moral
Theology; but what is so far from deserving the Name of Theology, that if it
were imagined that a general Counsel of Devils were by their Chief called to
debate of a Model of credenda and agenda for the world, it is likely they would
unanimously agree to set up this, and no other; for no doubt they would pass no
Article to deny the existence of a God, for they believe that, and tremble, nor
yet any Article that might be controlled by Natural light, or of which any
Matter of Fact would be overruled by Authentic History; but they would among
the unwary Judges of things, and such whose Judgments are choked up with the
fumes of lust, try to puzzle the Cause of Religion, and by distinctions to make
Golden Bridges for Men to retreat from Morality: And this Course the Jesuits
have took. By their Casuistical distinctions they have broke both the Tables of
the Moral Law into innumerable pieces; they have broke not only the least, but
greatest of the Commandments, and have taught men so to do, and how to do it
with a Salvo to them, and how Salvo metu and fide peccare; and by being
Casuistical Splitters of Sin, have been as troublesome to the World, as
Splitters of Causes are to a Country. The Christian Religion that great Tie
intended by Heaven to be like a substantial and great Cable (as I may say) to
supply the great Anchor of our hope, they have made it their great business to
untwist by their nice distinctions, and to make it so fine that it will not
hold, and by encouraging Lies and Calumnies for the honor of Holy Church, they
have helped the Politic-Atheists-would be to a new occasion of trying to
insinuate that old impotent-Slander that Religion it self is a Cheat; and
moreover, since it is on all hands Confessedly true, that Religion is necessary
for the Government of the World, and that every Ligament of Humane Society
without Religion, is but like a rope of Sand, it is probable that the Jesuits
Morality being destructive of Religion, that the Nations of the World will look
on it and their Society, as an Association against Humane Society, and that one
Nation after another will declare themselves Abhorrers of it. And it must by
necessity of Nature appear, that they cannot be Confessors of truth, nor
Martyrs for any but the Devil, that make lying venial; nor can their fate who
pretend to be Witnesses in the Cause of Religion be any other than is that of
some according to the Law and Practice of Nations, who are Witnesses in any
Cause, to have their whole Deposition rejected upon the Discovery of one
falsity therein. And since it is confessed to be the Doctrine of the Roman
Catholic Church, and particularly of the Trent-Council, that the intention of
the Priest is necessary to the validity of a Sacrament, who can promise to
himself safe anchoring in the Depths of a Jesuits intentions to make the
Sacrament, while he makes Cheating lawful? If any one shall say, that so vile a
thing is not to be supposed in a Priest, as upon any occasion not to intend the
making of the Sacrament, let him consult the Additionals to the Mystery of
Iesuitism, and there he shall see, p. 95. Proposition 23. no meaner a Jesuit
than the Great Casuist Escobar, cited for this Assertion, That it is lawful
upon Occasion of some great fear to make use of Dissimulation in the
Administration of the Sacraments, as for a man to make as if he Consecrated, by
pronouncing the words without attention. Escobar. Theol. Moral. Tom. 1. l. 6.
Sect. 2. C. 7. Prob. 26. p. 27. And in this point, the Pope's said Decree is
infallible; namely, to show the fact of this Doctrine of Devils, having been
owned by Jesuits and Casuists, as appears by the Proposition 29th. in the
Decree, viz. Vrgens metus gravis est Causa justa Sacramentorum administrationem
simulandi. O Blessed Jesus, can any Jesuit think it is lawful for him so far to
fear those that can kill the Body as by his Dissembling his making of thy Body,
to destroy another Soul by Idolatry? It Is among both Papists and Protestants
confessedly true, that if the Host I worship should not be the Body of Christ,
I were a great Idolater; and therefore if a Priest by that incident Passion of
fear may lawfully forbear to intend to make the Body of Christ, I may well have
such a constant fear as does cadere in Constantem virum, of the danger of my
worshipping only a Wafer, and consequently of my being an Idolater: and since a
Miracle is Heaven's Broad Seal to the truth of any Doctrine, and since
Transubstantiation is the greatest Miracle that can be thought of, I may well
conclude that God will not commit the Power of making Millions of Miracles
every day to men that make Cheating lawful, more than a Prince will commit the
Custody of his Broad Seal to a professed Impostor. And therefore I shall (...)
the way affirm, that the Protestant Religion not making the intention of the
Pr^est essential to the Sacrament of the Eucharist, is more strongly assertive
of the Real presence there then is the very Popish Hypothesis.

The truth is, it is a very inglorious, and a very imprudent thing to use fraud
even in the Conduct of Political Government. My Lord Herbert in his Life of
Harry the Eighth, speaking of a foreign Monarch, says with great Judgment, but
while he escaped not the Opinion and the Name of false ( which yet his Country
Writers pall^a^e no otherwise than with calling it Saberraynar) he neither
complied (...) his Dignity, nor indeed the Rules of Wisdom, true reason of
State consisting of such solid Maxims that it has as little need of Deceit, as
a sure Game at Chess of a false Draught: there is no use of it therefore among
the wiser sort, it being only a supply of Ignorance among the Ruder and worse
kind of Statesmen. Beside it appears so much worse in Public Affairs, as it is
never almost hid or unrevenged. Reputation again is still lost thereby, which
yet how much it concerns Princes, none can better tell than such as Imagine
them without it.

But to use Fraud in or for that great concern of Mankind called Religion, is
more absurd: and it is the vilest Nonsense imaginable, for Men to talk
deceitfully for God, and that style of a foreign Monarch of Dissembling his
Indignation, need not be used by him who made the World with a fiat, and can
unmake it with a thought, and whatever Religion in the World is true, I am sure
that is and must be false that attempts to support it self by falsehood or
fraud, and by the Violation of Faith given. For I am sure that to stand to
Promises, to abhor Deceit, is a thing in its own nature simply good, and that
it is impossible that God should lie, and if it be simply good in God, it is
necessarily so in Man, whom he has made after his own Image, the Image being
to answer the Archetype: and that Religion therefore that does approve of
falsarii, and which cannot have the true God for its Founder, and in which
every honest man may justly say to the Deity of its worshippers, Stand by thy
self, come not near me, for I am holier then thou, (as the Scripture expression
is) must expect to be exterminated out of the Knowing World. Such worshippers
can be no more judged parts of the Ecclesia Catholica, than Pick-pockets in
Churches are of the Coetus fidelium there, and as when these petty Larceners
are there discovered, they are glad silently thence to steal themselves away,
such perhaps will the fate of those grand Impostors too be after their
detection to march out of the Church, and that without the Parade perhaps of
noise of Trumpet, or beat of Drum. There needs no battering Ram against Fraud,
but Detection. And these Arbiters of Calumny, that like the Month of March came
into the World as a Lion, may perhaps go out of it like a Lamb, and their
Morallity naturally come into the number of Pancirols, Res deperditae, and as
not worthy of any Humane care to conserve, after it has with so much violence
been laboring in vain to destroy that old great invention of God, the Law of
Nature. Let any great East or West India Company in the World, but once as a
Public Society, renounce the observation of Faith, or Patronize Cheating, and
no other Company need envy their growth or Continuance, or pick holes in their
Charters, and retain the loudness of Lawyers to dissolve them. And such is the
fate like to be of any Religionary Society. None need ask where are the
Fighters, or where are the Disputers of this World, to confound an order whose
Casuists make Lying lawful; and yet make it lawful to kill one that gives the
Lie.

And the truth is, it is already through the Providence Divine, and likewise
the Providence and Circumspection of Men so effected, That these lewd
Moralists, that call themselves the Fellows of the Holy Jesus, these crafty
Companions are so detected in the Church, not only as Cheats, but as having the
Plague, that they are avoided by many of the Orders that own the Pope as their
Chief, who will neither admit them to Prattique nor Quarrentine, and they are
in a manner reduced to the state of those Princes, who force a Trade at home,
and only drive one with their own Plantations abroad. They are already come to
the state of Bessus his Colleagues in the Comedy, a sort of military pretenders,
who after their Buffetings and Spurn^ings they had took from so many, did
support their Credit only by this Combined Determination, namely, that they
were valiant among themselves: and this is the present state of these exposed
Casuists of the Church Militant that have been so long imposing on the World by
force and fraud, it is agreed on by them that they are Just among themselves.

With the help of all that Nature and Art can do, they can never recover the
wounds that have been given them, by the publication of the Les Provinciales,
or the Mystery of Iesuitism discovered in Certain Letters written on occasion
of the differences at Sorbonne between the Jansenists and the Molinists, with
additionals, and were Printed in the English Tongue in the Year 1658. And that
Great Court of Conscience that is a Court always open (and where the Judges
are too many to be all bribed or awed however some may sleep) which I may call
Conscientia humani generis, having arraigned and condemned their Casuistical
Tenets as infamous, they are after an Impeachment and Sentence in that Court to
expect no pardon: the World will never forgive nor forget their making Calumny
a Venial Sin; nor their particular bringing into the Field for the service of
the art of strongly calumniating Battalions of Fathers, Schoolmen, Divines of
other Orders by Guimenius: who in that Book of his before mentioned, brings in
a multitude of great names of those great ranks not only to Justify, but even
to Sanctify the Crimes charged on them in those Letters: and as 'twas said of
old, Citius efficies Crimen honestum, quam turpen Catonem, so in Guimenius we
do not see any rascal Deer who were Justly marked or wounded, thrown out of the
herd of the Jesuits, but we see Men who were besmeared with their own filth and
the Dirt the World threw on them, out-braving the light, and to cleanse
themselves from imputed guilt running into the Crowds of Casuists of their own
and other Orders, as likewise among the Fathers, Divines and Schoolmen; and so
Magnanimously Impious was he, as to make Acts of Cheating and Calumny to be
patronized by holy Church, and openly to excuse the putting Gods Mark on the
Devils Merchandise, and to stamp in effect a legitimacy on them with an
effrontery only to be paralleled with that which Tully tells us concerning
Antony the Orator, who being to defend a Person accused of Sedition, boldly
went to prove that Sedition was no Crime, but a very Commendable thing.

But after all their long Casuistical weighing of the Dirt of Vice in Aurificis
statera, or rather in Essay-Masters Scales which turn with the 300th part of a
grain, and as some contrived by an honorable Person of the Royal Society, will
turn with the thousandth part of one, it Can never be forgot that they tell us
this Dirt is Gold.

Nor can or will the bold Artifices of the Jesuits before mentioned in eluding
the Popes Decree of the 2d. of March, 1679. against their unmoral Divinity, and
of which Declaration the Cloud contains Thunderbolts of Excommunication against
their Tenet of lawful Lying and Perjury, and Equivocating, and of Dissembling
in the administration of the Sacraments, be ever forgot even by many thinking
Papists, or indeed the thinking part of Mankind.

And Protestants may well ask all Papists that Call those damned Tenets of the
Jesuits by the Name of Religion, Where was your Religion before the birth of
Luther? for Luther was born above half a hundred years before the birth of the
Society of the Jesuits.

Nay since that Religion has been damned by that Decree of the Popes, we may
ask them, Where is your Religion now, where is the Popes Infallibility so much
avowed and Idolized by the Jesuits heretofore? What, is not the Pope
infallible in his Chair, in the Inquisition? was his Chair in the Apostolic
Palace in the Vatican, and attended there by the most Eminent and most Reverend
Lords the Cardinals of the holy Roman Church, being specially deputed by the
holy Apostolic See, to be the General Inquisitors for the whole Christian
Commonwealth against all heretical pravity, I say, was that Chair the Chair of
Pestilence? Are not you as Heretics Self-condemned in having procured your
infallible Popes Condemning Decree to be suppressed in France as coming from
the Pope in the Court of Inquisition? Alas, do not we know that it is all one as
to the value of the Coin, Let the Prince's Mint be kept in this place or the
other; and that it is the Sanction of the Pope either in the Consistory, or in
the Inquisition at Rome, that gives the standard of weight and fineness to any
Doctrinal Propositions, and that makes them current? Do we not know it out of
the History of the Council of Trent, that the Pope told the Cardinals in
Consistory, that they had only Consultive Voices to put things to his
consideration, and that the Decisive Voice belonged only to him? Do we not know
out of that History, Book 7th, that Laymez the General of the Jesuits spoke
with great veh^men^^ and Master-like in the Council about two hours, proving
that the Power of Jurisdiction was given wholly to the Pope, and that none in
the Church besides ^ath any spark of it but from him, and that while Christ
lived in the flesh, he governed the World with an absolute Monarchical
Government; and being to depart out of the World, he left the same form,
appointing his Vicar St. Peter and his Successors to administer it as he had
done, giving him full and total Power and Jurisdiction, and subjecting the
Church to him as before to himself: That in Councels be they never so frequent,
if the Pope be present, he only does decree, neither does the Council any thing
but approve, and therefore it has been always said Sacro approbante Concilio;
yea even in Resolutions of the greatest weight (as was the Deposition of the
Emperor Frederic the Second in the General Council of Lions) Innocent the
Fourth, a most wise Pope, refused the approbation of that Synod, tha^ none
might think it to be necessary, and thought it sufficient to say pr^sente
Concilio? How comes the Case now altered, when we behold the Jesuits now
crucifying the Decree of their King the Pope, after all their former H^^anna's
to him, while he was mounted on the World as his Ass, and after all their
dea^^ing of the World with Blessing him in nomine Domini, and see them now
putting but a reed of Infallibility in his hand, and see his Scepter in theirs,
and see their fourth Vow to the Pope annulled, and what performance then can
Heretics expect from any Promises they make to them? and might not the Jesuits
wi^^ the salvo of a Protestation against the Inquisition, or with a thousand
Expedients, if they had pleased, allowed Receipts from the Inquisition, to rid
the World of a Pestilence, as frankly as Protestants use the Jesuits Powder
against Agues, and without intending more Honor to that Court, than the Sacred
Writ did to the Devil, in recording for our instruction several things by him
spoken? And have not we a candid account of this Arca^um in a very Ingenious
Discourse lately Translated into English, and called, The Policy of the Clergy
of France to destroy the Protestants of that Kingdom, and writ in the way of a
Dialogue between a Parisian and Provincial, where p. 67, and 68. Le Cheise and
the Jesuits Party are said to have effected the suppression of the said Decree
in France, upon pretense that it issued from the Tribunal of the Inquisition,
and that in the Draught of an Order of a Parliament in France, for the
suppressing the Publication of this Decree, these words were put, viz. Tho that
these Propositions are justly Condemned, and that Father Le Cheise caused these
words to be ra^ed out, and has put in their stead, That even the good things
which come to us from the Tribunal of the Inquisition, ought not to be received?

But if upon occasion of what was discoursed by that Author, it be further
said, that the setting up of those unmoral Casuistical Tenets in France, was
the erecting a Pillar of ignominy against God, I will ask if one who is revera
an incompetent Judge shall go to demolish any such Pillar set up against my
Father, and I have already owned that that Judge does infallibly know the
bounds of his Jurisdiction, and have obliged my self to him by the
forementioned fourth Vow, that what thing soever he shall Command that belongs
to the profit of Souls, and the Propagation of the Faith, I will without any
tergiversation or excuse execute, as far as I am able (for this is the Jesuits
fourth Vow to the Pope) shall I then be active in the hindering a Decree of this
Nature, given by this Judge from being executed, at the same time, I Protest
against it, shall I make no Protestation for the honor of my Father? And do
you think in this Inquisitive Age the Cheat of an Inquisition, will elsewhere
pass long, since that Court that is used by ordinary Inquisitors for the
torturing the Bodies of Christians, and mutilation of the Image of God, cannot
be allowed to show severity to the body of Sin, to the Image of the Devil in
depraved Minds, and that while your unerring Judge of Law and Fact is in Person
there praesiding? Are not you that surpre^^ the Dictates of your own Universal
Pastor such unreasonable Men as we may well pray to be delivered from?

All our Jesuited Papists must still expect Expostulations of this Nature.

Their Head was before at Rome, and their Brains too; but if they now make a
Schism from the Pope himself, they will come under the Denomination of Acephali
(the Name of some ancient Heretics) that is, the People without a Head, unless
they will own the Hydra of the Jesuits for their Head, which it seems the
Hercules of Rome could not subdue. I believe many of them will consider what
sure footing they have where they are, while they see their Moses flying from
his own Staff when made a Serpent, I mean his Order of Jesuits, and see the
Collusive or Sham-Serpents of the Jesuits devour those of their Moses, and
Juglers by Deceptio Visus and lying to impose on the eyes of the World against
the sense and reason of Mankind, and even of the Pope himself, and 'twill be
very ridiculous for them, who have been cheated out of their own Religion, to
think that some who are the Jesuits Bubbles can cheat us of ours, and that
while they are grown Seekers, they should make us loose our Church; and that
when the Spiritual Monarchy of the Pope is in a manner Run Down by the Republic
or Society of the Jesuits, they should think to cheat us of our King and
Church, and that our Religion can be run down by such Spiritual Outlaws, and
Rebels against the Pope himself, and such as perhaps the Pope may in time be
induced to oblige the World by suppressing after their Injuring all Morallity,
and the most vital parts of Christian Religion, and the great avowed use of his
Power in the whole Christian Commonwealth, by their Suppression of his said
Decree. I hope while the Fan is in his hand he will thoroughly purge his floor,
and esteem the Disposals of rich Benefices in France to be poor Regalia sancti
Petri, for him to vindicate in Comparison of the lives of the Souls of his
Flock, that he, and all ingenuous Knowing Mankind, Know must be destroyed by
such Casuistical Principles; and without his doing which, he cannot in the
least deserve the Title of his Holiness.

For the determining the truth about such Principles, he need not say as one of
his Predecessors did about the Iansenian Speculations, that he had no skill in
Divinity. A very little skill in Natural Divinity (and such as may be had by
the Reading a few Lines in Tully's Offices) would accomplish any one with what
would demonstrate the things allowed by the Casuists to be unworthy both of the
Divine and Humane Nature; and all the Jesuit's Skill in Divinity will never be
able to render them otherwise to the World.

I must seriously profess, that one saying of the Great Cicero in that little
Book, viz, Ea deliberanda omnino non sunt, in quibus est turpis ipsa
deliberatio, i. e. Those things are not at all to be deliberated wherein the
Deliberation it self is filthly; has in it I think more frank generous Morality
included, and that which is more worthy of the ancient Roman and Primitive
Christian simplicity, then what all the Libraries stuffed with Bauny, Escobar,
Layman, Le Moine, Navarrus, Azorius, Molina, Tanuerus, Lessuis, Emanuel Sa,
Henriquez, and other Numerous Casuistical Jesuits have furnished the world
with, wherein they do so nicely and infinitely divide the body of Sin in semper
divisibilia, and indeed make it an infinite Nothing. But the world I think will
not long deliberate what to do with this Casuistical Divinity, of which no
truer Description can be given, then that it is a Deliberation of Sin. I do not
know any that would eat or drink with another that he thought did deliberate
to Poison him. Dum deliberant (says Tacitus) desciverunt: i. e. While they do
deliberate whether they should revolt, they have revolted: their very
deliberation and consulting was ipso facto a Revolt.

I doubt not but many Pious Christians of the Roman Catholic Communion have
Complained of the effect of their subtle and innumerable distinctions
destroying Christianity, in that style of the Woman in the Gospel, They have
taken away My Lord, and I know not where they have Laid him; and that
Considering those Casuists had so far seared their Consciences and brazen'd
their Foreheads as in the Patronizing of Calumny and other Impieties to defy
not only Christ's Gospel, but the Pope's own Canon Law, many Papists importuned
the Pope with their Zeal suitable to that of the Psalmist's, to give that
decree, saying, It is time for thee to work, for they have made void thy Law.

It Is notorious that the Canon Law (as bad as it is) is very severe against
Calumny and Calumniators, and especially against Clergymen that are such, and
pronounces a Clergyman infamous who is convicted of defaming another: and
'twas very well worthy the Vigilance of the Pope, not to let the Jesuits steal
away his Canon Law from him.

But this must needs be very diverting to this inquiring Age, to see
Protestants as well as Papists accounting the Popes reducing some immorallities
to the Test of his own Canon Law, a piece of Reformation, and the Pope
struggling to effect it, and hindered by the Jesuits therein.

According to the former expression, it is time for the Pope to work and to
Null that Order that thus nulls his aforesaid Decree in the sight of an
awakened World, and is else likely to Null his Church, the Patience of Mankind
being the less able longer to bear the weight of Jesuitical Calumnies by its
having endured them so long.

The truth is, the Great and Original Cause of the founding of that Order being
to cut Heretics Throats, (for at this plain rate we must speak and call a Spade
a Spade when they are digging our Graves with it) it was necessary for them to
use the art of blackening of Heretics by Calumnies as the Prologue to that
Tragedy, the which would cause the Heretics to fall unpitied; and 'twas
necessary to make that black art as lawful as they Could, that so they might
have their quietus from the World for the arrear of their passed frauds, and
not fear accounting for future ones.

But as these men will not recede from their Art, so neither will Nature recede
from it self, and our Critical English World now having occasion to pass
Judgment of their Calumnies, is naturally enforced to Con^ider their former
Shammes in States and Kingdoms to aggravate their present ones, as Judges
still in the Case of Malefactors are obliged to take notice of their having
been formerly branded for the same Crimes.

The execrable Shamme made against the Admiral and others as conspiring to kill
the King of France, and giving provocation to the Parisian Massacre, will never
be forgot; nor the Shamme that was provided to have charged the Puritans with
the Gunpowder Treason; nor that of the Irish Rebels, who were so outragiously
impudent as to pretend the Commission of our Royal Martyr for their Butcheries:
Nor yet that of the Jesuits having effected heretofore in Bohemia, and lately
in Hungary, that Counterfeit and forged Letters should be found in the Custody
of the Protestants, to charge them with Crimes against Caesar. The Memorial of
the Sufferings of the Protestant Ministers in Hungary at the Instigation of the
Popish Clergy there, printed for William Not, in the Pallmall, 1676. shows it
at Large, where it is said, They did not (against the Ministers) insist much on
the Particulars that relate to Religion, but great endeavors were used to
prove them Accomplices of the Rebellion, the which their Advocates and Council
did manifestly disprove, and the Resident of the States of the United Provinces
at Vienna did afterward in a Memorial to the Emperor fully and solidly refute.
Tho the Ministers were indicted in form of Law, for having assisted the Rebels
by their Council, and supplied them with Provisions, and for having Made way
for the Turks to Come in and wast that Kingdom, yet none of them (as that
Discourse sets forth) was convicted thereof, nor one clear Testimony brought to
prove that any one was a Complice of that Rebellion.

That discourse shows that the Advocatus Fisci did exhibit everal Letters to
prove all the Ministers Accomplices of that Rebellion, but that many and great
presumptions evinced that these Letters were never produced, tho it was
frequently demanded by the Ministers and their Advocates that they might be,
and that yet they could never obtain any thing but a printed Copy of them; and
tho the Advocates for the Ministers did often press the Fiscal to declare when,
where or how he came by these Letters, yet that was never done.

That Author having p. 10. mentioned the vile art of Calumny, That the Jesuits
tried to exterminate the Protestants out of Hungary by, speaks in p. 11 th. of
the effects of their endeavors, saying, that upon a Just account it can be
made appear that at several times before and after the Citation against the
Protestants, (meaning the Citation to that vile Process) there were above 1200
Chruches of them suppressed.

It must needs then appear very Ridiculous to the World, that when there is not
a third part of Hungary (that old Bulwark of Christendom against the Turks)
remaining in the Emperor's hands, (for so Dr. Brown in his late Travels there
Computes it) that these Nominal fellows of Christ by nominal crimes charged on
real Christians, should endanger the exterminating of Christianity out of the
European World, and the making the Emperor not long so much as a Nominal King
in Germany it self, and that the Emperor should be more afraid of the Itch of
his remote Subjects, then of the plague of his nearer Foes, and that the
Jesuits disliking the Itch after new Doctrines in the Hungarians should be
reputed good advising Doctors, who counsel him to pass the time in scratching
and lancing with his nails his own members, when many Thousands of armed men
are designing against his Life and Crown, and when his Empire is brought to
such a state, that as 'twas said of the Roman Empire when devolved on Germany,
that one might quaerere Imperium in Imperio, that the danger now hangs over it
of the German Empire being there sought too, and all by the true Real Imperium
in Imperio of the Jesuits there.

And indeed the biceps aquila, which is the Insigne or Arms of the Empire,
might be properly of late referred to the divisum Imperium the Emperor had with
the Jesuits, whom to every abecedarian in Politics it is known to be more his
interest during the present grandeur of France, to dismiss from his Councels,
than ever 'twas the Venetians to deal so with the Ecclesiastics.

My Lord, I should not have thought it good manners to have been so copious in
the exercise of your Lordships Patience with the particularities of the unmoral
or unmannerly doctrine of the Casuists as to the Point of Calumny, but that I
thought some Oil of these Scorpions that you have not the leisure to extract
out of their dead Authors, might be useful to you in the repelling the venom of
their stings sooner then you are aware.

And indeed as it is observed, that the Last bitings of some dying animals are
most fierce, so is it likely to be with their last efforts, namely those of
their Calumnies against Protestants, which I believe will likewise be their
derniers Resort; and it is therefore your Lordships and every Protestants
Concern, who is a Lover of Justice, to know that you wronged any Jesuited
Papists, if in Capital Causes you did believe them not to practice in that case
the Principle they profess, namely the making Calumny venial, a thing so
expressly owned in the 15th Letter of the Les Provinciales, that they were
Called by some of the Sorbon on that account Quintadecimani, in allusion to the
Quartadeciman Heretics of old.

It Is said in that 15th Letter, That this is so notorious a Doctrine of their
Schools that they maintained it not only in their books but also in their
public Theses, which certainly is the height of Confidence, as among others in
their Theses of Louvain of the Year 1645. in these terms, It is only a venial
Sin to Calumniate, and impose false Crimes, to ruin their Credit who speak ill
of us: quidni non nisi veniale sit, detrahentis authoritatem tibi noxiam falso
crimine elidere? and this doctrine is so much in vogue among you, that you
treat him as an Ignorant and Temerarius person, who presumes any way to oppose
it: and presently after, it is related how Father Dicastellus said, that to prove
that it was no Mortal Sin to use Calumny though grounded on absolute falsities,
against a Calumniator, he had brought a Cloud of their Fathers to witness it,
and whole Universities Consisting of them all whom he had Consulted, and among
others the Reverend Father John Gans Confessor to the EMPEROR, all the public
and ordinary Professors of the University of Vienna, (consisting wholly of
Jesuits) and that he had likewise on his side Father Pennalossa a Jesuit
Preacher to the Emperor, etc.

But the aforesaid probable opinion of Calumny will never be received in this
Age of Demonstration, and since the old Roman Laws enjoin a Iuramentum
Calumniae, an Oath of Calumny, (as was before remarked) whereby every litigant
was to invocate God as Witness and Revenger about his not using any false proof
Knowingly, the Christian World in this Knowing Age will Know those who make the
use of false proofs knowingly to be a Venial Sin, and it must certainly appear
ridiculous to Judges and Jurors to give the least respect to such gamesters
Oaths who trumpet forth that Principle that it is a Venial Sin to use false Dice
of the Law to make true ones of Protestants Bones.

My Lord, I am not so unjust and uncharitable as to cast a brand on the Body of
the Papists, as not being capable of the Dignity of Witnesses.

I doubt not but there are in the external Communion of the Church of Rome very
many Thousands who by Divine Grace are kept from Communicating with that Church
in many of its Principles and Practices, and that invincible ignorance may
render many of them excusable, and that the great mortifications and
austerities and zealous devotions not only among many persons of their
Religious Orders, but of the Common people, showing them heroically Virtuous,
do entitle them to have their testimony in any matters of fact received with
honor equal with that of the best Protestants.

And as to many of our Papists in England it must be with Justice acknowledged,
that their having descended from ancient Families, and having had ingenuous
Education, and plentiful Fortunes, and their having seen the World abroad,
where they have observed many of the Principle, of the Jesuits as much detested
by Papists as they can be by Protestants, and their generous inclinations to
serve Virtue and Morality, may well secure us from fears of their being imposed
on by Jesuits to use little or great unholy Shammes and Calumnies for the good
of holy Church, a sort of Penance that must needs seem odious in Nature to
well-bred Gentlemen and Men of Estates, not tempted like little hungry Greeks
to leap up to Heaven, or down to Hell for bread, under the which mean class of
Mankind (according to my intelligence) those Papists have generally fallne who
have been famous for Shamming and Subornation as to the late Plot.

It Is therefore no wonder that Papists in the Low Countries are not tempted to
use any Shammes to promote their Religion, it being necessity that compels men
to turpitude, and the very Alms-men there not being ad incitas redacti.

And against some of our English Papists, being allowed to be dignitaries as to
faith of testimony, whom I have before described, I shall never except.

But for any English Papist who is a believer of the Tenets of the Jesuits, and
some other Casuists to Expect to be believed against any that honors not their
Society, (which none that upholds humane Society and would not have Mankind
tricked out of the Light and Law of Nature can do) is to render a man
irreverent to himself and his Maker, and to show his want of a Curator by the
prodigallity of his Faith, especially when he shall call to mind how Del Rio
the famous Jesuit affirmed that the Dominicans ought not to be allowed as
witnesses against the Jesuits, a charge that Guymenius p. 127, and 128. in
vain Contends to evade.

But this their dernier Resort (as I called it) of their use and application of
their erroneous or rather diabolical doctrine of Calumny, must certainly be
fatal to them; according to that Proverb in the Gospel about the last error,
and erit novissinus error pejor priore. The High Priests and Pharisees came to
Pilate saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said while he was yet alive,
After three days I will rise again; Command therefore that the Sepulcher be
made sure till the third day, lest his Disciples come by Night and steal him
away and say to the people he is risen from the dead: So the Last error shall
be worse than the first: and they Judged right enough of the Last error
Confounding more than the First, as it is the force of the Last motion from a
Precipice that breaks a man in pieces; and this effect of the last error was
presently exemplified in themselves; for they having caused the holy Sepulcher
to be very strongly guarded, and the Door of it to be barricado'd with a very
great Stone, and that Stone to be sealed, and the Lord of Glory after all this
overpowring the Grave and Guards, they had a Consult and gave the Guards Money
to spread that Shamme in the World, that his Disciples did steal him away while
the Guards slept, and says St. Matthew, this is reported among the Jews to this
day.

And lo, as Christ did rise for our Justification, so did this Subornation used
by those Impostors justify the truth of his Resurrection, which else could not
so well have confronted the Worlds incredulity: for if after his Resurrection
his Disciples believed not Mary Magdalen, Ioanna, and the Mother of James, who
told them that he had appeared to them, and if the two Disciples that told the
Rest that he had appeared to them going to Emmaus were not believed by them,
and if when he appeared in the midst of Ten of them at once and showed them his
hands and his side, they believed not for joy, and if when he appeared to the
Women and bade them tell the Disciples and St. Peter, that according to his
Promise they should see him in Galilee, and if the Eleven Disciples went into
Galilee to a Mountain which he had appointed them, and yet when they saw him
there they worshipped but some doubted, and if Christ almost in his Last words
upbraided them with their unbelief, because they believed not them who had seen
him after he was risen, the Pagan and Jewish World would not have been brought
to easily as they were to the belief of his Resurrection, the great hinge on
which the Christian Religion turns, and without which the Preaching of the
Cross would not so much have seemed foolishness as been madness.

Thus did that last Jewish error prove most fatal to Judaisme, and as Heaven
was extracted by the Divine Power out of the Hellish act of Murdring the holy
Jesus, so was the propagation of the truth of his Resurrection out of the
Calumny, Subornation and Bribery used to suppress it, those artifices being so
odious in the eye of the Law of all Nations, that they make any that uses them
to gain infamy and loose his Cause, and to make sure of the hatred ofone very
Considerable Enemy, namely Mankind; and justly, for against that great Body is
every one that professes Calumny an aggressor, and has proclaimed War.

And Granting that Nature is Constant to it self, and that conslusions of the
working of the Passions in humane Nature in future times may be made from the
passed, Our Quintadecimani (tho their Order seems in many political Principles
to be close compacted like the scales of Leviathan,) by the publishing of the
Tenets before mentioned and constant practice of them have brought themselves
into the shallows, and they are like Whales on ground gazed on by the Critical
World, and there laboring under the fatality of their own weight.

It has been observed by that deep Enquirer into Nature, Monsieur Descartes,
that Le bon sens est chose du monde, mieux partage etc. Nothing is more equally
distributed by Nature among Meu than Understanding and Reason, for every Man
thinks he has enough: and of this opinion was Mr. Hobbes in that Chapter in his
Leviathan, of the Natural condition of Mankind, Where he says, That as to the
Faculties of the Mind there is a greater equality among men then that of
strength: for prudence, says he, is but experience which equal time bestows
on all men in those things they equally apply themselves to.

That which perhaps makes such equality incredible, is but a vain conceit of
ones own wisdom, which all mortal men think they have in a greater degree than
the Vulgar, that is then all men but themselves and a few others whom by fame
or for Concurring, with themselves they approve: for such is the Nature of men,
that howsoever they may acknowledge many others to be more Witty or more
Eloquent or more Learned, yet they will hardly believe many so wise as
themselves: for they see their own wit at hand, and other men's at distance.

But this proves rather that men are in that Point equal than unequal: For
there is not ordinarily a greater sign of the equal distribution of any thing,
then that every man is Content with his share.

Admitting this great observation of those two great Masters of Wit and
Philosophy to be true, One would suppose that Nature did not in vain implant in
men such a general notion of their equality in Wisdom, nor without an intent
of promoting the good of humane Society thereby. The God of Nature has not
only not given us any members of our bodies, but not the very hair of our
eyebrows, nor even the hairs of our eyelids in vain; for our eyelids are
fortified with those little stiff bristles as with palisado's against the
assaults of Flies and such like bold animalcula: and I may say, that that
general Notion does defend the Eyes of men's Minds from being too easily imposed
on by particular Notions and Shammes occurring to us from any.

And as to that notion so universally planted in men's Souls by Nature, one may
well imagine that what a Gardener plants in every bed of his Garden, is no
weed; and perhaps one great End of Nature in the general implantation of this
principle in men may be The showing them the folly and danger of their
attempts, who think to engross that great Staple Commodity of the intellectual
World called Wisdom, and to force others to buy that Commodity of which they
think they have enough of their own by them, and especially when they see that
others would force a trade on them by counterfeit Wares, and have been already
branded for so doing.

The truth is, every man's life who pretends to a greater share of Wisdom than
his Neighbor, is in the better state of security by this Notion
beforementioned; for if a man thought others by their Wisdom could render his
ineffectual for his preservation, he would fear and hate them for their ability
to hurt him: and as Toads tho not Known to do any hurt are killed some times
for the imagined precious Stones in their heads, such might be the fate of men
for the value of their Brains, and which depretiate the worth of others. I
conclude therefore that any Order or Society must take what follows from being
thought Nusances and Enemies to Mankind, and prepare for a political death or
dissolution, who think themselves able by artifices to divest men of the
property they have in their Understandings, and to outwit their wisdom, and
who both hang out to the World a new light, and proclaim a new Law of Nature
contrary to the old, (notwithstanding the outcry of Nations that nolumus legem
naturae mutari,) and who Calumniate all that allow not the doctrine of Calumny,
and invent Crimes to Cut off the heads that will not ly at their feet, tho yet
they can invent no crimes (even Regicide not excepted) but what the Invention
of their Theology has made lawful, and think that an hypothesis may renitente
mundo call it self Religion or Politics, which if it were universally received,
would not leave the World one minute out of a state of War, for it ipso facto
dissolves all Pactions, and cancels all Allegiance, and nulls all hopes of
Protection; insomuch that in a Gaming-house that agreed on cheating, the play
could not be worth the candles at a days end, and each of the cheaters must be
reduced to cheat by himself; and thus too any one that makes fraud venial,
cannot be sure that any participants with him in Sedition will keep their word;
and he must rebel by himself too against an irritated world, that was never
made only for any to play in and with, and which must needs with inconceiveable
regret see those men who make all accusations and testimony in nature
uncertain, instrumental in the inflicting of the punishment of Certain death
thereupon, and see a Religion that is dying a Natural death, make any Religious
men die by a violent, and observe that its inventors do in a positive and
dictatorian way propound Principles that such sturdy propounders cannot
themselves believe, till like Geta, a Citizen of Rome, who having long as a
disguise wore a patch over one of his Eyes, he lost the use of it for ever,
they have by habituating their Understandings long to dissimulation, lost the
use of their faculty of discerning.

And this is the Case between Mankind and the Jesuits, neither better nor
worse, and is like to be the fate of these, and especially Considering that
their Principles have both Weight and Numbers to Contest with, I mean the
weight of Arguments, and the Numbers of their own and our Religion.

There is no Resisting the Power of Nature where those two things meet.

We see by frequent observation in our own Land, that the very breath of the
people like that of a Canon Bullet proves destructive, and what then will not
the breath of incensed Mankind do?

They have Numbers to Contest with that their Principles have infected with
Calumny, who think it scarce a Venial Sin to pay any man in the false Coin that
was received from him, and who will be making it as lawful as they Can, not to
play upon the square with false Gamesters: and as the strong are naturally apt
to repel force by force, so are the weak, to repel fraud by fraud, and will be
tempted to make an ill use of the lex talionis, and to account the pursuing of
them with wild defamatory Reports to be but following them in their own
Wild-goose-chace.

Iarrigius in his Book printed together with that called the Jesuits on the
Scaffold, says, While there was any thing of the League left in France, all
the slight the Jesuits had to weaken the authority and elude the unavoidable
accusations of the Pasquiers, the Servines, the Arnauds of that time was to
persuade the Credulous people, that those incomparable Men were fautors of
Calvinisme, and thereby imagined themselves sufficiently vindicated as to the
horrid Crimes and execrable Parricides wherewith they were charged by those
illustrious Officers of State in France, if in some wretched answers they
accused them of heresy. So stale and senseless has that humor of the Jesuits
been to call all that opposed them, Presbyterians.

But any who reads the very Learned Epistle of the Bishop of Lincoln to the
discourse of the discovery of the Gunpowder Treason Printed in the Year 1670.
will find that he there Cites Alphon. de Vargas Toletanus for saying, That all
the Universities of Spain, in a Book against the Jesuits printed and sent to
the King of Spain, give this Character of them, that they are fraudulenti
mendaces, veritatis interversores, Infamatores virtutis, Impostores Pietatis
Velo operti, lupi in vestimentis ovium, Novitatum amici, Sanctorum Doctorum
Contemptores, Lutheri and Calvini partiarii, ac de haeresi suspecti, pacis
publicae perturbatores, Diabolicae Industriae homines, serpents, ipsique
Cacodaemones ac ab omnibus Cavendi ac fugiendi: fraudulent, liars, Corrupters
of truth, defamers of Virtue, Impostors under a veil of Piety, Wolfes in sheeps
clothing, lovers of Novelties, Contemners of the holy Doctors, partners with
Calvin and Luther, and suspected of heresy, troublers of the Public Peace, men
of Diabolical industry, Serpents, and very Devils, and to be shunned and
avoided, or fled from by all men.

Thus their hands and heads being against every one, by a tacit Paction and
Confederation of Nature almost all men's are so against them.

They and other Casuists and Jesuited Papists have complained of Shammes and
Calumnies put on them by Protestants in England since the Plott; and no doubt
if they have not suffered in that kind, they may expect it, all Protestants
having not attained to the temper of St. Michael the Archangel to forbear
Railing accusations, nor to the holiness of St. Bartholomew, who it is said by
continual Prayer had his Knees as hard as a Camels.

I have read of an Antidote against the Poison of Calumny and false testimony
beyond what Protestants could Compass, namely, an Indulgence granted by Pope
Innocent the 8th to every man and woman that bears upon him or her the length
of Christ's Nails wherewith he was fastened to the Cross, (the Just length of
which was Nine Inches) and worships them daily with five Pater-Nosters, and
five Aves and a Creed, that he or she shall have granted them, these great
gifts: the first is that he shall never dye a sudden, nor evil death: the
second is that he shall never be slain with the Sword or weapon: the third is,
his Enemies shall never overcome him: the fourth is poison, nor false witness
shall never grieve him.

By my Consent every Protestant and Papist shall in this Pestilential time of
Shammes Carry this Antidote about him; but whether this be a Shamme-Indulgence
or no, and put upon the Pope, and invented by Some non-Papists; I know not. My
Author for it is Mr. John Gee, Master of Arts of Exeter College in Oxford, in
his Book 4to Called New Shreds of the Old Share, p. 103. Printed at London in
the Year 1624. In any such wretched Contention between the faex Romuli and any
of the Protestants here who should become most impure by Calumny, as the
Protestants being much more Numerous than the Papists would be able to
out-shamme them, and to make the more plain detections of the Shammes contrived
by their Adversaries, it would likewise go the harder with any Sect, that the
Majority of Numbers would thus run down with Shammes in this Nation at this
Conjuncture of time, when the many swarms of those who offer at Wit, and think
they merit the being called Wits, by doing the exercise in a Coffey-house,
Called Baldring, that is, with a serious grave face, telling idle feigned
Stories farced with particular Circumstances to ensnare the belief of the
Credulous, which kind of ungenerous triumphing over weak Understandings by
ridiculous Shammes, is a false sort of wit and humor below not only the
gravity of the English Nation, but the levity of the French, and used by none
but Fools who stand for the place of being Knaves.

There is no doubt but the talent of these foolish Shammers as their interest
and dependances or humors incline them to wish well either to Popery or
Protestancy extending to abuse the belief of the unthinking Vulgar with little
romantic Stories concerning those Religions, helps to Convey them into the
Press which gives wings to these Shams presently to fly round the Kingdom.

If the Papists think the Press has not in any of the Pamphlets it daily
spits, charged them with Calumny, and of Such a Nature as to bring universal
odium on them by alarming the Kingdom almost as much as it could be by foreign
invasion, and occasionally laying a Tax on men to buy what Arms for their
defense the Law allows, I will ask them what they think of one of our printed
Intelligences that Came out on the 26th of February 1680/1, wherein it is said,
Last Friday came a Letter from Stafford, directed to one Bacchus Tenant to the
Lord Stafford from one Wilson in Cheshire, but ordered to be left with one
Finny of Stafford to be sent to the said Bacchus: but Finny observing Letters
so directed to pass through his hands, and apprehending they might relate to
some dangerous Correspondence, took the liberty to Open this, and therein to
his great surprise found directions to Bacchus for burning of Stafford and
several great Towns: upon which making a speedy discovery to a Magistrate,
Bacchus was sent for, who after some evasions did confess he had received
Letters to that purpose. And just now the said Wilson is apprehended and
committed, and confesses he was by the order of a Certain Lord, to fire
Stafford, Drayton, Shrewsbury, Nantwich, Chester, Congerton, New Castle
Under-Line, and two more, and that he was to have 900 l. for fireing those Nine
Towns.

I having never heard of any Proclamation or proceedings either of the
Magistracy or Lievtenancy of this Kingdom after such an alarm of public
hostility and of a Rebellion hatched in the Kingdom, nor of the last punishment
inflicted on the pretended Certain Lord that was the General of those
Incendiaries, did look on them under the Notion of an Army in disguise.

But whatever ground the Protestant Religion has got or shall get by these
poor means, I desire that it may go to the Next occupant; for not only the air
it exhales is Pestilential, but it includes that air in it which may produce
Earthquakes, which dangers therefore the New Popish or Jesuited Religion must
be exposed to by the air of Shams and Calumnies.

My Lord, I shall here entertain your Lordship with somewhat very Remarkable
out of the Book of Father Parsons of the Succession, whereby you will see that
instead of Allowing the oportet esse haereses, he does in effect tell us, that
while the Kingdom has two Religions in it, oportet esse Calumnias: that great
Jesuit having with much agility danced on the high rope as to the Casuistical
part of the Question of the Succession, affects to do it too in the Politics,
but missed his Center of gravity in his motion both as a Divine and a
Statesman, and did shamefully fall in either Capacity, as your Lordship will
find by the reading of his words. He says, p. 217. being near the Conclusion
of the first part of his Book, And thus much now for matter of Conscience. But
if we Consider Reason of State also and worldly Policy, it Cannot be but great
folly and oversight for a man of whatsoever Religion he be, to promote to a
Kingdom in which himself must live one of a Contrary Religion to himself: for
let the bargains and agreements be what they will, and fair promises and vain
hopes never so great, yet seeing the Prince once made and settled, must needs
proceed according to the Principles of his own Religion, it follows also, that
he must Come quickly to break with the other party, tho he loved him never so
well (which yet perhaps is very hard if not impossible for two of different
Religions to love sincerely) but if it were so, yet many jealousies,
suspicions, accusations, Calumniations, and other aversions must needs light
upon the Party that is of different Religion from the State and Prince under
whom he lives, as not only he Cannot be Capable of such Preferments, Honors,
Charges, Government and the like, which men may deserve and desire in their
Commonwealth, but also he shall be in Continual danger, and subject to a
thousand molestations and injuries, which are incident to the Condition and
state of him that is not Current with the same Course of his Prince and Realm
in matters of Religion; and so before he be aware, he becomes to be accounted
an Enemy or backward man: which in Mind he must either dissemble deeply, and
against his own Conscience make show to favor and set forward that which in
his heart he does detest, which is the greatest Calamity and Misery of all
other, tho yet many times not sufficient to deliver him from suspicion; or else
to avoid this everlasting perdition, he must break with all the temporal
Commodities of this life, which his Country and Realm might yield him; and this
is the ordinary end of all such men, how soft and sweet soever the beginning be.

This Jesuit (who was before mentioned to have been Called one of the greatest
Men that his Order has produced) was here (it seems) a Statesman in his heart,
and no More: and has very honestly foretold all Protestants that shall live
under a Prince of another Religion, how dishonest Roman Catholics will prove to
them. The Jesuit was here an Almanac-maker, who predicted nothing to
Protestants but Lightning and Thunder, and too the Continual Raining of Snares
upon them during such a Conjuncture, and the causing each of them to be with
the darts of Calumny and obloquy forever stuck round like the figure of the man
in the Almanac: but how foolish Father Parsons was to write this when the
Protestants had the Ball at their foot, and when he could not be sure that the
Papists would ever arrive at the state, to have it always at theirs, let any
one Judge. He had before used that rhetorical expression, that so the Ship be
well and happily guided, I esteem it not much important of what Race or Nation
the Pilot be, but he was extremely impolitic, by so early and public an alarm
to notify it to many who thought that embarked in the Civil Government of a
Prince of any Religion, they might be safely transported from this World to the
Next, that Popish Masters of the Ship have determined beforehand to throw all
heterodox Passengers overboard, and their own Oaths and engagements to them
likewise.

But what ever person takes a promissory Oath with an intent of not keeping it,
may well be Concluded as actually guilty of perjury in the Court of Heaven, as
he who knowingly takes a false assertory Oath. They have both equally presumed
to try by solemn lying to weather the fear of Divine Omniscience and
Omnipotence* and both their assertory and promissory Oaths are of equal weight
in the balance of humane judgment.

And because I think the Argument will hold from the falsity of their Oaths
promissory in this their dernier Resort aforesaid, to the obtaining the Worlds
Sentence against the truth of their Oaths assertory, I shall entertain your
Lordship with an instance of one of the Church of Rome, of whom it may be said,
that a Greater than Father Parsons is here, to vindicate the making of Oaths
promissory with an intent of breaking them, and it is Pope Clement the 8th, of
whom Danaeus says in his Chronology of Popes, that he was (...), the 'O
Politician, as I may say, of whom D'Ossat in his Third Book, Letter 81, viz. to
Villeroy in the Year 1597, speaking there how he had discovered the Popes
Inclinations, that the King of France should break with England, and that he
told his Holiness that the King's making a particular profession to keep his
word would not suffer him to break that Alliance that had been so lately
renewed and sworn, says, that the Pope thereupon replied, That that Oath was
made to a heretic, and that his Majesty had made another Oath to God and the
Pope: And further mentions what the Pope had told him at other times and in the
precedent audience, That Kings and Soverain Princes did permit to themselves
all things that turned to their profit, and that none blamed them for it or
took it ill from them, and alleged to that purpose a Saying of Francisco Maria
Duke of Urbin, who was wont to say, That if a plain Gentleman broke his word he
would be dishonored by it; but that Sovereign Princes for Reason of State
without any great blame might make Treaties and break them, and Mentir, trahir,
and toutes tells autres chooses, i. e. Ly, and betray, and do all things of
that nature: whereupon says D'Ossat, I had but too much to reply to that, but
I did not think it my duty there to stay my self in a place so slippery. But
toward the close of the Letter he adds, By what is abovesaid you see tho the
Pope has no disrespect for the King of France, nor any love for the King of
Spain, yet the hatred that he has for Heretics, transports him so far, that he
lets fall from his Mouth (tho under the Name of another) some pernicious
Maxims unworthy of an honest man, and that the Pope accounts all ways good for
his Majesty to break with his Allies, because they are not Catholics, although
those ways are infamous. I am so far a Concurrer with that Pope, as to think
that according to the Law of Nature and Nations, the Oath and Promise to the
first of any Prince's Allies is most obligatory; and therefore the Pope does
very honestly notify his opinion, that Harry the 4th intended not to keep any
promissory Oath Contrary to that made to God and himself. But the Pope mistakes
the factum of that Great Prince's Oaths; and it is for the honor of the Roman
Catholic Religion, that it has left to Posterity so great an instance of a
Protestant Prince turned a Papist, and Continuing kind to the persons of
Protestants. But they owed no thanks to the Pope or Jesuits for his making or
keeping Promises and Alliances with Protestants. The Bohemian History tells us
how Ferdinand about the Year 1617, before he was possessed of that Crown, did by
Oath bind himself, that Matthew being alive he would not meddle with any of the
affairs of Bohemia, much less with Religion: but immediately after his
Coronation, he going into Moravia to receive homage, the Jesuits erected at
Olumacium a Triumphal Arch, and painted on it among the Arms of Austria, the
Lion of Bohemia tied to it with a Chain, and the Eagle of Moravia with a
sleeping Hare lying with open Eyes, and this Emblem writ under it, I have
practiced. But the Year following, a new erected Academy of Jesuits spoke out
in Print, that tho Ferdinand at his Coronation took an Oath to the Heretics,
yet first he left it in the Vestry of the Church, that he would not suffer
Heretics to prejudice the Rights of holy Church.

But I believe I may without offending any Candid Papists, say of that Pope,
that when he discoursed as that Letter mentions; the glory of his Infallibility
shined not out of his Mouth, as Porphry said that Plotinus his Soul did when he
spoke.

The Story is trite concerning a Popes Excommunicating a Bishop of his Church,
for owning that there were Antipodes; but there is a sort of greater
Excommunication that any Jesuited Papists are to expect that are the Antipodes
to ingenuous Mankind, and who make Assertory or Promissory lying to be venial,
or lawful, and that is thus to be excluded from the Communio fidelium (tho
without the Ceremony of lighting Torches and extinguishing them), namely, by
Gentlemen's forbearing to keep them Company, and esteeming them worse than
Publicans or Heathens, and accounting it neither safe nor honorable to
Correspond with the Enemies of Mankind; and this is the Sentence, namely that
of a kind of Civil Excommunication or seclusion from ingenuous men's
Conversation that they are likely to obtain in England after all their charge
and pains in their dernier Resort, and the having seen the birth of their Plott
confounded, and the afterbirth of it, namely its Shams thrown away.

Since No injury wounds so much as a Contempt, and since they by trampling on
our Understandings with More pride than ever Bajazet walked over the dead heads
of Christians, affect to try to bring us implicitly to believe their Shammes,
they are to thank themselves for our not giving decent burial to any of their
undecent Plotts, and for the exasperating any Protestants by despising them,
and endeavoring to impose on their Understandings as some did on a raw young
Country Gentleman, whom one day treating at a Puppet-shew, they persuaded that
the Puppets were living Creatures, and after he had found out his gross
ridiculous misconceit therein, they on the following day attending him to the
Theater, engaged him to believe that the Actors were Puppets: I mean, their
endeavoring to make us believe that Sham-Plots were real ones, and that a real
one was Shamme.

I shall never wonder at the increase of the passion of anger incident to
humane Nature even in great and generous Souls, on the occasion of gross
Calumnies invented against them about a matter of weight, when I consider the
Example of the Great Royal Prophet, a Person of a great Understanding, and of
so great Courage, that he was not afraid of Ten thousands of men who set
themselves against him round about, and tho an Host should encamp ogainst him,
his heart would not fear, and a Man that had in his Nature and temper the
Gentleness of a Lamb mixed with the stoutness of a Lion, and one to whom the
Divine Promise had ensured a Kingdom; and yet was he by the Sycophancies and
little Shammes raised against him by Readiness great Courtiers, wrought to so high
a pitch of anger, that he did with exquisite forms of imprecation, and such as
perhaps are not to be found in any other Story, frequently devote those
Calumniators to the most dire Miseries his fancy could lead him to express. But
the Cause of his being so highly provoked by those that would turn his glory
into shame, and did seek after leasing, and whose deceitful tongues used
all-devouring words, as he says to Doeg the Edomite in one of his Psalms, (and
whose tongue he there says did devise mischiefs, like a sharp razor working
deceitfully) may be ascribed to the Shammes of his Enemies wounding him in the
most sensible Part, namely the Reputation of his Loyalty to his Prince, whose
Life he spared when 'twas in his power to destroy him, and who was so far from
the use of Shammes against him, that he doomed the Amalekite to die, that
shamm'd himself the author of Readiness death.

And therefore No marvel if the Calumnies of Jesuited Papists attaquing
Protestants in that Case too of their Fidelity to their King, render the
passion of anger in them against those Shams so intense and vehement. And tho
the English Courage or a very little Philosophy would help them to bestow only
a generous neglect on other Calumnies, they can never forget those that strike
at the heart of their allegiance, and consequently of their Religion that so
strictly enjoins it. Nor if according to the Example of that great man after
Gods heart, who said, Away from me all ye that work vanity, and who would have
No liar tarry in his sight, is it to be admired if every true English
Protestant shall say too, odi Ecclesiam malignantium, and shall feclude all
dictators of Calumny from his company, and banish them home to their own.

And tho the abuse of Excommunication by the Papal Church and Presbyterian has
been so horrid, that the primitive use of it is in a manner lost and grown
obsolete, yet will that which includes somewhat of the Nature of it be still
kept alive in the World by private persons who practice the Christian Religion
they profess, (and to whom tho the Precepts of the New Testament have not given
that hateful thing to humane Nature in charge, namely to be Informers, or
Promoters, or judicial accusers of any of Mankind, accordingly as under the
Mosaic economy 'twas said, Tu non eris criminator, yet have they obliged them
to withdraw themselves from men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth,
and not to eat with any one who is called a Brother and is a railer, and to
turn away from men that are truce breakers, and to mark those who cause
divisions, and to avoid them, and to reject a Heretic who is subverted and
self-condemned,) and by men of Cultivated educations and tempers, who value
themselves on the Company they keep, and on it are valued by the World, and
will therefore abandon or excommunicate from their Conversation such Monsters
of men, who have renounced the obligations of humane society, and who are
guilty of Notorious Contumacy in matters that concern the very Salvation of
Souls, and the Safety of Kingdoms. The being staked down therefore to a
Narrower Tedder in Conversation, or being Civilly Excommunicated from
Protestants Company, must by necessity of Nature, in my opinion, be the fate of
our Jesuited make-bates and criminators of Protestants that have been so
unwearied in raising Jealousies between the King and his People, and between
Protestant and Protestant; and all such that go to part whom God and Nature and
Interest have joined, will probably come at last to be the derelicts of humane
Society when they shall Come to be understood, and especially when there shall
be that good understanding between Protestants here of several persuasions that
may be expected to arise from their having found out the authors of their
divisions, and seen how ridiculous Protestants have been in the view of the
World while they have appeared like the Cat to draw one another through the
Pool, and the Jesuits and their Pensioners stood behind undiscerned, and pulled
the Rope.

My Lord, I know we may justly fear that Popery may during some turbid
intervals gain ground in England, and as the Renowned Historian of our
Reformation has in a public Sermon Judiciously observed, that Sure none
believed themselves when they say we are not in danger of Popery, and none can
think it but they who desire it.

But without presuming to make my self one of Heavens Privy Counselors, and
without pretending to a spirit of Prophecy, I shall on the basis of the Course
of Nature ground this affirmation, That whatever alterations Time can Cause,
yet while the English Nation remains entire and defended from Foreign
Conquest, the Protestant Religion Can never be exterminated out of this
Kingdom, nor the public profession of it suffer any long interruption therein.

I will grant it possible that hereafter under a Prince of the Popish Religion,
Popery may like the vibration of a pendulum among Certain persons have the
greater extent in the return of it, as Becket's Image was by Gardener set up in
London (...), with much pomp in Queen Mary's time, after its being pulled down
in Harry the Eighth's, and himself unsainted, and some people may undertake
devout Pilgrimages hereafter to some such Images and Relics as my Lord
Herbert says were in Harry the Eighth's time exploded, and we may again hear
of our Lady's Girdle shown in eleven several places, and her Milk in eight, the
Bell of St. Guthlac, and the Felt of St. Thomas of Lancaster both Remedies for
the head-ake; the Penknife and Books of St. Thomas of Canterbury, and a piece
of his Shirt much reverenced by great bellied women; the coals that roasted St.
Laurence; two or three heads of St. Ursula, Malchus his Ear, and the paring of
St. Edmund' s Nails, and likewise the trumperies of the Rood of Grace at Boxly
in Kent, and in Hales in Glocestershire, things name^ as trumperies in p. 495,
and 496, by Herbert in that History, and as adjudged to be such by H. the 8 th.

And no doubt but the Number of such would be very great, who having great
Sums of Money given them, would be content to offer small ones in Devotion to
such Images; and many Candidates for preferment, among some that now look big
for, and among Dissenters that look big against the Church of England, would
produce Certificates of their Constant good affection and Zeal for the Roman
Catholic Church; and any Legate that came to reconcile us to the Church of
Rome, would be thought by many to have brought the Holy Ghost in his Sumpters,
tho we know what the Inside of Campegius his was made of.

It is moreover possible that Protestant writers may come not to have that
freedom of the Press that Popish now have, and all the luxury and wantonness
and humor of the Press in sending forth innumerable Pamphlets against Popery,
in this Conjuncture, may perhaps prove but like the jollity of a Carnival to
usher in a long melancholy Lent.

I will grant, that it is possible the Writ de haeretico Comburendo being now
Abolished that destroyed so many Protestants by retail, certain bloody men may
find some Invention to destroy them by wholesale, and to something of that
nature Bishop Vshers Prophecy referred, of the Raging Persecution of
Protestants yet to come and not lasting, and when their enemies will ipsam
saevitiam fatigare: and in the violence of such predicted cruelty not being
long lasting, that great Prelate erred not from the Nature of things more then
he did when he Prophesied of an Irish Rebellion Forty years before it happened,
for that usually happens once in so many years through the force and numbers of
the Irish within that time outgrowing the English, and their allowing
themselves the repossession of their Estates by that time as a Iubile.

I will further grant, that the discipline of our Church (of which I think the
Constitution is the best that the world can show) may be Crushed, as I said
before, and our Dissenters then in vain wish that they had the tolerabiles
ineptiae (as your Lordship knows who imperiously called them) in the Room of
the intolerable abominations of the Mass; and it is possible that divine
Justice and Power may permit the doctrine as well as discipline of our Church
to be suppressed totally and finally in this Realm, and that the prediction of
that Great Man of God who since his death has been as generally styled the
Judicious, as Lewis the Just was elsewhere so vogued (I mean Mr. Hooker) may
impress a deep horror and a too late repentance on us, who in his 5th Book of
Ecclesiastical Polity in the end of the 79th Paragraph p. 432. of the old
Edition, speaking of the ill affected to our Church, says, By these or the
like suggestions received with all Joy and with all sedulity practiced in
Certain parts of the Christian World, they have brought to pass that as David
does say of Man, so it is in hazard to be verified concerning the whole
Religion and Service of God, the time thereof peradventure may fall out to be
Threescore and Ten years, or if strength do serve, unto Fourscore: what
follows, is likely to be small joy to them whatsoever they shall be that behold
it. Mr. Hooker did first print his 5th Book in the year 1597. (the first four
of his Polity being before printed in the year 1594) and so the period of
Fourscore Years in his prediction was in the Year 1677.

Tho that good man pretended not to be a Prophet, yet according to the old
saying, (...) i. e. he is the best Prophet who can guess well, both our Church
of England and the Dissenters and Papists too have found that Mr. Hookers
prudence had so much divination, and his divination so much prudence, that the
small joy with which they have beheld the external face of Religion here since
1677. has showed us that he guessed shrewdly.

I have only affirmed, that humanly speaking, and according to the common
course of nature, Popery cannot be the overgrown National Religion of England,
but am not ignorant that the sacred Code has given us instances of Omnipotent
power punishing even Heavens peculiar people by the Course of Political and
Ecclesiastical Power running out of the common Channel of the Nature of things,
and particularly by a succession of Ten evil Kings one after another. For tho
humane Nature is so inconstant, and men generally so apt to reel from one
extreme to another, that the World grows as weary of the prevalence of Vice as
of Virtue, and after a long age of Dissoluteness and Luxury, a Contrary humor
reigns as long in the World again, a humor that then excludes all Voluptuaries
from Public Trusts for an Age together; (and a humor of which I think we now
see the Tide Coming in) and thus ordinarily scarce any Kingdom has more than
two or three good or bad Princes successively for any considerable space of
time; Yet after the Ten Tribes had made their defection from the Line of the
House of David, they were punished by a Succession of Ten Kings, and not one
good one in the whole number, tho some of them were less ill than others; so
that no Marvel if the weight of the impiety of so many successive ill Princes
sunk them into the power of the Assyrians: and to this their doom, that passage
in the Prophecy of Hosea refers, which the vulgus of the Scriblers against
Monarchy so Miserably detort and wrack (as I may say) to their own
destruction, namely, I gave thee a King in mine anger, and took him away in my
wrath; for the Prophet there had not his Eye on Saul, or on a particular
Person, but on the whole succession of Kings after their Rent from Judah, from
Jeroboam to the Last under whom the Catastrophe of their Captivity was. Such
Kings were given them by Heaven as were proper Instruments of Divine wrath; and
when they were took away from the Stage, 'twas that other worse might enter and
make their Condition more Tragical.

But secret things belonging to God, I pry not into the Book of Fate, but
Confine my sentiments alone to the Book of Nature.

In an Excellent Sermon of the Dean of St. Paul's, it is with great Piety and
Prudence said, We have lived in an Age that has beheld strange Revolutions,
astonishing Judgments, and wonderful Deliverances.

What all the Fermentations that are still among us may end in, God alone
knows.

I only as a Philosopher Considering that the Properties of humane Passions
have as Necessary effects in Minds, as gravity or lightness have in Bodies, and
that let men intend what male administration they will, things will not be ill
administered, do think that the fermentation now in the Kingdom will not end
but with Popery it self here ending. And that I may not seem to stand alone in
this my opinion, I shall entertain your Lordship with that of An Excellent
Philosopher and Divine, the Author of the History of the Royal Society, who
there having said, that experimental Philosophy will enable us to provide
beforehand against any alteration in Religious affairs which this Age may
produce, he goes on thus, If we Compare the changes to which Religion has been
always subject with the present face of things, we may safely conclude, that
whatever Vicissitude shall happen about it in our time, it will probably be
neither to the advantage of implicit Faith, nor of Enthusiasme, but of Reason:
the fierceness of violent inspiration is in good Measure departed: the Remains
of it will be soon chaced out of the World, by the Remembrance of its terrible
footsteps it has every where left behind it.

And although the Church of Rome still preserves its Pomp, yet the Real
authority of that too is apparently decaying. It first got by degrees to the
Temporal Power, by means of its Spiritual, but now it upholds some shadow of
the Spiritual by the strength of the Temporal dominion it has obtained. This is
the present state of Christendom: It is impossible to spread the same Cloud
over the World again.

The Universal disposition of this Age is bent upon a Rational Religion. And
therefore I Renew my affectionate request, That the Church of England would
Provide to have the chief share in its first adventure, that it would persist
as it has begun to encourage Experiments which will be to our Church as the
British Oak is to our Empire, an Ornament and Defense to the Soil wherein
it is planted.

This Author therefore with such Vigor of Reason passing his sentence
concerning any Vicissitudes here not happening that will probably Conduce to
the advantage of Popery or Enthusiasme, I hope your Lordship will acquit me
both of Singularity and Enthusiasme as to the opinion I have given, especially
since I only profess it to be founded on Natural Reason, and do only Consider
the God of Nature, when I think that a Religion that is of God will stand.

It Is not unknown to Your Lordship, that Columbus being in chase of the New
World, and Cast among some barbarous Ilanders that denied him the hospitality
of their Port, and freedom of Commerce, he Knowing that they worshipped the Moon,
and that it would shortly be Eclipsed, tho he was neither Prophet nor Prophet's
Son, awed them out of their inhumanity, by foretelling that the Moons deity
would be shortly obscured: and when ever I acquaint any Roman Catholics with my
Judgment of the Nearness of their Religion to an Eclipse, I intend no more
enthusiasme in my prediction, then Columbus did in his, and design nothing
worse neither by mine then he by his, namely the reconciling them to humanity
and a fair intercourse with Mankind.

'Twas in the middle of the Worlds long night of barbarism and ignorance that
Popery was in its Meridian, and for hundreds of years all the Learning that
busied the World referred to Judicial Astrology, Rabinical Resveries,
School Divinity, Latin Rhimes in praise of the Saints, Compiling of Legends,
to Monks Histories of Ecclesiastical affairs, and the times they lived in (but
so partial and so full of ridiculous and incredible Stories, that we have a
better and truer account of the times when Alexander and Julius Caesar lived,
then of the times of Constantine and Charlemain) to gelding of the Fathers
writings, and purging away their Gold, Regulating the Hoods, and Hose, and
Shoo's of Monks, to inventing of Ceremonies and mystical vestments, and
fantastic geniculations, to the making of the Popes brutish Canon Law, and the
Commenting thereon in barbarous Latin by Doctors of the Decrees and Decretals,
and to the Commenting on Aristotle by those that could not read his Text, and
the Commenting likewise on the New Testament by such as knew no Greek (insomuch
that 'twas then a proverbial saying among those illiterate Writers, Graecum
est, non potest legi) to quiddity, esseity, entity and such titivilitium, and
to eus rationis, that did (as I may say) destroy the being of Reason, to the
improvement of one sort of Mechanics, Viz. by making Images in Churches with
little engines and librations turn the eyes and move the lips like the
forementioned Rood of Grace at Boxley in Kent (and which was by Bishop Fisher
exposed as a cheat at St. Paul's Cross at the time of its being there broke in
pieces) while their great Real Design was to make the Layety but the Churches
automata, as brute Animals may not improperly be said to be God Almighties, to
the Composing Paschal Epistles about the time of the Celebration of Easter, a
Controver^y (as our great Mr. Hales says) that caused as great a Combustion as
ever was in the Church, and in which fantastical hurry all the World were
Schisma^ics, and about which Monk Austin was so quarrelsome with the Britains,
when the difference was not in doctrine but in Almanac Calculations, and about
which after the infallibility of the General Council of Nice had given a Rule
in the Cause, the World was yet so much in the dark, that the Bishops of Rome
from year to year were fain to address to the Church of Alexandrias's
Mathematicians for directions as to the week Easter was to be kept in.

And during this long night, Millions of mankind were brought into the World
only to sleep out their span of time, and to have day-dreams of Knowledge, or
rather a profound Docta Ignorantia; and men were by dignities rewarded
proportionably for their sleeping longest: according to what the Chronicon
Frideswidae mentions of Guimundus a Chaplain to our King Henry the First, who
in the Celebration of holy offices reading before the King that place of St.
James, non pluet super terram annos III, and menses VI, thus ridiculously
distinguished the Notes in his reading, non pluet super terram, annos, unum,
unum, unum, and menses quinque un^m, and the King asking him afterward, why he
red so, he answered quia vos in ita tantum legentes beneficia and episcopatus
Confertis.

No marvel then if during that long gross and palpable Darkness of the World,
the Pope travesty'd those words in Scripture about Gods making the two great
lights, to serve his turn against the Emperor, tho yet the attempt to prove the
Popes Supremacy out of the first Chapter of Genesis, is as extravagant as his
who would prove the Circulation of the blood out of the first Chapter of
Litleton.

And as the Roman Breviary tell's us of S. Thomas very gravely, that when once
he was vehement in prayer before a Crucifix at Naples, he heard this voice been
de me scripsisti Thoma, none likewise in that age laughed at the Pope for saying
been de me scripsisti Moses. The world then brought no quo warranto against the
Popes Charter derived thus in his Canon Law from Moses, nor that gloss on it
which says Since the Earth is seven times bigger then the Moon, and the Sun
eight times bigger then the Earth, the Papal Power must Consequently be fifty
seven times bigger then the Regal dignity.

Our English World will no more allow of the logical Consequence of that
doughty argument of Bellarmine (Lib. 1. de Pont. ca. 2. sect. denique, and
sect. sed.) There is one King among Bees, therefore there ought to be one
Commander, chief Teacher and visible Monarch in the Universal Church, then they
would allow that argument of the Bees to give our neighbor Monarch a right to
an Universal Temporal Monarchy. The Popes vociferating of that Text Behold two
Swords, and while their adherents held so many Thousands in their hands, might
then pass muster for as good an argument of his right to Spiritual and Civil
power, as the words, that the Lillies spin not, did for the Salic Law with the
help of another Army then one of Commentators.

The Renewall of the Popes Charter by Pasce oves, was not then disallowed
either for the fleecing of many Millions of Christians or killing some hundreds
of thousands in the German Empire, according to what has been observed by the
famous Erastus in his Theses, p. 72. and propter excommunicatos Imperatores and
Reges, aliquot Centena millia hominum trucidata sunt in imperio Germanico.

And perhaps the Popes plea for making the World a great Slaughterhouse, might
then be admitted by the authority of the Text, Arise Peter, kill and eat.

Conculcabis super aspidem and basilicum then went for a claim of Divine Right,
to make the head of the World to be trampled on by the foot of a bald-pated
Friar.

But if the Papacy, the light that was in the World then was darkness (as the
Scripture Expression is,) How great was that darkness!

And as the Popes continued art was then to Conceal Nature, so 'twas not then
held tanti for art in others to be Curious in following Nature, when an Opinion
was imbibed that the Pope could change the very Nature of things, according to
that saying, I have been shown in the Canon Law, glo. in C. proposuit. de Conc.
praeb. c. 5. de trans^. ep. Papa mutare potest rerum substantialia and de
Iustitia injustitiam facere, mutando and Iura corrigendo, adeoque quadrata
aequare rotundis et rotundis quadrata.

And for my part, I should not have repined at the Popes assuming to himself
the honor of the light that rules by day, if he could have illuminated the
World with the demonstration of the quadrature of the Circle, which that gloss
pretends to; a great Knowable thing, as Aristotle said, tho not known, and
which secret all the penetrating Mathematicians from Archimedes down to Mr.
Hobbs, have wooed with very great passion and could not enjoy.

But during the Egyptian plague of darkness that many Ages then lay under, our
famous Countreyman Wicliff alarmed the Lethargic World: and he assailed several
gross Errors of Popery with its own weapons of Metaphysics and School Divinity,
and by means of the noise his Two hundred Volumes made in the World, he
dispersed a great terror in that dark Age; and as one says, Sir John
Old-Castle, Lord Cobham and the Lollards being awakened out of their first
sleep, were desirous to rise before it was day, and before the appointed time
was Come for the Reforming the abuses in the Church: and between that time and
morning, most men fell asleep again as fast as ever: but yet long before the
dawn of the Reformation, the doctrine of Wicliffe had made such a fermentation
in our English World, that in the Year of our Lord 1422, that great Statesman
Chichley Archbishop of Canterbury, in a Letter to Pope Martine the Fifth,
Complained, That there were then so many here in England infected with the
heresies of Wicliff and Husse, that without force of an Army they could not be
suppressed: Whereupon the Pope sent two Cardinals to the Archbishop to Cause a
Tenth to be gathered of all Spiritual and Religious men, and the money to be
Laid in the Chamber Apostolic; and if that were not sufficient, the residue to
be made up of Chalices, Candlestics, and other implements of the Church, as the
Acts and Monuments Attest.

And it is not unknown, that long before, viz. in Harry the Fifth's time,
Chichley foreseeing that a Storm was coming from the Commons on Church Lands,
diverted it, by engaging England in its darling popular War with France, and
caused the Clergy to contribute very liberally to it.

But that fermentation that Chichley said could not in the Year 1422 be checked
in peoples Minds otherwise then as aforesaid, soon out-grew the power of any
Army to allay; for in less than Thirty years afterward, the Invention of
Printing came into the World, by which one man could transmit more notices of
things in a Day, then another could by writing in a Year, and which did as much
outdo the publication of notions by the Goosquill, as the invention of
Gunpowder did the killing Force of the gray-goose-wing, and which did, as it
were, revive the old Miracle of the Gift of Tongues, (and Cloven too I may Call
them, for their being divided from the Sentiments of the Papal Holy Church) and
made Learning begin to fly like lightning through the World to the Controuling
and detecting of the Popes Excommunicating Thunder, and which showed the World
its true face in the stream of time, and showed the greet Fisherman of Rome
dancing in the Nett, and which was the true speaking Trumpet, whereby a single
Author could preach to the diocese of the World.

And that great birth of Fate the taking of Constantinople within three years
after the Invention of Printing, occasioning the World's acquiring the
knowledge in the West that it lost in the East, and dispersing the Learned
Greeks, Theodore Gaza, John Lascaris, Manuel Chrysaloras, and many others to
teach the Greek Tongue where they went, the Press was thereby furnished, with
Glad tidings for the Curious World, and Erasmus, and many learned Papists, did
soon imbibe the knowledge of that learned Language, and he complained in a
Letter to the Archbishop of Mentz, That the Friars would fain have made it
Heresy to speak Greek.

So pleasant was it then to consider that that barbarous Generation instead of
knowing Heresy to be Greek, voted Greek to be Heresy, and that they who had
murdered so many thousands for being Heretics, knew not what the very word in
its original language imported.

The Sagacity of Erasmus could not then but easily see through the Cobwebs of
the School-Divines: totam Theologiam a Capite usque ad Calcem retexuerunt, and
ex divina Sophisticam fecerunt aut Aristotelicam, says he in vita Hier.
praefixa ipsius operibus. And Doctor Colet the Dean of St. Paul's, (whom
Erasmus often in his Epistles calls praeceptorem unicum and optimum) did as
Erasmus says in his life, account the Scotists dull Fellows and any thing
rather then ingenious, and yet he had a worse opinion of Aquinas then of
Scotus. And tho Luther had angered Harry the 8th. by speaking contemptibly of
Thomas Aquinas whom that King so highly magnifyed that he was called Rex
Thomisticus, Collet was not afraid to Pronounce in that case as Luther did.

And here it may not by the way be unworthy of your Lordships observation as to
the concert that is between the Genius of one great Wit and another, that
Erasmus and Mr. Hobbs had the same sense of School Divinity and School-Divines:
For Mr. Hobbs in his Behemoth or History of the Civil-Wars speaking of Peter
Lombard and Scotus says, That any ingenious Reader not knowing what was the
design of School Divinity (which he had before siad was with unintelligible
distinctions to blind Men's eyes while it encroach'd on the Rights of Kings)
would judge them to have been two the most egregious blockheads in the World,
so obscure and senseless are their Writings.

The New Testament was no sooner opened and read then in Erasmus his
translation and in the English Tongue, but the Popes Cards were by the Clergy
that played his game thrown up as to all claim of more Power here by the word of
God then every other foreign Bishop had; and both our Universities sent their
judgments about the same to the King, which methinks might make our Papists
approach a little nearer to us without fear of infection; for we allow the
Bishop of Rome to have as much Power by the Word of God as any other Bishop;
and it is pity but that Judgment of our Universities were shown the World in
Print, and sent to the French King, and particularly the Rescript or Judgment
of the University of Oxford as not being any where in Print (that I know of)
but in an old Book of Dr. James's against Popery.

Cromwell the Vicegerent to H. the 8th. had (as Fuller says in his
Church History) got the whole New Testament of Erasmus his translation by
heart: but the sore Eyes of many of the Clergy were so offended with the
glaring-Light the New Testament in Print brought every where, that instead of
Studying it as that great Primier Ministre did, they only studied to suppress
it: and thus Buchanan in his Scotch History says that in H. the 8 ths time,
^antaque erat caecitas ut sacerdotum plerique novitatis nomine offensi, eum
librum a Martino Luthero nuper fuisse Scriptum affirmarent ac vetus testamentum
reposcerent* i. e. They looked on the New Testament as writ by Martin Luther,
and called for the Old Testament again.

And the truth is, if Luther had then set himself to have invented and writ a
model of Doctrines against Justification by works, and redeeming our vexation
from wrath divine by Sums of Money, and against implicit Faith and many gross
Papal Errors, he could not possibly have writ against them in terminis
terminantibus more expressly then the Writers of the New Testament did.

But the New Testament was then newly opened, and the legatees permitted to
read the whole Will over translated into a language they understood, after they
had been long by fraud and force kept out of their legacies by the Bishops
Court of Rome, whose Artifice had formerly in effect suppressed that Will: and
that inestimable legacy of liberty from all impositions humane being
particularly shown to Mankind, there was no taking their Eyes off from this
Will, nor taking it out of their hands, nor suppressing the study of the Greek
language it was originally writ in.

King Harry the 8 th. had received his Legacy thereby, who before was but a
Royal Slave to the Pope; and the triumph of an (...) was echoed round his
Kingdom, like that of Archimedes, when he had detected the Imposture that had
mingled so much dross in the Sicilian Crown.

It Is true he retained the profession of several Papal Errors, and such as he
being versed in School Divinity knew would still keep themselves in play in the
World with a videtur quod sic, and probatur quod non, accordingly as the
learned Dr. Jones has observed in his Book called the Heart and its Right
Sovereign, that Image Worship, Invocation of Saints, Transubstantiation,
Purgatory are and will be learnedly and voluminously defended on each side to
the World's end.

Harry the 8 th therefore did in his Contest with the Papacy Ferire faciem, and
did fight neither against small and great but the King of Rome, as I may say.
He attaqued the Pope in his claim of authority over all Christians, the
authority that Bell^rmin calls Caput fidei, the head of the Catholic Faith.

' It Is therefore very well said in a Book called Considerations touching the
true way to suppress Popery in England, Printed for Mr. Broom in the Year
1677; Whatever notions we have of Popery in other things, the Pope himself is
not so fond of them, but that to gain the point of authority, he can either
connive, or abate, or part with them wholly: though no doubt he never does it
but insidiously, as well knowing that whatever consession he makes for the
establishing his authority, he may afterward revoke, etc. And so the Author
says, p. 12. That Harry the 8 th for having cast of his obedience to Rome was
therefore judged a heretic, and that was looked on by Rome as worse than if he
had rejected all its errors together. He was a thorough Papist in all points
but only that of obedience, in comparison of which all the rest are but talk.

I account therefore in Harry the 8 ths time Poperies most sensible and vital
part, viz. the Popes supremacy did end in England per simplicem desinentiam.
The radical heat and moisture it long before had was gone: like a senex
depontanus it was held useless in a wise Senate. He established the doctrine of
his own supremacy without a Battle fought, nor did any Rebellion rise thereupon
but what he confounded with a general Pardon.

Many of the Scholars of the University of Oxford did mutinously oppose the
introducing the knowledge of the Greek Tongue there, and were thereupon called
Trojans, and others of the Scholars were as rohust and loud for that Language,
who were therefore called Graecians: but by a Letter w^it by Sir Thomas More to
that University and by the Kings Command (which Letter is extant in the
Archives of the public Library there) the Scholars being admonished to lay by
those names of distinction, and likewise all animosity against the Greek
Tongue, and to encourage the learning of the same, it was there at last
peaceably received.

The daybreak of learning then in the world had put a period to the night of
ignorance in which the Beasts of Prey had domineered, and to their Monastic
denns themselves. The enlightened part of mankind was weary of growing pale
among papers and sometimes red hot with arguing about terms of art (and all
those barbarous too, that had formerly hid the God of nature) and would no
longer account implicit faith the only justifying one, and could not more
esteem the imposing of such a blind faith commendable that was made previous to
men's quest after pabulum for their Souls, then that practice of the boy of
Athens who did put out the eyes of birds, and then expose them to fly abroad
for food.

The Learning then introduced into the world showed that the hierarchical
grandeur of the Roman Church was not extant formerly in the learned times when
the old Roman Empire flourished, but was contrived in the times of ignorance
between the Bishops of Rome and the Leaders or Princes of the Barbarians, and
that it had its beginning from the Inundations of the Northern people (so that
with Mr. Colemans leave by the way, Popery may be called too a pestilent
Northern heresy) and that to the end that those Barbarians might not find out
the original of the papal power, and see how narrow the stream of it was at its
fountain when every Bishop was called Papa (as every woman is now with us
called Madam and Lady) that the Pope by affronting the Emperors power effected
a strangeness between the Greeks and Latins, by means whereof the Barbarians
being brought up in prejudice against the Graecians neglected their Language,
to the decay whereof in the world not only the decay of the purity of the
Latin Tongue may be imputed, but also of History, Geography, Geometry, skill
in antiquity, and even the worlds not knowingly then conversing with the Latin
Fathers.

It was in an age of nonsense when a Canonist venturing to be a Critic told
the world concerning the Greek word Allegoria, istud vocabulum fit ex duobus
vocabulis; ab allo, quod est alienum, and goro sensus; and when an old
Schoolman Thomas de Argentina, thus gave the derivation of latria, istud
vocabulum fit ex duobus vocabulis, a La, quod est laus, and tria, quod est
trinitas: quia latria, est laus trinitatis. But the very understanding of two
ordinary Greek words, namely (...), equal privileges in ecclesiastical matters
to the Bishops of Rome and Constantinople allowed by a General Council, that
were obvious to every enquirer into history, did quite blow up all pretenses of
the Popes supremacy; and one versicle in that long unknown Greek Book (...)
viz. Luke 24. 47. which shows, that the teaching of Repentance and remission of
sins in the name of Christ by his own order began at Jerusalem, did surprise
thinking men with amazement, when they heard a Pope and General Council calling
Rome the Mother and Mistress of all the Churches, and anathematising all who
think otherwise, and saying further extra hanc fidem nemo potest esse salvus,
for this the Trent Council did.

Thus then the abolition of the papal power here brought the world at the first
step out of a blind Chaos into a Paradise of Knowledge, and helped Christians
to demonstrate to themselves and to Jews, and Pagans the truth of the Christian
Religion, for the certainty of the doctrine of which during that time of papal
darkness the world had only the assertion of the present age that called it
self the tradition of the Church; but by the introduction of the Greek Tongue
and other learning, Christians had the sense of the Greek and Latin Fathers,
and those historical Records that brought down to them the certainty of the
Miracles that were wrought in the founding of Christianity; from the Primitive
Christians, who saw them. 'Twas the restoration of learning in general, helped
them to say with Tertullian fidem colimus rationalem, and with St. Paul, I know
whom I have believed, and without the introducing of humane learning, the
Protestant Religion could no more have been advanced to its height in the
world, then men can be perfected in Astronomy without the knowledge of
Arithmetic. Luther came into the field armed with the Knowledge both of the
Greek and Hebrew Tongues, when he was to contest with the Errors of the Papacy;
and he having for his Antagonist Cardinal Cajetan, who was the Legate in
Germany and an eminent School Divine, and who made a home thrust at Luther out
of the Scripture according to the Vulgar Latin translation, Luther told him in
plain terms, That that translation, was false and dissonant to the original:
and hereupon the Cardinal, tho he and the Papacy too had one foot in the grave,
Cato^like fell eagerly on the studying of Greek, that he might be able so
confute Luther and his followers out of the Scriptures, and was put to it to
make his weapon when he was in the field.

And can any one think now that in this present state of England, when we see
so many that are Critical Masters of Experimental Philosophy, and who by means
of the great useful pains formerly taken by Erasmus, Sir Thomas Moore and
others, in restoring Philological Learning, have now entire leisure to devote
their Studies to the substantial Knowledge of things, and whose Motto is,
Nullius in verba, and who know, that if they would have every one trust them,
they must take nothing on trust from any one; and who know, that since truth
does always sail in sight of error, they must all the way go sounding by
experiment; I say, can any one think that it was less easy for the Sun to go
back Ten degrees on Ahaz his Dial, then it is to make this Age run back to
implicit faith and ignorance and barbarism?

And is it to be thought that men who weigh Silver in Scales, will not weigh
Gold; I mean, not examine notions of Religion with care, when they are so
cautious in others? Can we think that men who will not part with those Notions
that salve the phenomenon, will quit those that save their Souls, and
especially considering the proverbial addiction of the English genius to
Religion, and considering too, that men by long use and Custom have been
habituated to the profession of a rational Religion, and that it can plead here
a hundred years prescription?

It is certainly more easy to unteach men the use of the Sea-Compass in
Navigation, then the use of Reason in Religion; and the inclination of the
Needle to the North, is not likely to be more durable then the tendency of men's
affection in England to the Northern heresy so called; and it is more easy to
teach all Mankind the use of Letters, then to unteach it to any one man; and
when the temper of an inquisitive Age is like a Trade-wind carrying men toward
Knowledge and toward a rational Divinity, they may by some accidents be made to
cast Anchor, or they may be sunk, but they cannot be forced to go back.

When a man has long been compelled to creep with Chains on him through a
toilsome dark Labyrinth, and having extricated himself out of it and being come
to enjoy his liberty in the light of the Sun, the persuasion of words cannot
make him go back again.

My Lord, I lately mentioned the Motto of the Royal Society of England, of
which your Lordship is a Member, and I look on the very constitution of that
Society to be an inexpugnable Bulwark against Popery: In which Society many of
our choice English Wits have showed as much subtilty and curiosity in the
Architecture of Real Science, and such as tends to the edification of the
world, as any of our Country men heretofore did in those curious but useless
Cobwebs of holy Church called School Divinity.

And the constitution of that Society has not only been useful in increasing
the Trade of Knowledge among its members by a joined stock, but moreover has
tended to the raising in the Kingdom a general inclination to pursue Real
science, and to contemn all science falsely so called: and the Raising of this
inclination I will call a Spirit that can never be Conjured down, nor can the
knowledge that depends on number, weight and local Motion, be ever exterminated
by Sophisms or Canting, or terms of Art; Nor will they who have from this
Society learned to weigh Air, give up their Souls to any Religion that is all
Air without weighing it, or (notwithstanding any hard name that may come to be
in vogue) ever forget that bread is bread.

His Majesty by the founding of this great Conservatory of knowledge presently
after his Restoration (wherein his great Minister then the Earl of Clarendon,
was an honorable Member) did convey real knowledge and a demonstration of his
being an Abhorrer of Arbitrary Power, to all that can understand Reason, and
affect not the ridiculous Treasonableness of Bradshaw's Court, to say, that
they will not hear reason; for had he like the Eastern King's affected
Arbitrary Power, he would have used their artifice of endeavoring to cast
mists before the understanding faculties of his Subjects, and to detain them
from knowledge by admiration, and to deprive them of sight, like horses that
are still to drudge in the Mill of Government by blind obedience; But to show
that he abhorred both such obedience and implicit Faith, and that he intended
to establish his Throne as well in the heads as in the hearts of his Subjects,
he presently settled this Great Storehouse of Knowledge, that showed it was his
desire and ambition by the general Communication of Knowledge in his Dominions,
to Command Subjects whose heads were with the Rays of Science crowned within.

And therefore I think His Majesty's Munificence to the Royal Society in giving
them Chelsey-Colledge at their first institution, was very Consistent with the
Primary Intention of the erecting that College, which was to be a Magazine for
Polemical-Divinity wherewith to attaque the Writers for Popery: for the very
planting of a general disposition to believe nothing contrary to Reason, is the
cutting of the gra^s under Poperies feet; and His Majesty providing for the
growth of reason did apparently check the growth of Popery, as well as of
Arbitrary Power, without the prop of which, Popery can never run up to any
height more then the Sun-flower without a supporter: and the settling in men an
humor of Inquisition into the truth and nature of things is, as I partly said
before, an everlasting barricade against the Popes darling Court of the
Inquisition.

That great and noble notion of the Circulation of the blood, took its first
rise from the hints of a common persons enquiring what became of all the blood
that iss^^d out of the heart, seeing that the heart beats above Three Thousand
times an hour, tho but one drop should be pumped out at every stroke: and if
any one shall tell me that he believes that Popery with its retinue of implicit
faith and ignorance can overrun us, I will ask him what will then become of
all that knowledge the vital blood of the Soul, that has issued from the heads
of inquisitive Protestants, and been Circulating in the World for above a
Hundred and Fifty years, and I doubt not but it will be in men's Souls as long
as blood shall have its Circular Course in their bodies; and maugre all the
Calumnies cast on the Divines of the Church of England for being fautors of
Popery, I shall expect that our learned College of Physicians will as soon be
brought to disbelieve the Circulation of the blood, of our Royal Society to
take down the Kings Standard that they have set up against implicit faith, as
our learned Convocation the learnedest that ever England had, be brought to
believe the principles of Popery.

I know, My Lord, 't^s obvious against this my hypothesis, of the
unpracticableness of Popery being here the State-Religion, to say that in
little more then Twenty years time Four great changes in Religion happened in
England, and that the generality of the people then like dead Fishes went with
the stream of the Times: but I ask, if the generality of the people had been
thoroughly enlightened in the rationality of the Protestant Principles Twenty
years together, would they have returned to the belief of the Popish? Will they
now do it after the establishment of a Rational Religion for above a Hundred
years together? Can Popery now find the way into most Men's brains here
presently after the whole Nation almost were Preachers, and when all our great
and little unruly disagreeing Sects yet agreed in this as a fundamental, that
the Bishop of Rome is the Antichrist? If Printing had been free in Turkey for a
Hundred years, and a libera Philosophia and Theologia had been there in fashion
for a Hundred years, and every man had been allowed his Judgment of discretion
so long about the sense of the Alchoran, or of the holy Scripture, and of all
Books of Religion, could ignorance even there come into play again? or if the
Turks had drank Wine for a Hundred years together, could any one Conjure the
glasses out of their hands by telling them there was a Devil in every grape?

If that Law in Muscovy that makes it death for any Subject to travel out of
that Kingdom without the Emperors License, lest his Subjects having seen the
freedom of other Countries, should never again return to the Arbitrary Power
in their own again; I say, if that Law had been repealed for a Hundred years,
and multitudes of oppressed mankind had thence found the way to breath in the
air of Liberty like men, could they be persuaded to return to the Yokes of
Beasts again?

When a floating Island has been a Hundred years fixed to the Continent, can any
teach it to swim again? Consulitur de Religione, is likely to be the eternal
business of England, and in case of a Prohibition to any man's little Court of
Conscience in that cause, he will certainly give himself a consultation.

The very humor of the English Nation long has and still does run against
what they think but like Popery, or makes for it, and that with such a rapid
current of Antipathy, as is never likely to be stem'd: and nothing is more out
of fashion then a kind of Sir-positive, or Dictatorian humor in common
discourse; much less then will a dogmatical Popes infallibility ever be
digested here, while he makes himself a St. Positive.

The gentile humor of the Age here that abhorrs hard words as loathsome
pedantry, will never be reconciled to one certain long hard word in Popery;
namely Transubstantiation; nor to another namely Incineration, or burning men
for not understanding the former word (according to the style of the Historian,
Imperator aegre tulit incinerationem Johannis Husse) and people will account
their Protestant Bibles more agreeable to them then the English one published
by the College of Doway, where the Translator studied for hard words in the
room of plain ones, as for the Passover, phase, for foreskin, praepuce, for
unleavened bread, azyms, for high places, excelses, and other such words we
have in the English Rhemish Testament, viz. exinanite, parasceue, didragmes,
neophyt, spiritualness of wickedness in the Celestials.

In our Busy English world while men are most yary after profit and pleasure
and the study of things, if very few or none can be brought to learn the
universal real character, and which would tend to the propagating Real
Knowledge among the Nations of the World (according^y as the excellent
propounder of it in Print with great modesty says in his Epistle dedicatory,
that he had slender expectation if its coming into common use) our Ingeniosi or
Wits (which all men pretend to be now, as they did in the Late times to be
Saints, tho yet as few are Wits now, as were Saints then) will not care for
troubling their brains with the studying of the Religion whose pretended
universality appears but a kind of universal character, and not real, and
tending to obscure the knowledge of things in the World.

If they should see here a Religion that was full of pageantry, and seemed to
be wholly theatrical, they would think it was as much their birthright to
censure it, as it is to be eternal talking Critics in the Pit to damn Plays,
and would think two Supremes in a Kingdom to be of the low nature of two Kings
of Branford, and rather then part with their money and stake down their Souls
for seeing such a Moral Representation of an absolute spiritual and absolute
temporal power on the stage of the Kingdom, they would be too apt with Mr. Hobs
to thrust the whole Nation of Spiritual Beings out of the world; I mean rather
then they would be to their faces cheated and harras'd by a spiritual power:
and our people inspired with wit as well as those with the zealous spirit of
Religion would cry out, conclusum est contra Manichaeos; I, and against the
Schoolmen too, I mean our Romanist Manichaei who make two summa Principia in
every State.

In this age where the lower or Sixth rate Wits do so overvalue themselves on
turning every thing into ridicule, the Mass would have here a Reception
according to what the gloss in the Canon Law observes, that when a place had
layen long under an interdict, the people laughed at the Priests, when they
came to say Mass again. Nor would any Papal interdiction unless it could
interdict us from the use of Fire and Water be of any moment. The World would
now laugh at any Prize that should be played between the Two Swords, the very
glossator on the Clementines saying occasionly that resipiscente mundo, the
World being grown wiser, there must be no longer striving for both Swords. And
any one that would obtrude on us gross exploded errors in Church or State will
appear as ridiculous as St. Henry the Dane, who as the Martyrology mentions,
when worms craul'd out of a corrupted Ulcer in his Knee put them in again.

My Lord, I will further offer it to your Lordships consideration, That if it
be found so hard to keep up the external polity of the Church of England, tho
in it self so rational and so meriting the name of (...), after the Twenty
years discontinuance of it, insomuch that Dr. Glanvile in the first page of his
Book called the Zealous and impartial Protestant, has these words, the first
occasion of our further danger that I shall mention, is the present diminution,
not to say extinction of Reverence to the authority of the Church of England,
etc. (and he p. 4. writes largely to that Effect,) what quarter can Popery
expect here from an Age of sense and reason when it should break in upon both,
after the forementioned Hundred years discontinuance?

According to the foresaid Argument of the Bees for the Popes spiritual
Monarchy, we see it improbable for him ever to bring us to a Rendevouz in his
Church again; for the sad experience we have had of the Sects here that left
the Hive of the Church of England, not gathering together into any one new
Hive, but dividing into several swarms and hives, and never returning to the
old, may show the Hive of holy Church how little of our Company it is to expect.

Having said all this about the mists of Popery, being to contend with
knowledge in its meridian, I think I shall comply with the measures taken by
our Philosophers in this Critical Age, in founding their observations upon
Experiments, if I further add, that the former Experiments England has had of
Poperies being pernicious to its external Polity and Grandeur, will perpetuate
and heighten the fermentation in the minds of our angry people against it.

All our Monkish Historians do attest the experience our Kings had in being
bereaved of great Sums of Money, while they enriched the Pope here by giving
him the Office to keep the Theological Thistle, which he Railed in with so many
censures and distinctions, and non obstantes, that our Kings could not pass to
their Palaces but by his leave, and on his terms.

An English King then was but the Popes Primier Ministre, and yet paid great
wages too for the being a Servant to the Servus Servorum.

King John used to say, That all his affairs in the World were unprosperous,
and went cross and untowardly after he had once subjected himself and his
Kingdom to the Church of Rome: His words were, Postquam me and mea Regna
Romanae subjec^ Ecclesiae, nulla mihi prospera, omnia contraria advenerunt. And
it is obvious to consider on the other hand, what a great figure Henry the
Eighth made in the World, after he had manumitted himself and his Kingdoms from
the Papal Usurpation: And how he held the Balance of the World in his hand, and
trod on the Basilisc of the Papal Supremacy, and notify'd it to the Nations of
the Earth that England is an Empire, that being the Style of the Statute of the
24 th of H. 8. c. 12. Viz. That this Realm is an Empire, and that the Crown
thereof is an Imperial one: And the words of Kings and Emperors of this Realm,
being then attribued in our Statutes to the Monarchs of England; and as the
great expression in the Prophecy of Ezekiel c. 16. v. 13. is applied by God to
the Jewish state, And thou did prosper into a Kingdom, it may be justly said
that Harry the Eighth's defying the Popes Usurpation, made England prosper into
an Empire. 'Twas his doing that made him horse de page, and it is only the doing
it that will make the French King truly so too: For it is only Air that any feed
a Monarch's fancy with, who would amuse him with an Universal Empire abroad,
till he has obtained one first at home; as no Man is to expect to govern his
Neighbors Family, who is Controlled in his own.

And like a Master who imagines himself great, while he is feared by none but
some of his own Servants, so how little terror did Queen Mary's Reign give to
any parcel of Mankind, but a few of her own Subjects, of which the number that
she burnt and made to languish in Prisons, and such as left her Kingdom by
migration to foreign parts, would easily have kept Callais for her, and
prevented the ignominy of her Politics, in losing the Real Key of France, while
she was finding the Imaginary Keys of the Church!

But it is a truth not contestable, That Queen Mary's Reign (in which her
persecution of her Subjects was so barbarous, and such a scandal to Government,
That Dr. Heylin himself applies to it in the Title Page of his History of Queen
Mary that passage in Paterculus, Hujus temporis fortunam, ne deflere quidem
quispiam satis digne potuit, nemo verbis exprimere potest) served only as a
foil to the luster of Queen Elizabeth, whom all Generations since have called
blessed; and who was not more loved by the English, then she was feared by the
French, and was offered Calice if she would but have connived at the continuing
of the French forces in Scotland, and who sent to the great Henry the Fourth a
Mandamus to build no more Ships, and had more money offered her by her Subjects
then she would accept; and yet (as is said in Towsend's Historical Collections)
had spent a Million of Money in her Wars with Spain, and laid out 100000 l. to
support the King of France against the Leaguers, and 150000 l. in defense of
the Low Countries, and discharged a debt of Four Millions she found the Crown
indebted in. Nay, our Historians tell us, that She paid the very Pensions that
were in arrear in her Father's, and Sister's time to diverse of the Religious
persons ejected out of Abbeys.

It was Queen Elizabeth who by all her Alliances, and especially her Offensive
and Defensive one with the States of the United Provinces in the Year 1578.
laid such a deep and sure foundation for a vast trade of the English Nation to
be built on, that it is overbalance is said to have brought to be Coined in the
Tower of London, from the first of October 1599, in the 41 st Year of her
Reign, to March 31st 1619, (being 19 years) 4,779, 314 l. 13 s. 4 d, And from
March 31st 1619, to March 31st, 1638 (being 19 years) 6,900,042 l. 11 s. 1 d,
And from March 1638, before May 1657 (being 19 years) 7,733,521 l. 13 s. 4 d;
England alone by verture of that her Alliance, having till the Peace of Munster
1648, enjoyed almost the whole Manufacture, and best part of the Trade of
Europe: And it was but just for Heaven to punish in England the greatest
villainy that could be wrought on Earth, I mean the murder of the best of Kings,
by suffering the Trade of England to have its fatal decay in that year 1648.
For then, I count, our overbalance of Trade for the last mentioned Nineteen
years had its Period, and 'twas by the effect of that Peace that both Holland
and France, and Spain cantonized the power of our Trade, and the most Sovereign
of our Manufactures. Till that black year 'twas to be ascribed to the result of
Queen Elizabeth's politics, and not to the conduct of the Long Parliament, that
England did, as to Trade, both do its business and play, and as to its
Commanding the Trade of the World, did Sail with a Trade-wind; and during that
Wind, it could not happen that any should meet us, or overtake us in our
motion, whatever mean Pilots were at the Helm.

It was for the completing the last ternary of the Coinage, that I mentioned,
the (...), or nineteen years, ending in 1657. For I believe that both Astrea
and Trade left our Land in that fatal Crisis of 48, of which the M^nth of
January produced the Signing of that Peace at Munster, and the horrid
Arraignment, and Martyrdom of that matchless Prince.

It Is therefore not to be admired, That Queen Elizabeth's provident Ensuring
such a plenty of Traffic and Riches to her Kingdom, both for her own and
future time, she had what praemium of Taxes from her Parliaments she pleased,
accordingly as King James tells the Parliament Anno 1620, That Queen Elizabeth
had one year with another above 100000 l. in Subsidies; and in all my time I
have had but four Subsidies, and six Fifteenths; and he said his Parliament had
not given him any thing for Eight or Nine years.

England did thrive apparently while it was to Queen Elizabeth, a Puteus
inexhaustus: But while it was such an one to the Pope, was in a miserable and
consumptive state, as any one must necessarily conclude, who considers that the
nutritive juice of the wealth of the Kingdom was diverted from cherishing its
own Head to pamper the Bellies of Foreigners. Deplorable then was the
condition of the English Crown, when (as we are told by the Antiquitates
Britan. f. 178.) in the Reign of Hen. 3d. Repertus est Annuus reditus Papae
talis quem ne Regius quidem attigit: And when according to Matthew Paris f.
549, in the Reign of that King, Anno 1240, it was complained of, That there
remained not so much Treasure in the Kingdom, as was in three years extorted
from it by the Pope.

But what is more strange, we are told in Cotton's Collections p. 129 of the
times of Edward the Third, That the Taxes paid to the Pope for Ecclesiastical
dignities did amount to five times as much as the People paid the King per
annum. One would wonder that so martial a Prince, the Scene of whose Reign lay
almost in continual War, should be so careless of the Sinews of it, as to
permit so much of the wealth of the Kingdom to be mis-applyed, and that too
while all manner of Experiments of Taxes were tried on his Subjects, who paid
him toward his charge of the War with France Wool and Grain, as not having Money
enough to supply him wholly therewith: and when, as it is said in Cotton's
Collections, A long Bill was brought in by the Commons against the Usurpation
of the Pope as being the Cause of All the Plagues, Murrains, Famine and Poverty
of the Realm, so as thereby was not left the third Person, or Commodities
within the Realm as lately were, and the Commons did desire that it might be
enacted, That no Money might be carried forth of the Realm by Letters of
Lombardy, or otherwise on pain of forfeiture and imprisonment.

But the Pope knew, it seems, there was money to be had out of England, though
the Commons grudged it him, and that a complaint of the Commons of the decay of
Trade was no proof of it, but rather in his case an indication of the contrary,
for that it is Proverbial with Rich Men when they have no mind to part with
their money, to say, they have none; and it appears out of a balance of Trade on
Record in the Exchequer, that in the 28 th year of Edward the Third, the Sum of
the overplus of the Exports above the Imports amounted to 255214 l. 13 s. 8 d.

This however shows sufficiently the Indignation of a Popish House of Commons
at the Pope and his Lombard Street Bankers, who conveyed his money for him hence
by Bills of Exchange; and if our late Parliaments have not thought fit to
comply with the demands for satisfaction of Protestant Bankers there, much less
will future ones favor any of the Popes Lombards.

That the Pope formerly had as much money here from the public as the King, we
may well believe possible, since it is generally held that Wolsey's Revenue
equalled Harry the Eighth's.

Matthew Paris tells us, Anno 1240, Misit Papa Pater noster sanctus quendam
exactorem in Angliam Petrum Rubeum, qui excogitata muscipulatione infinitam
pecuniam a miseris Anglis edoctus erat emungere. i. e. Our holy Father the Pope
sent an exactor Peter Rubeus into England, who with a kind of Mousetrap trick
^^ped the poor English of infinite Sums of Money. And the expression of Wiping
the English of infinite Sums of Money was in fashion among all eminent later
Writers of ours against the Papal Usurpation: and it is particularly used by
Parker in his Antiq. Britan. where he says, Praeterea indulgentiarum,
dispensationum, similiumque fraudum immensa copi^ infinitis pecuniis Anglos
emunxerunt.

Nothing less then infinity of Treasure out of one Island could supply the
great exacter of Rome, who it seems resembled him that Cicero brands by saying,
infinitum genus invenerat ad innumerabilem pecuniam Corripiendam. But there is
now no catching a Nation in Mouse-traps.

As the Pope has never thought it worth his while to send Emissaries to Denmark
and Sweden, and some other Northern Countries, to sponge Money out of them,
which he knows that great spendor called War that so generally infests them,
makes them have none to spare for the Popes use (and Curia Romana non vult ovem
sine lana) so will the future vast charge too likely to be for ever incumbent
on England, and other parts of the World, in providing and maintaining Capital
Ships, effectually provide against the profusion of any on the Projector of
Religion at Rome, and against Romes being to us as Matthew Paris called it of
old, barathrum proventuum.

And any who considers that his Majesty has not without difficulty obtained
Supplies of Money from late Parliaments, and that they have been all
appropriated to certain public uses, may well give the Pope City-security,
that he shall have no Money from England; and no Man I think now supposes that
any thing that time can cause, can make the Pope get much Money out of the
Exchequer of England, but one who (as Charo^ says) was born in a Bottle, and
never saw the World but out of a little hole. But if according to the
Calculations that have been by some made, the current Coin of the Nation does
not now exceed Six Millions; and the public Revenue in times of Peace has
amounted to somewhat near one Third of that, and if the Pope should be allowed
here to have a spiritual income equal to the King's, and the restored Abbots
and Monks, and the other Clergy be allowed another Third, (for so the accounts
of their proportion were totted by some Critical Calculators) the whole Laity
would be nichil'd, as the Exchequer word is.

King Edward the First, as the Antiq. Britan. mention, sent some of his
Courtiers to treat with the Clergy about the Quota of their supplying him, viz,
Misit ex aula sua Nuntios qui suo nomine agerent cum clero, quoniam eorum and
tranquillitas Major and fructus atque reditus annui tunc essent long uberiores
quam populi, ut ad Regem in his bellicis angustiis adjuvandum se ostenderent
promptiores. And it appears out of Cotton's Collections, That in the fourth
Year of Richard the Second, The Clergy confessed they had a Third part of the
Revenue of the Kingdom, and therefore then consented to pay a Third part of the
Taxes. But in those ancient times of Popery* beside the Clergies share in the
Balance of Land, it might be justly added to the Inventory of their Wealth,
That they generally engrossed the highest and chiefest Offices in the Kingdom,
and that from the Office of Lord High Chancellor, to that of the very Clerks in
Chancery. and other Clerks places (whence to this day the officiating Registers
of Courts are called Clerici or Clerks) whereby they caught in a manner the
whole Kingdom in a Purse-net.

It Is therefore no wonder that the great affluence of the Riches of the Clergy
drew to them that Popular esteem, that (as the Antiquaries observe) the English
word Sir was affixed to the Christian Names of Clergymen, from King John's
time down to the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and which was also expressed in
Latin by the word Dominus, as for example, in the witnessing of a Deed,
Testibus Domino Willielmo de Massy, persona de Bowden, Matheo Hale, etc. And of
the people calling their Parish Priests by the name of Sir William Massy, and
the like, as in ordinary Communication we call Knights, we have the instance of
the first Christian on whom here for his Religion incineration was practiced,
viz. Sir William Sautre, Parish Priest of the Church of St. Scythe etc. in
London in Henry the Fourths time: for so he is Styled in the Acts and Monuments.

Bishop Sanderson who in his profession of Divinity was greater then any
praise, was likewise so accurate an observer of the weight of what he affirmed
in the Pulpit, though it was not of a point of Theology, that every thing he
there said has a Title to be regarded: And he in his Sermons in fol. ad
Populum, on 1 Cor. 7. 24. page 195, and 196, speaking of the Monks, says, It
is well known in this our Land, how both Church and Commonwealth groaned under
the burden of these heavy Lubbers: The Commonwealth, while they becam^ Lords
of very little less (by their computation who have traveled in the search)
^hen one half of the temporalties of the Kingdom: and the Church while they
engrossed into their hands the fruits of the best Benefices of the Realm,
allowing scarce so much as the Chaff to those who tread out the Corn.

This profession is God be thanked long since suppressed: There is nothing of
them now remains but the rubbish of their Nests, and the stink of their
memories, unless it be the sting of their Devilish Sacrilege, in ^^bbing the
Church by damnable Impropriations. He had before said they were (...), and
Slow-bellies, Stall-fed Monks and Friars, who lived mewed up in their Cells,
like Boors in a Frank, pining themselves into Lord, and beating down their
bodies till their Girdles cracked.

But though it has been truly observed, That the not providing for the
augmentations of the poorer Livings in England, was a scandal to our
Reformation, in that it made so many scandalous Livings, and consequently so
many such Ministers, and it has been in one of Queen Elizabeth's Parliaments,
notify'd by Dr. James (as Townsend's Collections mention) that of Eight
Thousand and odd Parish-Churches then in England, but Six Hundred did afford a
competent Living for a Minister: And it has been publicly aver'd by Archbishop
Whitgift, That there were Four Thousand Five Hundred Benefices which are not
worth above Ten Pound a Year in the King's Books; yet the dispersing of so much
of the Church Revenue among the Laity has had this effect, namely, to engage
the possessors of so great a proportion of the Land of England to be Champions
against Popery; and one other good effect within my own observation it produced
in the late times, when Tithes themselves were thought Delinquent, namely, that
the Impropriate Tithes saved the others: And the not augmenting the poorer sort
of Livings (the which mostly were in Cities and Corporations in the Country)
has not however proved any augmentation to the interest of Popery: For though
the Relics, and Images, and Shrines of Saints there, that brought a concourse
of Offerers and Offerings thither enriched those places, and the Churches, and
had the effect of Staple Ecclesiastical Commodities, and Harry the Eighth's
abolishing them, reduced the value of the Livings there almost to nothing, they
grew by occasion thereof afterward to be receptacles for heterodox Divines, who
seized on the Livings there in a manner derelict, and finding the Genius of
Trading people averse from Ceremonies did represent the few and innocent, and
indeed decent ones of the Church of England as odious to them, and therefore
were sure of pleasing their auditors by constant declaiming against those of
Popery, that were so many, and cumbersome, and had caused so much bloodshed,
and were known to be Ceremonies both mortuae and mortiferae.

And as Doleman alias Parsons observed in his time, that the strength of the
Puritans lay in those Corporate Towns and Cities, there will the hatred of the
Principles of the Papists* probably for ever increase.

I have for this purpose found it truly observed in a Discourse in octavo,
concerning Liberty of Conscience, Printed for Nath. Brooks at the Angel in
Cornhil: That the Puritan Preachers by their disesteem of Ceremonies and
external Pomp in the worship of God, were the more endeared to Corporations,
and the greater part of persons engaged in Trade and Traffic, who hate
Ceremonies in general, and what does unnecessarily take up time: And that
persons who nauseate Ceremonies in Civil things, will loath them likewise in
Religious, as a man who has an antipathy against Muscadine in his Parlor,
cannot love it at the Sacrament. And that if we reflect on those who did most
love Ceremonies heretofore in our Nation, we shall find them to have been
persons of the greatest Rank and Quality (who did effect Ceremonies in Civil
things) or of the poorest sort, who did get their daily bread by the Charity of
the other. So natural is it for men to Paint God in Colors suitable to their
own fancies, that I do not wonder at Trading Persons who hate Ceremonies, that
they thus think God in respect of this hatred altogether such as themselves.

That Discourse had before set forth, That it is natural to Men, who live by
Trade and whose being rich or beggars depends much on the honesty of their
Servants, to be enamo^^^^ on that Preaching that is most passionate and loud
against what looks like luxury, and is apt to occasion unnecessary expenses to
them: And therefore no humane Art will ever Reconcile them to one Casuistical
Tenet that is so so branded in the Pope's said Decree of the second of March,
viz. Servants of either Sex may secretly steal from their Masters, for the
value of their service, if it is greater than the Salary which they receive.

The Mystery of Iesuitism, letter 6, page 80, cites for this Tenet Father
Bauny's Summary p. 213, and 214 of the sixth Edition, viz. May Servants who are
not content with their Wages advance them of themselves, by filching and
purloining as much from their Masters as they imagine necessary to make their
Wages proportionable to their services? On some occasions they may, as when
they are so poor when they come into service, that they are obliged to accept
any proffer that is made to them, and that other servants of their quality get
more elsewhere.

At the rate of this Moral Theology no Tradesman knows what Money he has either
in his Pocket, or Compter, or what Cash in his Closet, nor indeed any King what
Treasure he has in his Exchequer.

But notwithstanding the aversion of many persons of high Birth and Breeding,
and who are lovers of Pomp and Ceremony in matters Civil, and likewise in
Religious, from the contrary humor of Trading Men, yet is there one thing that
has and always will (in spite of all differences in Religion) occasion an
intercourse of Civility between the former Class of Mankind here, and the
latter, and it is, that necessity of nature that makes the Borrower a Servant to
the Lender, namely, that the expensive former Class taking up Money at interest
from the more frugal latter, obliges them to give the Lenders the respect of
fair quarter: And thus according to that Bull in Tacitus, That in some parts of
Scotland the Sun shines all night long, there will still during the contrariety
of their tenets, and humors, and which are as opposite as light and darkness,
occasionally arise a clear understanding between them.

And of the Redundance of Money, the Puritans party had in the late times, and
of their designed employing it for the greatning the interest of their party,
the establishment of Feoffees by them for purchasing Impropriations, is a great
instance: Of their great progress wherein we have an account in Pryn's Complete
History of the Trial of Archbishop Laud, where he says, And had they not been
interrupted in this good work, they would probably in very few years have
purchased in most of the great Towns and noted Parishes Impropriate in England
in Laymens Lands: And which had they effected, they might have settled such a
Bank of Land on the Fond whereof to have brought into their possession the
greatest part perhaps of the money Current in England, and that party without
any but Silver weapons, have acquired such an arbitrage of the interests of all
others in England, as to have usurped Harry the Eighth's Motto of Cui adhaereo
praeest.

But though the Livings in these great Corporate Towns are so small, and the
value they had by oblations be evaporated every where but in the King's Books,
(where it remains still to enhance their payment of first Fruits and Tenths)
the heterodox Divines there find Harvests of oblations rich enough, and so will
the Divines of the Church of England, if ever a storm of Popish Persecution
shall drive them there for shelter to be Pastors of the Monied Men; and if the
worst comes to the worst, they will there find some ^at gathered Churches
better then lean Bishoprics, (as perhaps some heterodox Pastors do now there
experiment them) and the ambient heat of State-favour that called out some of
the inward one of Religion, being abated, they will probably grow more
exemplary in austere virtue, and thereby attract so much reverence from their
flocks as to become Confessors, as well as Preachers to them, for so the
Nonconformist Divines there now in a manner are; and as Confession under
Popery proved the only Guaranty to the Priests for their being paid their
Personal Tithes, and as then people at their deaths expiated their omissions in
the payment of their Tithes, by valuable Legacies, thus too will it probably
happen to the Ministers of Christ's New Testament, and often, to be Executors,
or at least Legatees in Christians Wills; the very dust of whose feet is
thought beautiful by all Men, generally when their return to their own dust is
approaching.

And the persecution designed them will but reduce their state in the Eye of
the World, to look and be like that of the Primitive Christians, who made the
Apostles their Bankers, and the depositaries of their wealth; and whose
Successors likewise in the administration of the Gospel during the following
Ages of Persecution had good livelihoods, on the Fond of Oblations. And as for
Tithes we hear nothing of them for many Ages in the Primitive Church. In the
Codex Canonum Ecclesiae Universae published by Iustellus (the most authentic
Book in the World next the Bible, and which contains the Canons received by the
Universal Church till the year 451) there is not one word of Tithes. The Clergy
were then liberally maintained by the free oblations of the people, which were
called (...): And there was no such Proverb heard of in the World abroad as
la^ci semper sunt infensi Clericis, till there was another unlucky one,
Ecclesia peperit divitias etc. and till the Goths and Vandals being Proselyted
to Christianity* expressed the natural zeal of new Converts by vastly endowing
the Clergy (...) Lands, who had (as I may say) settled Heaven upon them, and
who^e gre^^ proportion in the balance of Land necessarily made them a^terward
one of the Three Estates in the Christian World. And most worthy of Christian
Princes care it was to endeavor to secure the profession of Christianity in
future times as well as their own, by providing that the Clergy should not be
of the meanest of the people, nor depend on benevolence; which in the
prosperous condition of Christianity might perhaps grow cold, as under Popery
the Charity of Oblations had done, but for the A^tifices before mentioned of
Saints, Shrines, etc. and Relics, and the fear of Purgatory.

Of the Oblations of the people here in England decreasing toward the Pastors
of Independent Churches, when Independency became the Darling Religion of the
State, we had an indication in the late times, when some of the most eminent of
them obtained the possession of great Livings and their Tithes, and others of
them retreated from their Churches to Headships of Colleges. Nor has there
been any failure of the return of the old Exuberance of Oblations from such
Churches to such Divines, who have again returned to them when they were
dislodged from those preferments.

I find not that the Piety of our Ancestors had established any Revenue to the
Church from Tithes in England, till about the end of the Eighth or middle of
the Ninth Century; nor was the division of England into Parishes before the
time of Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 636, till which time
there could not be Parochial Tithes. About that time as 'twas said that the
measure of donations to the Church was immensitas, so was the modus of their
Artifices to preserve them sine modo, it being incident to humane Nature, to be
restless in the acquiring of riches, for without the perpetual acquiring of
more, no Man is sure to preserve the Quota of what he has.

'Twas thence that Sacrilege of the Monks arose, that tore the Bread out of
the Mouths of the Parish Priests by the Name of Appropriations, which showed
the President to Wolseys alienation of Religious Houses, that was the President
to Harry the Eighth's. And it may well be supposed that the Design of the Monks
in robbing the Parochial incumbents by Appropriations, was to propagate
ignorance among the Laity thereby, and to leave the Age as dark as they found
it, or rather to be able generally to let in or keep out what quantity of light
they pleased.

Yet had those Appropriations been made in an Age of knowledge, they would then
have met with that Nickname of Impropriations, that was born many years
afterward: and it would then have appeared improper to all that the Monks
should Muzzle the mouth of the Ox that did tread out the Corn; and that old
natural Zeal for Religion, so anciently radicated in English minds, that Popes
have formerly complained they were addressed to with more questions about
Religion from England than from all the World beside, would have inclined the
respective Parishioners according to their abilities to contribute a liberal
maintenance to their Parish Priests; and even in St. Paul's words, To have
plucked out their own Eyes, and have given them, but that they saw that
devotion that brought the forementioned concourse of Spectators, and Offerers
to the Images and Shrines, and to the Altars there made the Vicars at least
competently to live by the Altar.

And if that Class of heterodox Pastors in Corporations who as to skill in
Theology and the Encyclopaedy of Arts and Sciences, requisite to Crown a
Divine, are generally but Images in comparison of the excellent Divines of the
Church of England, have been how ever so much adored there, and had such
offerings from their adorers, the substantial and learned Divines of our Church
there, may on occasion well say, quid non speremus?

During that late persecution of the Divines of the Church of England in the
times of the Usurped Powers, who therein exercised all the cruelty they durst,
it might be truly said of the Doctrine of that Church, and the fire of the zeal
of the Laity in providing for the liberal maintenance of many of its Clergy, as
it is of Lime in the Emblem -- Mediis accendor in undis. What burning and
shining lights then in the midst of a perverse Generation were among others of
the Church of England in London, Bishop Gunning, Bishop Wild, Bishop Mossom?
Nor did their numerous Congregations in the least, for want of plentiful
Oblations to them, starve the Cause of Religion. The last forementioned person
at the Funeral of Bishop Wild, in a Printed Panegyric of his Life, takes
occasion to speak of the Oblations in those times afforded him, and says, p.
7. And whereas some good Obadiahs did then hide and feed the Lord's Prophets,
it was his care to Communicate to others what himself received for his own
support. Many Ministers sequestered, many Widows afflicted, many Royalists
imprisoned and almost famished, can testify the diffusive bounty of his hand,
dispensing to others in reliefs of Charity, what himself received of others in
offerings of Devotion.

And as if that Iron Age had been the Golden one of the Church of England, he
does so pathetically represent the internal glories of that Church in that
conjuncture, that any one who would draw an Historical Painting of the State of
the Primitive Church to the exactness and bigness of the life, might best do it
by the Church of England sitting in that posture he describes. These are his
words, p. 6, And here I cannot but recount with joy amidst all this Funeral
sorrow, what were then the holy ardours of all fervent devotions, in Fastings
and Prayer, and solemn Humiliations: Ay, in Festival and Sacramental
Solemnities. O the lift up praying, and yet sometime down cast weeping Eyes of
humble Penitents! O the often extended, and yet as often enfolded arms of
suppliant Votaries! Upon days of Solemnity, O how early and how eager were the
peoples devotions, that certainly then, if ever, the Kingdom of Heaven suffered
violence, so many with Jacob then wrestling with God in Prayer, not letting him
go till he gave them a blessing, etc.

Thus was that great Magazine of Learning and Piety Dr. Hammond in the late
time of the Persecution of the Church of England, the Magazine then likewise of
mighty Alms, insomuch that Serenus Cressy says, in his Epistle Apologetical
Printed in the year 1674, p. 48. Dr. Hammond in those days inviting me into
England, assured me I should be provided of a convenient place to dwell in, and
a sufficient subsistence to live comfortably, and withal, that not any one
should molest me about my Religion and Conscience. I had reason to believe that
this invitation was an effect of a cordial Friendship, and I was also informed
that he was well enabled to make good his promise, as having the disposal of
great Charities, and the most zealous promoter of Almsgiving that lived in
England since the change of Religion.

Thus while as noble Confessors they forsook Houses and Land, they according to
the Evangelical promise, received the effects of Houses and Lands, and praedial
Tithes an hundred fold in this Life, with the Gospel Salvo (as I may call it)
of Persecutions: And as in the primitive and best times, when the Christian
Pastors had no Tenths but the Decumani fluctus, or Ten Persecutions, and many
Christians were decimated for Martyrdom, that Community of Goods that was never
read of to be practiced but in Vtopia, and that Renunciation of that dear thing
called Property, (for the defense whereof Political Government is supposed to
have been chiefly invented) did so much glorify the Christian Morality, to the
confounding all examples of the most sublime Morals of the Heathens, that the
Pastors had the Christians All at their Feet, and did tread on Oblations at
every step they took, so likewise those great Divines beforementioned, and many
others, found that Primitive Temper, revived in some of the Lay-Members of the
Church of England by their generous Offerings and Contributions, which adorned
the Gospel, and supported its Ministers, and which Laity, though cruelly
decimated by the Usurpers, yet were then Rich in good works, ready to
distribute, and willing to Communicate, and by their forementioned great
liberality in Oblations, exceeding the rate of Tenths, did lay up in store a
good Foundation against the time to come for the Pastors that shall be their
Successors in Persecution, that may secure their expectations of good Pastures
in our Cities, and of having a Table prepared for them in the presence of their
Enemies, come what can come from Popery.

Moreover by such an accident only can the great Cities in England be freed
from some illiterate Pastors of gathered Churches, who without having their
Quarters beaten up by Penal Laws, will disappear there, when the excellent
tried Veterans of the Church of England shall come to Garrison them. Those
little Sheep-stealers of others Flocks will then no longer attempt there to
have Common of Pasture without Number, but will by all be numbered, and found
too light. 'Twill be visible to all that the Divines of the Church of England
can with ease Preach in as plain a manner as the other, and that the other can
not, with pains, Preach as Learnedly and Rationally as they.

We see that many ridiculous Lay-Preachers, who in the late times did set up a
kind of Religion-Trade in great Cities, and did gather Churches, and likewise
gather there some maintenance, have thence silently took their march on the
occasion of the more Learned Presbyterian Divines ejected from their Livings,
retiring thither, and there having constant auditories, partly resembling the
guise of gathered Churches: And the disproportion in intellectual Talents being
generally as great between them and the Divines of the Church of England, as is
that between them and the Lay-Preachers, they must there prove Bankrupt
necessarily as the others did.

Dr. Glanvil in his Book called, The Zealous and Impartial Protestant, did but
right to the Episcopal Clergy of England, when he ascribes to them the honor
of having by their Learned Writings Confuted, exposed, triumphed over the
numerous Errors of Popery, and there names Bishop Jewel, Bishop Morton, Bishop
Andrews, Archbishop Laud, Bishop Hall, Bishop Davenant, Archbishop Usher,
Archbishop Bramhal, Bishop Tailor, Bishop Cozens, Dr. Hammond, Mr.
Chillingworth, Mr. Mead, Dean Stillingfleet, Dean Tillotson, Dean Lloyd, Dr.
Henry More, Dr. Brevint: And speaking of the Episcopal Clergy of the City of
London, says, How many Learned, Substantial, Convictive Sermons have they
Preached against the Popish Doctrines and Practice since our late fears and
dangers? It Is true, some few others have written something, Mr. Baxter and Mr.
Pool have labored worthily: Dr. Owen has said somewhat to Fiat lux, and there
are some Sermons of the Presbyterians extant, Morning Lectures against Popery:
these are the most, and the chief of their performances I ever heard of.

The Conjuncture of the few and evil days of Popery would occasion another good
effect, a thing that is always to be wished, but (considering the general
present ferment in Men's minds, and passed mutual exasperations) never else to
be hoped for, and that is this* the common Calamity would cause such an Union
between Protestants of several persuasions in Religion, as would put a Period
to that dreadful state of dissension among them, which has so much horror in
it, that all those subtle miscreants who have been able to cause it here, and
make so many of them almost ready with the ferity of the canes sepulchrales to
devour one another, can never in words express. Nor can my imagination paint
out to me any thing of the kind like it in the past course of time, without my
recollecting the description of the fears of the Doctor of the Gentiles, given
by himself concerning the State of the Church of Corinth, to which he applies
the words of debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings,
swellings, tumults, and without my considering the fermentation in the City of
Jerusalem when near its fatal destruction. But there will be a finalis
concordia among the now implacable Protestants, if ever Popery should set up to
be the State-Religion: And then any one who will give advice to a Painter to
draw The present state of the Protestant Church of England, may make a good
Copy from the great Original of that Prophecy in Scripture, The Wolf and the
Lamb shall feed together, etc. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy
Mountain, etc. And perhaps without going so far for a Mountain that may
represent to ones fancy that State of English Protestants, he may find one in
England to do the work, one that several of our Historians speak of, telling us
that in the Year 1607, When by the Irruption of the Severn Sea, the Country in
Somerset shire was overflown almost Twenty Miles in length, and Four Miles in
breadth; it was then observed that Creatures of contrary natures, as Dogs and
Hares, Foxes and Conies, yea Cats and Mice getting up to the tops of some
Hills, dispensed at that time with their antipathies, remaining peaceably
together without sign of fear, and without any violence used toward one another.

Nor do Men in great Towns supposed qualified only as the Children of light,
but as the Children of this World, and as wise in their Generations, and as
projecting their own wealth, and the increasing of their Trade, and of the
value of their Rents, by eminent Oblations provide for such Divines planting
there; and it is obvious to every thinking Man, that the erecting of
Free-Schools, and encouraging excellent Divines to live in any particular Town,
turns sufficiently to Men's account in this World as to the ends aforesaid by
attracting inhabitants. For it will be natural to Christians there, when they
do not barely hear of a Christ Transubstantiated into a dull Wafer, but see one
(as I may say) Transfigured and shining as the Sun in the Preaching of the
Gospel, to say Lord it is good for us to be here, and for them there to make
Tabernacles, and provide Oblations not for dead but living Saints; and as a
living Dog is more valuable then a dead Lion, so I be^lieve that in any times
of Popery here that can come, any one Corporation and a holy learned Divine of
the Church of England, will get more by one another, then all Towns where
Shrines and Images of dead Saints shall be set up, will mutually gain thereby.

Then will the Clergy and People being benefactors to each other be naturally
ready to pray for each other, and the former being believed from their hearts
to say O Lord save thy people, will find both an Oral and Cordial Response from
the latter, And bless thy Clergy.

But while I am thus accompanied by the Guide of Natural reason, traveling in
the Region of future time, the time that only is the object of humane
solicitude, and from which anxious minds are too apt to fear that every days
birth may be a Monster,: I have by considering the former Revenue accruing to
the Church by Oblations, took occasion to Corroborate my great affirmation, of
its not being naturally possible for Popery to exterminate the Protestant
Religion in England, a Religion that Popery can never take by assault, or
making of its professors Martyrs, nor yet by Siege, in starving its Pastors.

It Is true, that such a great impost as Popery may occasion to Protestants by
Oblations, may in one sense seem to have the nature of a punishment, namely,
because 'twill not be a burden to which all Subjects, or indeed all Protestants
will be equally liable, and it will chiefly light on the devouter sort of
Protestants: And in like manner it may be said that the gain that arose from
Oblations in the times of Popery to the Parish Priests of great Towns, was in
effect an unequal impost on the Popish Laity, as being a Tax only on the more
Ignorant and Superstitious of them. But any one who has in the least considered
matters of State cannot but know that any great inequality of Taxes, that
lights on the Subject as a mischief, does prove to the Prince an inconvenience,
to whom the Subjects pressure makes him unable to afford that Subsidium he
otherwise could, and perhaps would cheerfully for the Public safety. Thus may
the great supposed charge to be incumbent on the more devout Protestants by
Oblations, probably tempt them to use all the means the Law will permit, to
render the Government of a Popish Prince uneasy to him, and certainly disable
them from paying in that proportion toward the public Levys upon emergent
occasions, they else might do.

It may therefore here be affirmed, that the gain of Popes arising from
Indulgences, which was so vast, that Popes would boast That they could never
want (...) while they could command Pen and Ink, and which Klockius in his Book
de Contributionibus observes, did yield the Pope in Common Years a hundred Tuns
of Gold, i. e. a Million of pounds Sterling, (and which being an unequal Tax on
Papists, and not pressing the debauchees of that Religion but only falling
heavy on the more Pious and devout sort, made them the less able to supply the
holy See with money on extraordinary occasions, or to pay their Taxes due to the
Popish Princes they lived under, and particularly those due to the Pope as a
Temporal Prince) has since in a manner dyed a natural death, the light of
Learning having no sooner come into the World, then that poor Hermit Friar
Martin Luther scourged the Popes Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, with as
much ease almost as our Savior did the Jewish.

Any one who shall consider the burden of Oblations, that the devoute^ Roman
Catholics in England lie under, as to their Priests (which we may suppose to
be very heavy, according to Mr. John Gees account in his Book called The foot
out of the Snare, p. 76, where he says, That the Popish Pastors ordinarily had
a fifth of the Estates of the Laity allowed them, and that he knew that in a
great shire in England, there was not a Papist of 40 l. per annum but did at
his own charge keep a Priest in his house; some poor neighbors perhaps
contributing some small matter toward it) may well think our Laity will bid as
high for English Prayers, and for Wares they understand, and see, and weigh, as
the Popish Laity does for Latin ones, and Merchandise they are not allowed to
examine; and he who considers that the Priests of that Religion, though thus
pampered with Oblations, yet knowing them burthensom to the Laity, do feed
themselves and them with hopes of the Restitution of Tithes to holy Church, and
even of that sort of Tithes alien'd from it in the times of Popery, may
reasonably conclude that our Divines whenever forced to fly to the asylum of
Oblations, will be restless in being both Heaven's and Earth's Remembrancers,
of their claim of Tithes appropriated to the Protestant Religion by the Laws in
being, and that a violent Religion, and illegal Gospel will be but a Temporary
bar against the collecting of Tithes, from a Land only during an Earthquake.

I shall here acquaint your Lordship with a passage in the late times relating
to the Clerical Revenue in England, worthy not only your knowledge, but
posterities, and that is this: A Person of great understanding, and of great
regard of the truth of the matters of fact he affirmed, and one who made a
great figure in the Law then, and in the Long Parliament from the beginning to
the end of it, related to me occasionally in discourse, That himself and some
few others, after the War was begun between the King and Parliament, were
employed by the Governing party of that Parliament to negotiate with some few
of the most eminent Presbyterian Divines (and such whose Counsels ruled the
rest of that Clergy) and to assure them that the Parliament had resolved, if
they should succeed in that War, to settle all the Lands, Issues and Profits
belonging to the Bishops and other dignitaries upon the Ministry in England, as
a perpetual and unalienable maintenance, and to tell them that the Parliament
on that encouragement expected that they should incline the Clergy of their
persuasion by their Preaching, and all ways within the Sphere of their Calling
to promote the Parliaments Cause; and that thereupon those Divines accordingly
undertook to do so: And that after the end of the War, he being minded by some
of those Divines, of the effect of the Parliaments promise by him notified, did
shortly after signify to them the answer of that party, who had employed him
in that Negotiation to this effect, viz. That the Parliament formerly did fully
intend to do what he had signified to them as aforesaid, and that the public
debts occasioned by the War disabled them from settling the Bishops Lands on the
Church: But that however he was authorized at that time to (...) them, that if
it would satisfy them to have the Deans and Chapters Lands so settled, that
would be done: And that then those Divines, in anger replied, They would have
settled on the Ministry all or none: representing it as Sacrilege to divert the
Revenues of the Bishops to Secular uses, and that thereupon they missed both,
the Deans and Chapters Lands being sold.

Those Divines it seems had a presension that the prosperous Condition of their
Church, would diminish the Charity of Oblations, and therefore did not
impoliticly try to provide for the duration of their Model, by dividing both
the Bishops Power and L^nds among their Clergy: And no doubt but in the way of
a fac simile after this Presbyterian Copy, the Popish Priests will in concert
with the Pope, even under a Popish Successor as well as now, combine to lessen
the King's power, and advance the Pope's, on promises from the Holy See, that
they shall have the Church Lands restored to them.

And I doubt not but a Popish Successor will support a Popish Clergy with what
maintenance he can, having a reference to the Law of the Land, and likewise to
the Law of Nature that binds him first to support himself; and perhaps by
keeping vacant Bishoprics long so (a thing that by Law he may do) he may have
their Temporal ties to bestow on whom he shall please, and perhaps by issuing
out new Commissions about the valuation of the Clerical Revenue, a larger share
of First Fruits and Tenths legally accruing to him, may enable him to gratify
such Ecclesiastics as he shall favor. But as I likewise doubt not that ever
any accident of time will leave the disposal of such a great proportion of the
Church Revenue at his Arbitrage as the Usurpers had at theirs, so neither do I
of his affairs ever permitting him to allow so large a share of that Revenue to
his Clergy as the Usurpers did to theirs, whom as those Powers durst not wholly
disoblige (and therefore unasked settled on them toward the augmentation of
their Livings the Impropriate Tithes belonging to the Crown, and to the Bishops
and Deans and Chapters, though yet nothing of their Terra firma) so neither
durst those Presbyterian Divines who followed them for the Loaves, and who once
in a sullen humor resolved not to have half a Loaf rather then no Bread,
reject the Impropriate Tithes given them, because they saw a new Race of
Divines called Independent ready to take from those Powers what they would
give, and who were prepared by their Religion to support the State-government,
and some of whom had already acquired Church Livings, and others of whom in the
great Controversy among all those Parties (which was not generalrally so much
de fide propaganda as de pane lucrando) would with the favor of the times
easily have then worsted the Presbyterian Clergy in the scramble for that thing
aforesaid, that though Moreau in his learned Notes on Schola Salerni, says, no
Book was ever writ of, yet I think few have been writ but for, namely Bread.

But herein on the whole matter the Usurpers Policy was so successful as that
ordering the great Revenues of the Church as they did, and Appropriating the
Bishops and Deans and Chapters Lands to the use of the State, they by the
augmentations arising from the Fond of the Impropriate Tithes to their Clergy
(and especially to those of them they planted in great Towns and Cities) tied
them to their Authority (as I may say) by the Teeth, and kept them from barking
against it, or biting them, which else they would have been likely to have
done, being disappointed as to their gratiae expectativae of the Lands of the
Bishops, had they been let loose to have depended on maintenance by Oblations
in such Towns and Cities, and where they would have probably tried with a
diversified Curse ye Meros, to fly in the faces of Masters who would not feed
them.

I have before said how the Parliament sweetened them into obedience by the
luscious power of oppressing their fellow Subjects: But neither by any Revenue
adequate to those Impropriate Tithes, nor by any such power of oppressing (that
prerogative of Devils, to torment) can it be imagined that a Popish Successor
will ever be able to ensure the obedience of his Clergy to himself. His Bishops
and Dignitaries will be like the Popes Trent Titulars without a Title, I mean
one to a Dignity or Benefice, and the burden of the Clerical Papists
maintenance, lying still on the laity, will make Popery soon visibly grow weary
o^ it self.

I shall here take occasion to observe that Tithes were first called
Impropriate by the sarcasm of the dislodged Monks, who thought that the Tithes
Appropriated (for that was the Ancient Law-term for them) were improperly
placed on Laymen; but both the present possessors, and all that know that it is
necessary for England's being a Kingdom and no Province, that its Riches
accruing by the number of its Inhabitants, and by improvement of its Soil,
should keep its weight in the Balance of Christendom, especially considering
the growth of France, will for ever think it very improper, that so much of its
Land and Wealth and Populousness should be sacrificed to Religious Idlers, and
that according to Bishop Sanderson's account, almost half of the Land should be
turned into Franks for Boares, or as I may say, Sties for such as are Epicuri
de grege Porci, or such as were called Barnevelts Hoggs, he having called the
Monkish Herd by that name, of whom if any angers one they all rise against him,
and if he pleases them all, there is nothing to be got but Bristles.

That Herd was not a little molested, as Mr. Fox tells us, by a private
Gentleman one Mr. Simon Fish in the Year 1527. who writ a little Book called
The supplication of Beggars addressed to the King, and it had the honor to reach
his Eyes, and to be lodged in his Bosom three or four days, and to bring its
Author to be embraced by the King, and to have long discourse with him, as Mr.
Fox affirms, who Prints that Book, wherein the Author with much labored
curiosity attaques the Revenue of the Monks with Arithmetic, a Science
necessary for the strengthening of Political no less Military Discipline.

He says there in the beginning That the multitude of Lepers and other sick
People and Poor, was so increased that all the Alms of the Realm sufficed not
to keep them from dying for hunger: And that this happened from counterfeit
holy Beggars and Vagabonds being so much increased. These says he) are not the
Herds but Wolfes, etc. Who have got into their hands more then the third part
of your Realm. The goodliest Lordships and Manors are theirs. Beside this he
sets forth that They have Tithes, Oblations, Mortuaries, etc. And he therein
says, That there being in England 52000 Parishes, and Ten Households in every
Parish, and five hundred and twenty Thousand Households in all, and every of the
five Orders of Friars receiving a penny a quarter, that is Twenty Pence in all
yearly from every one of these Households, the Total Sum was 430333 l. -- 6 s.
-- 8 d. Sterling. He further sets forth, That the Friars being not the four
hundredth Person of the Realm, had yet half its profits.

There were in that little Book many things so pungent, and so confirmed by
Calculation, that the Clergy put no meaner a Person then Sir Thomas More on the
answering it in Print; and it occasioned the Bishop of London's publishing an
Edict to call in that little Book, and the English New Testament, and many
Books writ against the excesses of the Priests. Well therefore might Sir Thomas
More be favored with a License to read Heretical Books, when he was to be at
the fatigue of answering them. Sir Thomas in his Answer to it makes a just
exception to Mr. Fish's estimate of the number of Parishes in the Realm: But
admitting there were then Ten Thousand Parishes in England, and about Forty
Houses in one Parish with another in the Country (beside what were in great
Towns and Cities) he might modestly Calculate 520000 Households in all.

Nor is it to be much wondered at, That a private Gentleman should err in the
excess of the number of the Parishes, when we are told in Cotton's Collections,
That in the 45 of E. 3. The Lords and Commons in Parliament granting the King a
Subsidy of 50000 l. at the rate of 22 s. 4 d. for each Parish, they estimated
the Parishes then near that number; but were afterward informed by the Lord
Chancellor, that by returns made into the Chancery on Commissions of Enquiry,
it was found there were not so many Parishes in the Realm.

It had been very acceptable to those who in this Age take their Political
measures of the power and growth of Kingdoms from Numbers, if either Mr. Fish
or Sir Thomas More who answered his Golden little Book (as I may call it, for
his endeavors therein to fix matters relating to the Economy of the Kingdom
by Calculation, and for his being a Columbus to discover rich Mines without
going to America, nor yet further then home) or if any of our Monkish
Historians, or even our Polished and Ingenious ones, and particularly My Lord
Bacon, and my Lord Herbert had given the World Rational estimates of the
Numbers of the people of England in the times they writ of, or particularly of
the Numbers of the Males then between the Years of 16 and 60, for if they had
done that (as on the public Musters made by occasion of Warlike preparations
they might perhaps well have performed) we might now easily by the help we have
had from the Observator on the Bills of Mortality conclude, what the entire
Number of the People then was, and might likewise have better agreed on a
stated Rule of the Period of Nations doubling; a Curiosity in knowledge not
unworthy the Genius of an Inquisitive or Philosophical Statesman, and which
presents to his View as in a Glass the Anatocisme of the faetus populi,
resembling the Interest upon Interest of Money; as for Example, when we see
that one pound in Seventy years (the Age of a Man) is, at 10 per cent.
increased to a Thousand.

But it is our misfortune, that through the aforesaid omission of our
Historians, we are not so much illuminated about the increase of the English
Nation, as we are about the gradual multiplication of the People of Rome so
many hundred years ago: And indeed by the help of the Writers of other European
Countries we are taught to know the Numbers of all people but our own. But in
this State of improvement that the World is arrived at, I do account that all
who shall hereafter employ their Pens about that greatest exercise of humane
Wit and Judgment, called History, and shall not found the weight of their
Remarques upon the Numbers of the People they write of, will no more be termed
grave Authors, or indeed ought but grave nothings, and such who deal
irreverently with a World that is weary of trifles, and from which they are to
expect no other Doom then that of the Annals Volusi.

And though as to the faetus populi as well as to the faetus pecuniae, called
faenus, accidents may happen that may cross the Rule of increase in both Cases,
as in the latter by Bankrupts, and in the former by Plague or War, etc. (and
thus once as to the Romans, Censa sunt Civium Capita 270 Millia, and in the
following enrollment but 137, Ex quo numero apparuit, says the Historian,
quantum hominum tot praeliorum adversa, fortuna populi Romani abstulisset; as
if he would infer that the losses they received from Hanibal had swept away
133000 Citizens) yet do such exceptions but confirm the Rule, the which may be
made out by continued mean proportionals. But this by the way.

If my Lord Herbert who mentions page 121 of his History, That in the Year 1522
Warrants were issued out, Commanding the Certificates of the Names of all above
sixteen Years old, had set down the total number of the persons certified, he
had much more obliged the World then by many things in his History.

I do not remember that any of our Historians of those times do relate the
Numbers of the Religious Persons that all the suppressed Monasteries contained.

We are told by Godwin in his Annals, That the number of the Abbeys that were
in England is not easily cast up, and the Names of the chiefest, and whose
Abbots had voices among the Peers in Parliament, he thereupon enumerates.

But Weaver in his Funeral Monuments p. 104, mentioning That all the Religious
Houses under the Yearly value of 200 l. being given to the King, and that they
were all worth per annum 20941 l. says, That the Religious Persons put out of
the same were above Ten Thousand.

My Lord Herbert p. 441, speaking of that sort of Monasteries, being dissolved
in the 27 th year of the King's Reign, makes Thirty, or Thirty two Thousand
pound yearly thereby fall into the King's hand: And p. 507, makes the total
yearly value of all the Religious Houses suppressed to be 161100 l. It may
therefore be thence inferred, that if Thirty Thousand pound yearly maintained
10000 Religious Persons, that there were maintained by the 161100 l. above
50000 Religious Persons or Regulars: And according to the aforesaid rate of the
yearly value of the Land, viz. 161100 l. the allowance to each came to somewhat
above 3 l. per annum, the which shows that those Lands were not sold to half
the value, because less then double that Sum cannot be imagined to have
maintained such a person then.

I do account that supposing the Parishes to have been then in England and
Wales, as Cambden in his Britannia says, 9284, that the Secular Clergy added to
the Number of the Regular only the last said Number: For then the Canon Law
(which requires, that Orders shall not be given to Men without Titles) being
strictly executed, there were perhaps not more Parish Priests in England: And
the adding to those Numbers the Dignitaries, viz. Two Archbishops, and 24
Bishops, and 26 Deans, and 60 Archdeacons, and 544 Prebendarys, and several
Rural Deans, does enlarge the Sum to another Thousand of Persons who lived by
the Altar. Moreover there being then estimated to live in Oxford and Cambridge
about Sixty Thousand Students, who in expectation of Church-preferment, as
either Regulars or Seculars, abstained from Marriage, I account that the Number
of Persons then tied by Caelibate from increasing and multiplying the people to
be above 120000, as at present above double that Number are in France.

What accrued to the Secular Clergy then, or since by Tithes ought not to have
been looked on by any one with an evil Eye, as I suppose by Mr. Fish it was
not. For as to the nature of the payment of Tithes, according to the judgment
of Sir W. P. in his Book of Taxes and Contributions, p. 58, It may be said to
be no Tax or Levy in England, whatever it might have been in the first age of
its Institution.

And this notion of his may be extended even to that which is called a Tenth,
but is revera a Fifth (I mean the Tith of arables in regard of the charge of
Culture and Seed, which is ordinarily at least as much as the Rent of the Land)
because it is a charge equally incumbent on all proprietors of such Land, and
for that the true notion of Wealth and Riches depends on comparison, and it is
only the inequality in the proportion of the Tax that is the sting thereof.

But that which Mr. Fish chiefly levelled his Calculations at, was the excessive
share in the Wealth of the Kingdom the Monks and Friars had, who did so little
for its preservation, and the increase of its Numbers. What an infinite number
of people, says he, might have been increased to have peopled the Realm, if
this sort of Folk had been married like other Men! Instead of using his
Rhetorical Expression of infinite, I shall affirm that these 120000 adult, able
persons living in Celibate might according to the notion of the Observator of
the Bills of Mortality, That every marriage, one with another, produces four
Children, viz. Two apiece for each Sex, have more then doubled their number in
the same age: by which any one may well conclude, that as the number of the
people of England is now vastly increased by the dissolution of Abbeys, so it
would likewise be so diminished by their re-establishment. To effect therefore
to lessen thus the number of the people of England, when the French King with
great wisdom has by the Revival of the Roman Immunity of the Ius trium
librorum, and the application of others, laid so a great Foundation for the
growing populousness of France, would too much expose us to his power and
derision.

The Divine Wisdom's allotting to the Levitical Tribe the affluent quota it
enjoyed, is very justly took notice of by those who discourse of the Clerical
Revenue.

The Author of the Present State of England, says, That our Ancestors
according to the pattern of God's ancient people the Jews, judged it expedient
to allot large Revenues to the English Clergy, and that the English Clergy were
the best provided for of any Clergy in the whole World, except only the Nation
of the Jews, among whom the Tribe of Levi, being not the Fourth part of the
twelve Tribes (as appears in the Book of Numbers) yet had, as Mr. Seldom
confesses, and that by God's own appointment, three times the Annual Revenue
of the greatest of the twelve Tribes.

Doctor Covel in his Modest and Reasonable examination of some things in use in
the Church of England, Printed Anno 1604, says in Chapter the Eleventh,
That^the Levites were not the Thirteenth part of the Jews, and yet had the
Tenth: Wherein that Doctor agreed with the sense of the Fathers of the Council
of Trent, who (as it is mentioned in the latter end of the History of that
Council) said, That in the Mosaical Law God gave the Tenth to the Levites, who
were the Thirteenth part of the people, prohibiting that any more should be
given them: But the Clergy now which is not the Fiftieth part, has gotten
already not a Tenth only, but a Fourth part.

But by exacter Calculations, it is apparent that the Levites though a small
Tribe (if a Tribe, there being twelve beside) scarce the sixtieth part of the
House of Jacob, had perhaps a Sixth of the whole profits of the Land: They had
the Tenth or Tith of the Land, together with its Culture; they had in Iudaea, a
small Country, 48 Cities, with their Suburbs, 2000 Cubits from the Wall on
every side, and their first fruits, and a great part of the manifold
Sacrifices, and free-will-offerings of the Male Children of Israel, which were
to appear thrice yearly before the Lord with some Offering, and whatsoever
House, Field, Person, Beast, etc. was by a singular Vow given to God, which was
to be valued by the Priest himself, and all these duties were brought in to the
Priest, without charge or trouble: and those Cities and Lands descended from
them to their posterity, from generation to generation, as also did their
Tithes and Offerings.

I shall here observe, that that which has probably induced so many to err in
making the number of the Levites so great as aforesaid, was their not
considering what yet is really true in Nature, namely, That the number of
people of any Nation from a month old and upwards (for so the Levites were
counted Numb. 3. 39.) is more then double their number from Twenty years old
and upward, and so the rest of the Tribes were numbered Exodus 33. 26. Numb. 26.
62. And therefore I infer that the Levites were but about a sixtieth of the
number of the other Tribes.

But during the Theocracy that the Jews sometimes lived under, or while God was
their King, it being worthy of the Divine Empire to design and promote the
wealth of its Subjects, and consequently that they should increase and multiply
(for that alone is real wealth) there was no Celibate among the Levites, or any
degree of Ecclesiastics to hinder the same.

Having thus in the way of Calculation glanced on the Ecclesiastical Polity of
God's peculiar People or Subjects, I suppose the rectitude of that Rule will
show the obliquity or warping of the practice of the Papal Clergy: For if we do
admit (as I believe we well may) that there are seven Millions of people in
England, of which 120000 is a sixtieth part, this old Church Polity of the
Popes Clergy does Toto Caelo differ from that of the Israelites, in that they
spend double the proportion of the wealth of the Kingdom, and yet live in
Celibate or without multiplying: And as Mr, Fish in effect said in that his
Book, do hinder procreation by promiscuous coupling with other Men's Wives.

But it is a known great truth, that the great business of the Monks, and the
Ratio studiorum of the Papal Clergy was not to make the Kingdom populous, but
to depopulate. We have for this the testimony of Walter Map Archdeacon of
Oxford, who was bred up with Henry the Second, that the Abbots and Monks in
that time were very Criminous in the point of depopulation, whence that Proverb
arose Monachi desertum aut inveniunt aut faciunt, wherever they seated
themselves, they either found the place a Desert, or made it one.

It Is said of them, That they laid more places waste then ever William the
Conqueror or his Son Ru^us did, when they demolished and destroyed many
Parishes to enlarge the bounds of the new Forest.

In that Fleet of depopulators there was one first-rate one, namely The Abbot
of Osney, who was for his Talent of depopulating so remarkable, that 'twas
observed that he made all paupers that dwelt within the purlieus of his
Possessions: And of this Henry the Second took such notice, that one day when
he had not poor people enough for his Alms on some great Festival he said in a
fit of anger, That rather then his bounty should be unemployed he would make as
many beggars as the Abbot of Osney had done.

One would think that the Monks should have been well willers to the increase
of the populousness of the Kingdom, for that thereby the values of their Lands
would have been increased, a thing no doubt that appeared visible to the
Reasons of the more Sagacious among them: But there was another thing they
found palpable, that is, they found themselves well at ease, even to envy in
their vast share of the wealth of the Nation, whereby they Lorded it over both
God's inheritance, and the Laity, and therefore they did not fancy the sight of
the Sea of the people increase, by the coming in of the Tide of new
generations, that would have produced much more persons to malign, and perhaps
contest with them: they naturally therefore wished the sweet absence of such
company from the World, just as in Ireland, and other thin peopled Countries,
the Natives living at their ease have sharp regrets against the accession of
strangers, though they know it would raise the value of their Lands, and as in
America the Natives wish no improvement to their Country from the Spaniards.

The Monks had got the Monopoly of Religion, and near half the Land by it, and
not having any certain Issue to endear posterity to them, and consequently to
oblige them to promote the wealth of the Kingdom in general, and to consult
thereby the good of surviving parts of themselves (for that figure Children
make as to Parents) they and the Abbots and Popish Bishops cared for no more
then being warm in the Pyes Nest while they lived, and 'twas as natural to them
to repel the thoughts of Colonies of people advancing the wealth of the Kingdom
by new generations, as it is natural to present Trading persons to prevent the
public good of an Act of Naturalization.

And as this advancement of depopulation was therefore the interest of the
present Monks and Priests, so was it of the present Popes, who knew they were
sure of receiving Aids and Contributions from them, as long as numbers of other
fresh comers did not drive them off the Stage.

One would rather wonder that our Popish Monarchs saw it not sooner their
Interest, to crush the Politics of these holy Depopulators and Pastors, that
turned the Kingdom into Sheep-walks, and who minding chiefly the increase of
Cattle by pasture, hindered that increase of Men that the advancement of Tillage
would have produced, and the furnishing the Crown with more Subsidy Men, and
Soldiers. But this supineness of our Kings was not only caused by Superstition,
and a vitiated fancy in Religion, an Idol to which Philip the Second sacrificed
his Son (and therefore might be well supposed prevalent with others to wish the
generation of their Children or Subjects restrained) but our Kings were not
then stimulated by necessity to promote the populousness of their Realm, for
that their riches and strength depending on comparison, the same Religious
Orders did by Celibate and Depopulation equally obstruct the Wealth and Power
of the neighboring Kingdoms as well as this, and by that means they were not
our overmatch.

But the course of increasing Generations having operated so far as to awaken
the World, and Men for not having so much Elbow-room as they had, jostling one
another by the violence of War, the politics of Statutes against Depopulation
were forced and reinforced on this Realm: And like as Men, so too will such
Statutes beget one another (as I may say) to the end of the Chapter. Nor is the
power of the Kingdom ever likely again to be really emasculated by such as
pretended To make themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven's sake, and
honored not the Founder of Christianity, of whom since he for the good of
Mankind made his first Disciples fishers of Men, it may seem unworthy that he
should intend the hurt of States and Kingdoms, by making the following Doctors
of his Church Pastors of Sheep.

Sir Thomas Moor in the first Book of his Vtopia does with a sharpness worthy
his excellent wit tell us, That certain Abbots (holy Men God wot) not
profiting, but much damnifying the Common Wealth, leave no ground for Tillage,
they enclose all in pastures; they throw down Houses, they pull down Towns, and
leave nothing standing, but only the Church, to make of it a Sheep-house. And
afterward says, That one Shepherd is enough to eat up that ground with Cattle,
to the occupying whereof about husbandry many hands were requisite. And he in
that Book calls the Friars errones maximos, and desires they might be treated
like Vagabonds and sturdy Beggars. And in the Second Book contrives a Model of
the Priesthood so as not to make it such a Nuisance to the Civil Government, as
the Papal one was, accordingly as has been before discoursed. For one of his
fundamentals there is, That the Priests should be very few, and that they
should be chosen by the people like other Magistrates, and with secret voices;
and enjoins to his Priests marriage, and makes them to be promoted to no power
but only to honor.

Sir Thomas More it seems was far then from Writing at the Pope's Feet, (the
Character that was afterward given to Bellarmine's style) and there was as
little occasion for a peace-maker's interposal between him and Fish, as is
between two wrangling Lawyers at a Bar.

But the matter is well mended with our English World since the time of the
Supplication of Beggars, as appears by the multitudes of the healthy and robust
Plebs of our Nation, that Till the Earth and Plough the Sea; and who by the
proportion of the Money Current coming to their hands, having fortified their
Vital Spirits with good diet, there is finis litium, and an end of such
Lamentations, as the beginning of that Supplication to the King in part before
referred mentions, viz. Most lamentably complains of their woeful misery to
your Highness, your poor daily Beads-men the wretched hideous Monsters, on whom
scarcely for horror any eye dare look, the foul unhappy sort of Lepers and
other sore people, needy, impotent, blind, lame, and sick, etc. How that their
Number is daily so sore increased, that all the Alms of all the well disposed
people of this your Realm is not half enough to sustain them.

There is no doubt but their indigence was extreme, when they were to glean not
only after the Reaping of the Monks, but after the Ecclesiastic Beggars, the
Fratres Mendicantes, (or as they were then called Manducantes) had been
satiated in diebus illis, and when Holy Church almost engrossed not only the
wealth but the begging in the Kingdom.

And he who now looks on our English infantry when they turn their
Plough-shares into Swords, will see nothing of the horror of starvelings in
their faces: and the Writ de leproso amovendo is in effect obsolete in nature,
as that too de haeretico comburendo is abrogated: And within the Term of about
twenty years that the Observator of the Bills of Mortality refers his
Calculations to, he mentions but six of 229150 dying of the Leprosy. What the
Bills of Mortality in France may contain about deaths by the Leprosy,
happening there in late years, I know not, but do suppose that the general
Scur^e appearing in the skins of the Pesantry there, condemned to Sell their
Birthright of nature for no Pottage, and to eat little of the Corn they Sow,
and to drink as little of the Vines they Plant, and to taste little of Flesh,
save what they have in Alms from the Baskets of the Abbeys, and who are Dieted
only for Vassalage, may be an indication of the Leprosy, having still its
former effects among them: But our English Husbandmen are both better fed and
taught, and the poorest people here have so much of brown Bread, and the
Gospel, that by the Calculations on our Bills of Mortality it appears, that for
so many years past but One of Four Thousand is starved.

It Is therefore I think by instinct of Nature, That our Yeomanry in the
Country, though not addicted to mind niceness of Controversy in Religion, nor
to be dealers in the Protestant Faith by Retaile, are great Wholesale Traders
in it, and will as soon suffer their Ploughs to be took out of their Hands, as
their Bibles from under their Arms: And they have been generally observed since
the Plot, and some years before, to manifest in common discourse their robust
abhorrences of Popery, as supposing that under that Religion they could neither
save their Souls, nor their Bacon.

Doleman alias Parsons in the Second part of his Book of the Succession,
speaking of the Numbers of the Papists here, makes it very considerable, In
that the most part of the Country people that live out of Cities and great
Towns (in which the greatest part of the English forces are wont to consist)
are much affected ordinarily to their Religion (meaning the Popish Religion) by
reason the Preachers of the contrary Religion are not so frequent with them as
in Towns, etc.

But were he now alive he would find the Scene of things changed in our Country
Churches since Queen Elizabeth's time, in whose Reign a Book was printed Anno
1585, called A lamentable complaint of the Commonalty by way of Supplication to
the High Court of Parliament for a learned Ministry. He would find that even in
the poorest of our Country Parishes (where yet by the increase of people since
her time, the values of the Livings are proportionably increased) there are
Ministers more learned then were there in his time, and that the Reading the
Prayers and Homilies of our Church has furnished our Country-Folks with so
much understanding, as will render them for ever unwilling to sow the matter of
which to make the God they must either devour, or be devoured by. Had Mr.
Coleman vouchsafed to have spoke with some of this sort of men, he would not
have thought the whole Kingdom ready like moist Wax to have received the
impressions of Popery, but would have observed in them, That with the stubborn
and proverbial Pride of a Russet Coat, they disdain to draw in the Yoke either
of Papacy or Presbytery, and that they talk of Popery as a Religion that would
sink down both their Souls and Bodies to the state of Brutes, and not only make
agriculture vail to pasture, but bring them to eat Grass and Hay more pecudum,
as a great Cardinal bragged that they had almost prepared the Laiety to do,
till Luther showed them better things: and if any one who has not heard the
sturdy Anathema's that our Rustics in their Common discourses bestow on Popery,
and who has not observed that in Elections for Knights of the Shire their
Suffrages are given to the most fiery Zealots against it, shall not have the
same sense with me of the general intense hatred of the Country People egainst
Popery, let him Cast his Eye on the Returns made in the Bishops Survey of the
Number of Papists above the age of 16, for those two Diocesses in which the
glory of our English Yeomanry so much abounds, namely of our Yeomen of Kent,
and he shall find that the Number of Papists both male and female was in
Canterbury Diocese but 142, and in that of Rochester 64; and one would think
that the Neighborhood of France might have transplanted more of the Popish
Persuasion into those Diocesses.

The Traditions our Country People have had from their Ancestors concerning
their state in the days of Popery, have sufficiently antidoted them against the
poison of Traditions from Popish Priests and such who would have them Traditors
of their English Bibles. They have a joyful Gusto of the Petition of Right (as
it were) fresh in their Mouths, and fear the being thrown back to the
supplication of Beggars. They cannot think of the Times of Monkery here,
without thinking of how many of the Plough-men in England were then Villains,
and that too Villains to Abbeys, for that part of their Land that was arable:
they were Villains regardant to their Manors, and such as the Romans called
adscriptitii glebae. And it is observed by Sir T. Smith in his 3d. Book de
Repub. Anglorum, c. 10. That the Monks and Friars when they were Conversant
with the Layety as Confessors in extremis, enjoined them in the Court of
Conscience for the honor of Christianity to manumit all their Villains: but
(says he) the said holy Fathers with the Abbots and Priors did not so by
theirs. And he says, Quorum exemplis episcopi insistentes ab ista crudelitate
nisi pretio conducti, aut Calumniis impetiti sero deterreri potuerunt. Dein
aequatis solo Monasteriis and in manus laicorum recidentibus, libertatem omnes
adepti sunt. i. e. But at last the Monasteries being levelled with the ground,
they all gained their freedom.

Thus did the Abbots and Monks formerly affect the Monopoly of ordering
Villainage: and the multiplying of the people born of their Villains by
succeeding Generations, did but multiply Slaves to the Abbeys; and at the same
time they sowed Corn for the Abbys, they sowed their Children too to Villenage:
The which is apparent by an Abbot and Convent's formula of manumission in
Edward the Third's time, mentioned in Blount, viz. Omnibus -- Frater Mathaeus
Abbas de Halesoweign and Conventus ejusdem loci salutem. Noveritis Nos unanimi
voluntate and Consensu fecisse Iohannem del Grene de Rugaker liberum cum tota
sequela sua procreata and procreanda.

But the Children that now come to see the light in England, are not damnati
antequam Nati, Condemned to Servitude before they are born, and our Yeomen that
are above wearing the Badges of our Nobles, will scorn the Vassalage to Friars:
and when the Genius of the English Nation is so full of Candor (and what few
Nations can pretend to) that they never make Slaves of their Prisoners of War
in any part of Europe, none I believe will ever see their incomparable Infantry
by whom their Battles are won, to become Slaves in Peace, and the very Slaves
too of Slaves, I mean of the Monastic Slaves to sloth.

That 40 s. a Year that made them in the state of legales homines heretofore,
is now become in value 6 l. per annum: and as by the increase of their Wealth
they are the more enabled to go to Law, so the Policy of William the Conqueror
to have men's Lands lie scattered as they are in Common Fields, to the intent
that the multiplicity of Law Suits occasioned thereby might divert their
uniting against him, (the which has been Commonly called the Conquerour's
Curse) has however enured them to a pugnacious spirit of litigation in the
Law, and the effect of which tough mettle of theirs, Popery is likely to find
if ever it shall be a Trespasser on them: and in fine, Popery need never balder
us with any other miracles, if it can effect this one, namely, to reconcile our
Husbandmen to love it, and to applaud the Ius Divinum of the Monks that coming
in Sheeps clothing, would by a Pasce Oves make Pasture confound Tillage.

The truth is, they are as unlikely ever to effect this, as are any who love
the Noble Sport of Hunting, to reduce England to its Primitive state, and more
remote then Pasture, namely, Forest, (for that and Marsh is the Natural state
of all uncultivated and desolate Lands) tho they should too try to hunt as with
a full cry out of the Scripture into that state, and with the (...) of Isaia,
cry, Resonate Montes laudationem, sylva and omne lignum ejus; and further tell
us of the antiquity of the Divine Right to Forests appearing out of those
words of the Royal Prophet, For all the Beasts of the Forest are mine, etc.
and should insinuate that 'twas fit to unpeople the Earth of men to make groves
for Gods to inhabit.

We are told in the Preface to Manwood, That in the Reigns of Richard the
First, King John, and Henry the Second, the Crown had afforrested so much of
the Lands of the Subjects, as that the greatest part of this Realm was then
become Forest; but no man is so senseless as to pretend to fear the Return of
any such state in England.

And according to the Principles of Sense and reason it may be affirmed, That
all Monkish hopes of our Ploughmen happening again to be overrun by Shepherds,
are very extravagant, and Popery will grossly err, if it shall think that
Poverty will ever compel this sort of men to the turpitude of taking up illegal
Arms for it, or that it can eradicate their innate hatred against it.

The Subsistence that the Plough afforded our Husbandmen in their Trade, made
few of them in Comparison of those of other Trades, become Soldiers in our
late Civil Wars: Nor were they then observed to favor those hyhocritical
Religion-Traders the Land was then pestered with. Nor indeed can they who
really Till and Improve the Earth, naturally affect those who pretend to
Cultivate Heaven; and by necessity of Nature it must still come to pass, that
they who acquire their own bread by rearing it for others with hard labor,
will have an aversion against those who can subsist luxuriously, by cheating
others of it with easy Tricks, and against any attempts for a Resetled
Monkery, which would, after the mode of the Pyed Piper, demand an
unconscionable rate for trying to rid us of a few haeretical Mice, and which
too tho our Land should pay, would yet depopulate it of its Children.

And here I cannot forbear to Observe, That there happened one thing so
momentous, that it can never be forgot while the English Nation has a Being,
and which did among our people in the Country Convey a fresh sense of the
Pestilential nature of Popery, and of the increasing Danger of its infection,
and that is, that the Body of our Clergy of the Church of England, did
generally from the Press and Pulpit for some Years together send so many strong
Antidotes against Popery round the Kingdom. Every Pulpit almost from one end of
the Land to the other did resound, as I may say, with a Seasonable discourse
against Popery. It may be with Justice applied to those Discourses of our
Divines, That they alarmed more than our English World, or perhaps the Roman,
and that the World elsewhere did ring with their (...); I here allude to those
words in the Epistle to the Romans, (...): Their sound went into all the Earth,
and their words to the ends of the World. There is no doubt but their Sound was
heard to Rome by the help of the Jesuits intelligence, and that our Divines
knew when they so Preached and Writ, they had passed the Rubicon, and that
'twas in vain like Cranmer to try to be reconciled to irreconcilable Rome, and
that 'twould be as much in vain in any Course of future time to use politic
whispers in Commendation of Popery after their former loudness against it, as
for one who told a Husband that he saw such an one struggling to ravish his
Wife, to say afterward that he was a very Civil Gentleman.

Our Fanatics therefore do by nothing more deserve that Name, then by
nick-naming the Body of the Clergy of the Church of England as fautors of
Popery, since 'twas but of yesterday that almost all our First and Second Rate
Divines did like Capital Ships (as I may say) one after another attaque the
Fleet of the Romanists, and discharge their Thunder upon them: but as my Lord
Bacon has observed, That in great Sounds the Continuance is more than
momentany, and that the noise of Great Ordnance, of which the Sound is carried
many miles on the Land, and much further on the Sea, will there come to the Ear
not in the instant of the shooting off, but an hour or more later, the which
must needs be the Continuance of the first Sound; Thus too, I hope, that the
aforesaid late (...) of our Capital Divines against Popery which has been heard
far and near among our Countery Inhabitants, (and will I believe Continue
audible among them during the hour of life) will in part of that hour, sooner
or later, be heard with regard by our weaker Brethren.

But what a Demon then in understanding, or God of Eloquence had he need to
think himself, and to be thought too such by others, who Imagines to talk
England both out of its Manna of Religion, and what is better then its
Fleshpots too, and to persuade us by bringing in Monkery again, to have our
Land ore-run with Flocks of Sheep, and to want hands to Work their Fleeces, or
(as I may say) to fancy to have Manufacture without hands; and for want
thereof, to make our Sheep almost useless but only to eat, and in that way too
to be chiefly appropriated to the Stomachs of Lubbers; and, who would allow our
Land Flocks of Sheep, but not Dogs to guard them; I mean a sufficient growing
Populacy in the Land to defend both it, and the very Flocks in it, and I may
add too, who would almost make the Wool of our Sheep useless but only to send
into Foreign Parts; and who would abdicate from the Land that benefit of the
continual passing of our Wool here through so many hands busied in Trade, and
thence filled with Wealth in the way of Interest upon Interest intended by
Nature for the maintenance and subsistence of our People, so multiplying as
aforesaid, and preparing Tables for all new Guests here, let them come into the
World never so fast; and would have us Consent to the diminution of the Number
of our People, when for want of our being fully stocked with them, so great a
part of our Land lies fallow every Year, as does not in Countries sufficiently
Populous, and where the Lands value will quit the cost of the Manuring.

Alas; when through the Divine Blessing England shall arrive at the state of
being fully Peopled, and being got beyond Pasture, that first improvement of a
thin Peopled Country, shall likewise have Completed that second of Tillage,
that our being better Peopled will occasion, there will lie a third in our View
to employ the Labors of our Consummate Populacy, namely that of Gardening, and
to oblige us that the Earth shall produce nothing but what is exactly useful:
and instead of going back from Tillage to Pasture, we must naturally go forward
from Tillage to Gardening, whereby one Acre may be made to maintain Twenty
persons, whereas now it is observed that 20 Acres generally throughout England
maintain but a fourth of that number, viz. 5. persons.

And when we are thus furnished with as many People as by Tillage or Gardening
can well live on the Land, it is then, and not before, that our increasing
Populousness will push on greater numbers of our Inhabitants to live on the
Sea, which none will choose to do, that can live on the Shore: and it is only
such a state of populacy that can naturally make us Masters of the
Fishing-Trade; to compass which, all our Projects before, whether by Acts of
Parliament, or Companies and Stock, will be but Chymerical.

Moreover, it is only such a state of Populacy that will exonerate us of those
burdens of the Earth, and scandals to Heaven, I mean all Religion-Traders,
whether Popish or Fanatical, those vilest of Nominales who cheat in nomine
Domini, and such likewise who disquiet States by assuming the Trade of
World-menders, and everlasting Propounders, that are like busy Insects flying
in the Eyes of Mankind, (and whom Sir E. Coke in the 85. Chapter of his Institutes,
which is entitled against Monopolists, Propounders and Projectors, deservedly
brands) and Atheists that would reform a Church, Bankrupts in their particular
Trades that would advance Trade in general, Defiers of Justice who would amend
the Law, and wasting that time as Censors of the Manners of Kings for not
paying their Debts, which they should employ in acquiring Assets to pay their
own: In fine, Undertakers to Cure Church and State as Confident as the Quack
who said in his Bills, He Cures all Diseases both cureable, and incureable.
All these sorts of men whose Trade is talking, and whose talk is cheat, will
only come to be Bankrupt by being heaved out of all places by the Generations
of Useful Traders multiplying there. Nature that has been long laying its Siege
to such Idlers in places of resort, will then at last carry on its works so far
as to leave them no Earth to play their Engines upon, and such unprofitable
people will be as naturally extruded out of our Towns, as are Women and
Children out of Places besieged: nor can all the humming of their Propositions
procure them more continuance in such places of business, then the noise of
Drones entitle them to a residence in the Hive; and it will as little quit Cost
to have them planted in our Cities, as for a Gardener that pays a high Rent to
have beds for weeds.

Of the Improvement of great quantities of Land by Gardening, the Islands of
Iersey and Guernsey, are examples: and we have a Pleasant and Profitable
Prospect of such Improvement near our Metropolis and other Great Cities; and I
doubt not but England may flourish so as to become the Garden of the World: and
do as little doubt of any Course of time bringing the Pope again to say as
Matthew Paris tells us he did, Vere hortus Noster deliciarum est Anglia, as I
do of that honest Monk's sleeping till the Resurrection, or Mr. Coleman's
having any more Dreams of a Paradise in the Gardens of Wooburn.

It Is hard for a Visionaire not to fancy any thing possible: but he who shall
pronounce that England can from its present improvement and populousness be
driven back ad primordia rerum, and that the many cultivated understandings in
it, and who have reduced Knowledge ad firmam by calculation, can be reduced to
the Calculation only of Beads and be imposed on like the Indians to part with
their Gold for Beads, and that half the Land of England now inhabited by three
Millions of People (as all estimates make to be the least that half of it
contains) will be delivered up to 50000 Regulars and to persons that the Laws
in being allow not so much as a Foot of Earth for Graves, and that it is not of
equal detriment to a Country to have half the Land made unprofitable and become
Bog or the like, as to be long in perpetuity to unprofitable people, and that
such as make property their God (which they who over value the things of this
Life do, and are the Majority of any Country) will idly sacrifice it to those
real Impropriators who make but a Property (as I may say) of God, I mean those
hypocritical Idlers who only by a Religion-Craft without any service useful to
Mankind claim a great Quota of the Profits of others labors, and that when we
are going on so fast toward the exactest culture by Gardening, which excludes
all Weeds, the old inimicus homo shall find six Millions asleep to give him an
opportunity to sow Tares and to ask half the Land for his pains, I say, he who
shall pronounce as aforesaid, is one that looks but at few things, and so de
facili shoots his Bolt, and is one that we may think to be a fool without being
in danger of Hell Fire: and Holy Churches great work of the Conversion of three
Kingdoms, to the end that it may Convert half the Land again to its use, is
likely to prove as fruitless as the Christian endeavors to recover the Holy
Land.

There is such a strong Rampart of living Earth against the assaults of Popery
in this kind I mean the Number of our Protestants and particularly of those
employed in Tilling the Land, that Popery cannot dissolve: and let it pipe
never so plausibly, we shall be like the deaf Adder stopping our Ears by laying
them against the Earth we are possessed of.

My Lord, They who have observed the Intervals of your pleasure, when you have
had some breathing times for retirement, from the fatigue of Affairs of State,
know that the contriving the improvement of your Ground by Tillage and Planting
and Gardening, has been at once your care and your delight. And I believe
Cicero's Cato Major does not describe the pleasure of old Age in the
improvement of the Earth, with greater hight then your Lordship is able to do:
and your example in this thing may Crown both that of Tully and the Aged Hero's
by him there commemorated for delighting in Husbandry: and indeed it may be
supposed but natural for old Age being so near the Earth its Center to move
with a quicker sort of delight toward it, and especially among Christians to
whom the dull Earth Aided by the acuteness of St. Paul (I referr to his
similitude of the Corn) is so kind and greateful for their culture of it, as to
Court them with an Emblem of their Resurrection, and to teach them a surer
way, then Galilaeus had found out to Transplant the Earth into Heaven. But now,
methinks to one that has so curious and perfect a Sense of this solid and manly
pleasure that the Culture of the Earth affords, as your Lordship, the very Idea
of England's Degeneracy from its thriving State of Agriculture to poor solitary
pasture (how unpracticable soever the thing is) must necessarily carry some
horror with it to be imagined, and the very telling it to you that some vain
Popish Projectors would rob us not only of the Culture of Learning, but even of
that of the very Earth, must give your thoughts a Nausea instead of such a
Noble Extacy as filled the whole Soul of Erasmus who in his old Age in a Letter
to Budaeus speaking of Sir Thomas More's and other men's Works that did then
begin to beautify the World with Learning, cries out, Deum immortalem, quod
seculum video brevi futurum! Vtinam contingat rejuvenescere!

And as I am sure you would not desire to Renew your Youth like the Eagle, only
to live in an Age of buzzards, so you know too much of the course of nature to
wish your Life a day shorter for fear of the longevity of Popery, if ever it
should call it self here the State-Religion: for it can naturally be but a
short dull Parenthesis of time in an Age of Sense, and the Eye of Reason can
see through the duration of it as well as through its absurdities, and it can
naturally be but like an angry Cloud, that with the Eye of Sense we shall see
both dropping and rolling away over our heads, and shall behold the Sun playing
with its Beams around the Heavens, near it at the same time: and nothing can be
easier to you then to dye in the Faith, that Popery cannot live long in
England, and to know that you are not to be compared to an Infidel, though you
should have provided for your surviving Family nothing but Abbey Lands, the
which I believe may by a bold instrument of Eternity drawn by a small
Scriveners Boy, be effectually Conveyed to any Layman and his Heirs for ever.

I know that the present State of that part of the Land of England that was
aliend from the Church, is such that it bears not the price of years purchase
it did before the Plott, and that it is according to the common expression,
become a drug as to Moneys being taken up on it in comparison of other Lands:
and it is obvious to consider how much herein the Plott has prejudiced the
Wealth and Trade of the Kingdom, in making so great a part of the Land in some
regard comparatively useless to the Possessors: but I likewise know that hereby
Popery will be no gainer, for that it is apparent that the owners of it will be
indefatigable in the use of all means lawful to bring Popery to such a State,
as shall make any men ashamed to say they fear it.

Tho Holy Church that everlasting Minor, that Minor like Sir Thomas Mores Child
that he said would be always one, will be still laboring the Resumption of
what was alien'd from it (and hence I believe it has proceeded, that our Kings
tho in the eye of the Law always at full Age, have thought fit to learn from
Holy Church the Privilege too of being reputed Minors or Infants in Law, for
so the Books call them, that upon occasion they may resume what was alien'd
from the Crown) and tho the hopes of such resumption would be a bait to help
Popery to Multitudes of Proselytes, yet the people imagine a vain thing who
think such resuming practicable in England, and especially at this time if the
Calculation of the Ebb of the Coinage of England be as is contained in
Britannia languens, viz. from the forementioned period of May 1657, to November
1675, (near another nineteen years) 3, 238, 997 l. 16s., a Calculation that I
think cannot be disproved but by the Records in the Pipe Office, where annual
account of the Money Coined in the Mint are preserved, or by Balances of Trade
made up from that time, whereby the exportations eminently preponderating what
is imported, would evince what considerable quantities of Bullion have been
Coined, or by our knowing that since that time Sterling Silver has not still
obtained the Price of 5 s 2d an Ounce, a price that it has not indeed fallen
short of in England about these twenty years past, and therefore before the
late Act for the Coynage, could never be entertained by the Mint to be Coined,
which was by its Law and Course necessarily restrained from giving for Sterling
Silver above 5 s. the Ounce, and which Rate and no more it did afford when the
Balance of Trade favoring us caused that vast Coynage mentioned in the former
Ternary of nineteen years.

But in fine, his Majesty's Royal Goodness to his People in not only quitting
what did accrue to him for Coynage, but being at the expense of the Coining the
most exquisite sort of Money in the Known world, and such as in Curiosity does
equal Meddals, is an indication of the Balance of Trade, not having employed
the Mint sufficiently in making for his Subjects the Medium of Commerce; and
for the depression of the Trade not only of the English but of more then the
European World, the Usurper Cromwell is to be justly blamed, who not long after
the wounds England had felt by the Munster Peace, did harrass us by his
fantastic War with Spain, which not only impoverished England but the Trading
World, and forcibly obstructing the Returns of the Spanish Plate Fleets, did
particularly put both Spain and France under a necessity of making that Peace
that gave the French Crown its leisure to trouble the World.

But let any one judge then how ridiculous it is to suppose, that the Trade of
the Nation must not, as I may say, shut up Shop, if half its wealth should be
again juggled into the hands of a few Ecclesiastics, and the old Trade between
England and Rome be renewed of giving the Pope Gold for Lead.

It must indeed be acknowledged by all who have conversed with History that the
absolute and unbounded Power with which the Eastern Monararchs Governed their
Kingdoms, did not more require an excessive share of the public Revenue to
feed standing Armies then Priests, who with their Idols and Superstitions, and
Crafts, did awe and delude People into obedience: but as in orderly
Commonwealths there is no need of such an immense Charge for Artifice to make
men obey themselves, so in our Constitution of the English Government, it being
justly to be supposed, that we have all the desirable, solid and substantial
freedom that any Form of Government can import, besides the insignificance of
the name of it (and insignificant we may well call it who remember that our
late real Oligarchists took not only the name of God, but the name of a
Commonwealth in vain) and are to the envy of Forraigners, and shame of our
former Domestic Propounders, blessed with the Sovereign Power of a Great and
Glorious King over a free and happy People (as the words of the Royal Martyr
are in one of his Declarations) it may be well said to any one who shall talk
of giving half the profits of the Realm to use Art, and Imposture to make
Members obey their Head so constituted, quorsum perditio haec?

But in a word, to come closer to the Case of Popery, any one that would have
half the Revenue of the Kingdom given to Impostors for the making a Monarch
only half a King, or King but of half his People, and for the tricking both him
and them into a blind obedience to a Foreign Head, and for the making a
Foreign Power Arbitrary and absolute, is a very bad Land-Merchant, and knows
not the use or value of the soil of England, and will never find the half of
25 Millions of Acres sold for Chains and Fetters, and will be put to the
trouble of taking out the Writ, de idiota inquirendo against at least three
Millions who have already outwitted him, and will never think a Foreign Minor
and whose concessions are resumable, fit to be their Guardian, and account it a
very preposterous thing that since our Savior refused to divide an
Inheritance, his pretended Vicar should do nothing else.

Moreover Holy Churches resuming all its Lands out of Lay hands, would appear
the more strange in England when we see (as my Lord Primate Bramhal says in
his vindication of the Church of England, p. 212) that the very Kings of Spain
impose Pensions usually on Ecclesiastical preferments to the 4th part of the
value, and particularly one Pension on the Archbishopric of Sivile in favor
of an Infant of Castile of greater value then all the Pensions there imposed by
the Pope; and when we know that the French King does for the behoof of so great
a number of Laymen, impose so many and great Pensions on the Abbeys without
saying to the Abbots more then Car tell est nostre plaisir.

Sir Edwyn Sands in his Europae Speculum writ in the Year 1599, and in the time
of Harry the 4 th of France, speaking of that Kingdom, says, That there the
Church Prelacies and other Governments of Souls, are made the Fees and Charges
of mere Courtiers and Soldiers: and our excellent Animadverter on Monsieur
Sorbier reflecting on that Country, Intimates in effect how there the chiefest
spiritual dignities are entailed upon Families, and possessed by Children.

They who unjustly cry out of the Constitution of the Church of England, for
interrupting the Trade of the Kingdom, would be loud enough in their Complaints
of Omnia comesta a Belo under Popery.

He who knows not that the Revenue of the King now depends in a manner solely
upon Trade, and that Trade depends on populousness, and that the encouragement
of people to live under any Government, is that great thing, called Property in
their Estates, Religion, and Laws, and that therefore any thing that calls it
self Religion, that goes to exterminate above a hundred and fifty persons for
every one it leaves (for so the Proportion between Non-Papists and Papists by
the Bishops survey made about the Year 1676, was returned to be) and to call
them Heretics, and which makes their Goods and life ipso facto a forfeit of
the Law, will not ipso facto exterminate Trade, is fitter for the Galleys or a
Trading Voyage to the Anticyrae, then for any discourse of Trade and Commerce.

Your Lordship has in your Travels sufficiently seen it long since
exemplified, that the Protestant Countries for the quantity of Ground exceed
the Popish in Trade, and numbers of People, and that thus the Protestant Hanse
Towns have eclipsed their Roman Catholic Neighbors; and Amsterdam, Antwerp,
and the United Provinces, Flanders, and that in Flanders where the
Ecclesiastics are Proprietors of seven parts of ten of the whole Country,
Levies of Men and Money for the defense thereof have been made, with so much
slowness and difficulty, and been so inconsiderable as not to have secured
themselves against Invaders.

Nor did the Ecclesiastics there think it worth their while, to strain
themselves in Contributions to resist an Invader who is of their own Religion
(the which made the French Kings Victories there fly like Lightning) more then
our over-rich English Regulars did to oppose William the Conqueror, when he
came here under the Popes Banner. And thus were they here, and in Flanders are
like Wenns in the Body which draw to themselves much nourishment and are of
great trouble and no use, and thus ridiculous is it that so over great a part
of the property of the Land, should be linked to persons, who are no way linked
to the interest of the Country, more then professed Gamesters and Empyrics and
Soldiers of Fortune, and are no more damnified by Popish Invaders, then Fishes
of the Sea are by Earthquakes.

But on the other hand in the United-Provinces, how easily and soon are vast
Taxes raised when their All is at Stake, and to what a prodigious increase of
the numbers of their People have they attained since the Reformation? insomuch
that the Author of a Political discourse of the Interest of Holland Printed in
Dutch in the Year 1669, and Licensed by John de Wit and by Van Beaumont, makes
the People in the Province of Holland to be 2 Millions and 400 thousand, and so
likewise does Pellerus in his Learned Notes on Klockius de Aerario p. 300. and
there cites that Book of the interest of Holland, when as Gerard Malynes in his
Lex mercatoria makes the People in Flanders in the Year 1622 to have consisted
of a hundred and forty thousand Families, and he reckoning each of them one
with an other at 5 persons, makes the Total of the people in Flanders to have
then amounted but to seven hundred thousand Souls.

And yet as that Author of the interest of Holland says, the Province of
Holland can hardly make 400 thousand profitable Acres or Morgens of Land, Down
and Heath not put in, and that the 8 th part of the Inhabitants of Holland
cannot be nourished with what is growing there: but tells us what prodigious
Granaries they there have, and that Amsterdam that in the Year 1571 was about
200 Morgens or Acres of Land, was in the year 1650 enlarged to 600 Morgens or
Acres of Land in Circumference, and to have in it three hundred thousand Souls.

And the defense of the Zelanders Choice Printed in the Year 1673, mentions
Aitsmas Liere to have reckoned the public Incomes of Holland alone in the Year
1643, to have amounted to 1100 thousand pound Sterling; and the Author of the
Interest of Holland says, that in one Year in a time of Peace, viz. In the
Year 1664 the Inhabitants of Holland did over and above the Customs and other
Domains of the Earls or States of Holland pay toward the public Charge as
follows, viz.

To the States of Holland 11 Millions of Gilders.

To the Admiralty of the Maze, 472 898 Gilders.

To the Admiralty of Amsterdam 2 Millions of Gilders.

To the Admiralty of the Northern Quarter, 200 thousand Guilders.

Which comes to in all about 14 hundred, 87 thousand Pounds Sterling. How
meanly do the Achievements of Venice, and their Efforts to aggrandize their
Republic, compared with Hollands show in story, for the quantity of years many
times doubled since the Dutch threw off the Yoke of the Papacy! History has
recorded the longevity of the Venetian Government as it has of Methusalem of
whom we read, not (...) great thing he said, or did, or attempted; but a few
days of the short life of Alexander, in the Balance of same weighs down the
999 years of the other.

The very Religion of Popery makes the Venetians more narrow in their
principles, and even in their Rules of Traffic then are the Inhabitants of
Protestant Countries. The Popish Religion does hamper its devout Professors as
to Trading with Heretics, and holding Communication with such as are ipso jure
and ipso facto excommunicated, and giving any Quarentine to men said to be
infected with Heresy, insomuch that we are told in D' Ossat's Letters, Part.
2d. That the Republic of Venice would not suffer the Ambassador of Henry the 4
th to them tho a Catholic to be admitted to their Chapels with other
Ambassadors, because they did not know his Master to be reconciled to the Sea
of Rome.

And Bodin de Rep. says, That the number of the Inhabitants of Venice was taken
Anno 1555, and was then in all but one hundred and eighty thousand and four
hundred and forty.

Sir William Temple in the 5th Chapter of his Observations on the United
Provinces, makes one of the great Causes of the first Revolt in the
Low Countries to be the oppression of Men's Consciences, or Persecution in their
Liberties, Estates, and Lives on the pretense of Religion; and it may be truly
said that by their buying the truth at the Rate of such high Taxes as they now
pay, and not selling it either to France or Spain, they have been no losers;
for many good Artists and wealthy Fugitives have brought their Persons and
Families and Estates to them for shelter, from the Storm of Papal Persecution,
and daily continue so to do; insomuch that the Author of the Zelanders Choice
in Sect. 3. Observes that of late years some of the Wise Men of the Reformed
Religion in France, being fearful of its being there utterly supplanted, have
required their Children by their last Wills and Testaments to leave France and
settle themselves in the United Provinces: and in so doing, they bestowed rich
Legacies on Holland, each head of any new comer being judged to add at a Medium
3 l. per year to the riches of the State.

The late great late accession of Protestant strangers to Amsterdam, has
caused many new houses to be there built, and has raised the Rents of the old
ones a 5 th part, whereas they are sunk a 4 th in Cheapside in London.

It Is there that Men of every Nation under Heaven, Parthians, and Arabians,
Jews, Papists, Calvinists, Lutherans, and the Christians of the Subdivisions of
all Sects do hear Men speak in their own Language, and what they think most
Musical to them, the wonderful works of God.

Nor are the Enemies to Monarchy to ascribe the flourshing State of Holland, to
its former throwing the Power of the State-holder, and Captain General out of
the Balance of their Government. Their breaking down the Banks of his
Authority, introduced the sudden inundation of the French Power among them,
that they had else been more secured against then the Assaults of the Ocean,
and not have so perfectly forgot the Art and Nature of Defensive War in their
Frontiers: and tho it may seem plausible that an Animal, supposed to have most
heads, will have most brains, and that Republics are more apprehensive of
their true interest then other Governments, yet to the Reproach of such
Politics it appeared, that when the Regnant Faction in Holland were no more
headed by a Captain General or State-holder, and had thrown the poise of his
Power out of the Scales, they grew so vain, as tho they had no Capital Ships,
yet to become aggressors in a Naval War against England, that had Ships enough of
that kind to affright the World, and of which War the Result was the abolishing
their great Navigation (...) England, from whence their forced frequenting of
our Harbors, still occasions their exporting more of our Commodities then we
import of theirs. But this by the way.

However so vast yet is their Navigation, and the number of their Mariners
that tho we need them not for our Carriers, both Spain and France do: and to
which Kingdoms they have and probably will for some Ages to come, have the
honor and profit to be Carriers, how much soever France is or seems to be
feared by us: and thus that Book of the Interest of Holland tells us, viz. That
the French have very few Ships and Mariners of their own, so that almost all
their Traffic for Holland ( some few English Ships of Trade excepted) is
driven by Dutch Ships, and that when any Goods are transported from one French
Haven to another, they are laden on Board Dutch Vessels, and that as to Spain,
that it has so few Mariners and Ships that since the Peace between them and
Holland, they have used to hire Dutch Ships to sail to the Indies.

And therefore when I consider what that ingenious Author has thus discoursed,
and that Sir W. P. in a Manuscript discourse in the Year 1671/2, has
Calculated the number of the Total of the Seamen, who are Subjects of France to
be 15000, and that a great and fatal diminution of the number of them since
happened in the Year 1678, by so many of their then perishing under D' Estre in
the West Indies, and that as the Author of Britannia languens says, The Dutch
have at least 10 times as many Seamen as the English, I shall venture to
conclude that more then all the Millions of Mankind now living will be
dissolved to Ashes before (humanly speaking) it will be possible for France to
overbalance either the Dutch or (...) at Sea, and whoever they are that
pretend to fear the Contrary, I think they do but pretend to fear it.

But at once to return to the consideration of the gain Holland has from fresh
Advenae, and to take my leave of it, all old Trades being there fully improved,
such new comers are forced to dig up a new Soil of Trade and Industry, as I
may call it, for their subsistence; and thus at the Charge of their Experiments
the Country is enriched: and many new Artists there bring with them their old
experimented Arts, and thus it is known that an Englishman from Yarmouth coming
to be an Inhabitant among them, taught them the rich Arcanum of the Fishing
Trade: and since they disused to pray to dead Saints in the way of Popery, they
have found living Saints praying to them to be admitted to live with them, and
have not only had the honor to entertain Saints, but by being not forgetful to
entertain Strangers, they have unawares entertained Angels (as the Scripture
expression is) and such who have proved tutelar ones to their Country and
Religion.

No marvel therefore if the Learned Divine, the Author of the Defense of the
Zelanders Choice, does there so pathetically pronounce his opinion, that if
ever the Protestant Religion shall leave Holland, that Country may be called
Ichabod, i. e. the Glory is departed from it.

And here I should be injurious to the Political Energy of the Reformation in
England, if I should not observe how vastly it has contributed to the increase
of the value of our Land, and the number of the people and the extent of our
Commerce, and indeed of Commerce it self.

It was not long before the Reformation that the Kings and People of England,
maintained themselves chiefly by Sheperdry, and the Kings and people of France
by Tillage, and their great improvement in Manufacture, bears Date but from
Harry the 4 ths time. The great Scene of Merchandising was not opened in Europe
till about 6, or 7 hundred years ago, and till then none were there worthy the
names of Merchants except some few in the Republics of Italy, who lived in the
Mediterranean parts trading with the Indian Caravans in the Levant, or driving
some inland Trade, and then and some hundreds of years afterward, the Nations
in the worst Soil of Europe being the greatest breeders, and having superfluity
of nothing but people, had no invention for living but by being Murderers, and
by the boisterous Trade of Fighting their way into better Quarters: and during
that dark and Iron Age that produced Herds of Men void of knowledge, there was
nothing in humane Conversation or discourse valuable; and in our European World
it was scarce worth Men a few steps to gain one another acquaintance: but on
the gradual increase of knowledge there, Men found a readier way at once with
delight and profit to exchange Notions and Commodities of Traffic, and the
Protestant Religion at last drawing up the Curtain that kept all things obscure
on that Stage of the World, Men being better taught the knowledge of the God of
Nature and of Nature it self, were grown worth one another knowledge, and were
for the surprising brightness of their intellectual Talents gazed on by the
wondering World, like in Machines, Gods coming down out of Clouds, and it was
worthy of the bounty of Heaven, then to spread on the Earth the Commerce of Men
and the Medium of Commerce too, and to allow them to converse together with
more splendour by the Donative of the American Mines when the dawn of the
knowledge a little before that of the Reformation had rendered them conversable
Creatures, and fit for the interviews of one another: and shortly afterward by
a mighty increase of Navigation, many did pass to and fro, and knowledge was
more and more increased.

Thus as I have some where read of a saying of one of the Fathers, Deus ambit
nos donis and forma sua, the Divine Goodness provided that the World should
Espouse the beauty of the Reformation with a great Dowry, and that it should
appear particularly in England with the great Figure that Wisdom makes in the
Proverbs, Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and
honor.

And the truth is conspicuous in our English History that former intervals of
some Efforts of Trade, and of some, of withstanding the Papal Encroachments
were always contemporary, and lived and died together, and they were no sooner
risen out of the Grave where the barbarity of former times depressed them, but
they were again found in one another Embraces.

That the Stock and Wealth of the Kingdom, is vastly increased since Harry the
8ths time, is visible to any one who considers what Stow says in his Annals on
the Year 1523, the 15th Year of his Reign, That when in a Parliament held at
Blackfriars, and where Sir Thomas More was Speaker, 800000 l. was required to
be raised of the fifth part of every man's Goods and Lands, that is 4 s, of
every Pound to be paid in 4 years: but it was denied, and it was proved
manifestly that if the fifth part of the substance of the Realm were but 800000
l, and if Men should pay to the King the fifth part of their Goods in Money or
Plate, that there was not so much Money out of the Kings, hands in all the
Realm: for the fifth part of every Man's Goods is not in Money or Plate, etc.
And then consequently if all the Money were brought to the Kings hands, then
Men must barter Cloth for Victuals, etc. And there it was further Argued that
the King had by way of Loan 2 s. in the Pound (which is 400000 l.) and if he
had 4 s. more in the Pound, 'twould amount to 1200000 l, which is almost the 3
d part of every Man's Goods, which in Coin cannot be had within the Realm.

That the Merchandising Trade of England was before the Reformation, and
sometime after managed chiefly by Forraigners, we Learn out of Heylin's Edward
the 6 th, p. 108, where he says that Edward the 6 th, Suppressed the Corporation
of Merchant Strangers, the Merchants of the Stilyard, concerning which we are
to know that the English in the times foregoing being neither strong in
Shipping, nor much accustomed to the Sea, received all such Commodities as were
not of the growth of their own Country from the hands of Strangers, resorting
hither from all parts to upbraid our laziness, namely Merchants known by the
name of Easterlings, who brought hither Wheat and Rye and Grain, etc. for their
encouragement wherein they were amply privileged and exempted from many
impositions.

I shall here deduce a proof of the growth of the Revenue of the Nation, from
the growth of that of the Church, and to prove that the Revenue of the Church
and Nation of England were in the year 1660 about Quintuple, to what they were
at the time of the Reformation, I shall say first that Godwin in his Catalogue
of Bishops, makes the Revenue of the Archbishops and Bishops to be valued at
the time of the Reformation near 22000 l. per Annum, and if we admit the
Revenue of the Deans and Chapters, to be double the Sum, viz. 44000 l. then
will the whole Revenue of the Hierarchy appear to have been then 66000 l. per
Annum.

But Dr. Cornelius Burgess, a Man versed in the speculative and practick part
of Sacrilege, does in his Book concerning Sacrilege called Two Replies, and
Printed Anno 1660, affirm that the Bishops, Deans, and Chapters Lands, were at
the end of the late Civil War sold for two Million three hundred thousand
pounds, and he says, there was offered since his Majesty's Restoration seven
hundred thousand pounds more to confirm that Sale: whereby the value of the
said Land is made to be in the year 1660, 3 Millions.

And Mr. Prynne in his Printed Speech in the House of Commons on Monday the 4th
of December 1648. touching the satisfactoriness of the Kings Answers to the
Propositions of both Houses, does in Page 68 there affirm, That near one half
of the Archbishops and Bishops Possessions and Revenues consists in
Impropriations, Tithes, Pensions, and the like; and if we may suppose the like
as to the Revenues of the Deans and Chapters, then according to that Estimate
will the value of the whole Revenue of the Hierarchy of our Church be about 6
Millions, the twentieth part whereof, viz. at twenty years Purchase is 300,000
l. per Annum, and the 12 th part of the same, viz. at 12 years purchase is
500,000 l. per Annum, so that what at the time of the Reformation was worth but
66000 l. per Annum, was in the Year 1660 worth between 300, and 500000 l. as
aforesaid.

In the next place I shall prove the Remainder of my Position that the Revenue
of the whole Nation is about Quintupled also; for that the Revenue of the
demolished Monasteries was, as my Lord Herbert in his Harry the 8 th, makes it
1 hundred 61 thousand pound per Annum, and the Revenue of the whole Church
about Triple to that Sum, viz. About 450000 l. per Annum, and the Revenue of
the whole Nation between triple and quadruple to the Revenue of the Church,
viz. one Million 6 Hundred Thousand Pound per Annum: but careful Calculators in
these times have computed the same to be about 8 Millions per Annum, which is
quintuple to the said 1 Million 6 Hundred Thousand Pound above mentioned.

And as to the proportion of the Trade and Traffic of England encreaseing
since the Reformation, little more need be added to what I have before
discoursed then that the Customs, which when Queen Elizabeth came to the
Crown, made but 36000 l. per Annum, were since 1660, farmed at 4 hundred
thousand Pound per Annum, and have since that time made about double that Sum.
And because She foresaw that that Branch of the Revenue would both support the
Crown and the Walls of the Kingdom, I mean its Ships and Seamen, she wisely
provided for the increase of the Customs and Navigation in her own and future
times by the Planting of Virginia, and was the Foundress of our Trade in the
American Plantations, that is at this day so beneficial to the King and
Kingdom, and where no Forraigners can Trade without his Majesty's leave (and
therefore the Freight both outward and homewards is restrained to our own
Shipping) and where the Scene of intercourse is agreeable to the Genius of so
many of our Protestant Traders of England, and not troubling them with the
sight of the Religion, or with the Study of the Language of Popish Countries.
And as in any great important undertakings, the first projectors or undertakers
do usually but lay the Foundation of Gain for the next comers, thus too did
providence order it to be in the Case of the Spanish Acquests of America, which
were so fatal to the diminution of the strength of Spain, and fortunate to the
increase of that of England.

And it was by the means of the advancement of the Protestant Religion that she
was so prosperous in her mighty Attempts of advancing Trade and Navigation.
It Is notorious how by making her Realm and Asylum to Foreign oppressed
Protestants, She enriched it with the Manufactures they introduced, in her
great Towns and Cities, and where the value of House-Rent being by that means
raised, the Manufacturers were enforced to work harder, and the increasing of
their corporal hard labor did tend to the increase of their Generations and
Populacy as it did among the Israelites in Egypt, and it had a greater tending
to that effect, in regard that our People in their Towns were their own
Taskmasters, and could console themselves with the thoughts not of going but
being gone out of Egypt, and they were rendered the more industrious by the
knowing that they were secure from having the fruit of their labors swept away
from themselves and their Children by Arbitrary Confessors and Priests, a thing
that was practiced by those who formerly made England in effect but a Province
to Rome, and when more Money was exported hence by Appeals and Applications to
the Court of Rome then is here imported from Ireland, and when as in Turkey men
are dicouraged from enriching themselves through industry and improvement by the
Grand Signiors being the general Heir, our Forefathers too were by the Popes
being so much here in the same capacity. In fine, the value of the Benefices of
the Divines in those great Towns, being partly increased by the growing Numbers
of the People and their riches, and partly by their liberal contributions did
invite thither such men of Learning to the Pastorage of Souls, as did by their
fame invite more inhabitants, and did keep up those Towns by the Cement of
Religion in such a state, that they were Seminaries of Knowledge to the
Adjacent Countries, and even Magazines of War for the Princes occasions, as
well as Storehouses of Manufacture to be exported: and for this purpose
Archbishop Grindal in his Letter to Queen Elizabeth, Anno Domini 1580, Printed
in Fullers Church History speaking of able Ministers, being placed in all
Parishes, and of the benefit thereof redounding to Princes by their Subjects
obedience to them, says, No Prince ever had m^re lively experience hereof,
then your Majesty has had in your time, and may have daily: and if your
Majesty comes to the City of London never so often, what gratulation, what joy,
what concourse of people is there to be seen: yea, what Acclamations and
Prayers to God for your long Life and other manifest significations are there
to be heard of inward and unfeigned love with most humble and hearty obedience?
whereof comes this, Madam, but of the continual Preaching of Gods word in that
City, whereby the people has been plentifully instructed in their Duty toward
God and your Majesty? On the contrary, what bred the Rebellion in the North?
was it not Papistry and Ignorance of Gods word through want of often Preaching
in the time of the Rebellion? Were not all Men of all States that make
profession of the Gospel most ready to offer their lives for your defense,
insomuch that one Parish of Yorkshire which by continual Preaching has been
better instructed then the rest, Halifax I mean, was ready to bring 3 or 4000
able Men into the Field to serve you against the said Rebels, etc.

As I before observed, That the Reformation brought us at the first step, out
of a blind Chaos into a Paradise of knowledge, so I may add that at the next it
conducted us to that blessing of Paradise, Be fruitful and multiply, and
replenish the Earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the Fish of the Sea.
No sooner had the Reformation under that Great Queen cleared the heads of her
Subjects, but it enlarged their hearts, and substituted in Men a new brave and
generous spirit, in lieu of that dull and formal and lethargic one that
possessed them under the Captivity of their blind Guides, and they accounted
their All and even the Worlds, too little for their Prince, and they made her
Exchequer as spacious as her Kingdom, and the English Commerce as wide as the
World. Navigation and Navigators were her Favorites, and her great States man
Walsingham by her Command animated Frobisher to attempt the discovery of a
nearer passage to Cathay and China, without going so far about as by the Cape
of good hope, and he gave not over that design till after three Voyages, and
the death of Walsingham: and the success of her Politics and of the
Reformation, have in despite of all the power of Rome and Spain terminated in
such a multiplying of the Subjects of the Realm of England, as probably renders
them more numerous then the people of the Kingdom of Spain, which Heylin in his
Geography makes to have only Eight Millions of Souls.

But there scarce needs any other Medium whereby to evince that the Progress of
the Reformation has vastly increased the value of our Land and proportion of
our Commerce, then that it has so vastly increased the number of our People, a
Fact that I have already proved, and have shown what Depopulaors or dispeoplers
of the Kingdom the Monks were, and have made some Calculations of the numbers
of the Religious Persons living in Celibate, and the effects thereof in
restraining formerly the growth of the Numbers of the People: but do find that
I was extremely short in assigning the number of those whom Popery made to live
in Celibate to be but 120000. I was glad to gain a rise for somewhat like an
Estimate of the numbers of all the Religious persons in Monasteries by finding
it in Weavers Monuments that the Religious Persons put out of the Religious
Houses, under the yearly value of 200 l. were above 10000: and that therein
Weaver agrees with Sanders de Schismate, etc. but I made no Estimate of the
numbers of Friars Mendicant the which were very great, and I was too short on
the accounting that there were perhaps no more Secular Priests then Benefices
in England: for tho the Rule of the Canon Law allows not Orders to be given to
Men without a Title, yet it admits an exception in the Case of Men who can live
on their own patrimony, and it still took the Title to be a Curate as current
Coin for one to a living: and moreover the livelihoods that many unbeneficed
Secular Priests acquired by saying particular Masses, did pass for Titles, and
thus in France it being conceived that the Secular Priests unbeneficed are
about 6 times as many as the beneficiaries, we may thence guess what the
proportions of their numbers were in England.

But yet further to discourse of the growth of the numbers of the people of
England before and since the Reformation, I shall acquaint your Lordship that
you may easily find among the Records of the Exchequer, what the number of the
people of England was in the Year 1522, when Harry the 8 th (as I cited it out
of my Lord Herberts History p. 121,) Caused Warrants to be Issued out,
Commanding the Certificates of the number of all above 16 years old to be
returned, and by an Index or Repertory of the Matters of State in the Exchequer
that I have, I can readily direct the finding it out there: and moreover by the
accounts of the Pole Acts in former times, a considerable indication of the
numbers of the people in those days may be had.

And if we may guess at the increase of the people of England from that of
London, I can easily satisfy any person about the prodigious growth of that
City in numbers of people, and consequently in wealth since the abandoning of
the Papacy.

I have by me an account of the proportions of the Shires of England and City
of London, in a Tax of 50000 l. long since in Edward the 3 ds time, and in
which Surry bore the same proportion with London, and in which London and Surry
and Middlesex paid but about 1500 l. which was but about a 16 th part.

And in Harry the 8 ths times, it happened that Cardinal Pool excited diverse
Princes of Christendom to invade England, and a fit man he was who had been
then a Traitor to come here and absolve Heretics: but Holling shead in his
Chronicle of Harry the 8 th, p. 947 tells us, That the King having heard of the
Treasonable practices of the Cardinal, did Anno 1539, make a Survey of his
Naval Strength, and did ride to the Seacoasts: and that Sir William Foreman
Knight, then Major of London, was commanded to certify the names of all the
Men within the City and liberties thereof, between the age of 16 and 60,
whereupon the said Mayor and his Brethren each one in his Ward, by the Oath of
the Common Council and Constable, took the number of Men, Arms, and Weapons:
and after well considering of the matter by view of their Books, they thought
it not expedient to admit the whole number certified for apt and able men; and
therefore assembling themselves again, they chose forth the most able persons
and put by the residue, especially such as had no Armor. But when they were
credibly advertised by Thomas Cromwell Lord Privy Seal (to whom the City was
greatly beholden) that the King himself would see the People of the City Muster
in a convenient number, and not to set forth all their power, but to leave some
at home to keep the City, etc. then he says, the number beside the Whifflers
and other Waiters was 15000.

But the Observator on the Bills of Mortality, has in his last Observations on
that Subject told us, That there are in London about 6 hundred and 70000 Souls:
and tho I know that some Parishes are included within the Bills of Mortality
for the said City that formerly were not, yet the said Observator having told
us that there are in London more Males then Females, and it being true that
there are as many above the Age of sixteen as are under it, and that the
Sexagenarii are but a 6 th part of Mankind, and the Quota of the numbers
resulting from the Parishes added, being likewise shown us by that Observator,
let any one judge how vast the number of able Men certifiable between 16 and
60, is grown to be since that year of Harry the 8 th before mentioned.

It must be acknowledged that the thanks of the Age are due to the Observator
on the Bills of Mortality, for those solid and rational Calculations he has
brought to light, relating to the numbers of our people: but such is the
modesty of that excellent Author, that I have often heard him wish that a thing
of so great public importance to be certainly known, might be so by an actual
numbering of them, and the truth is, it is much to be pitied that by the care
of Magistrates, an exact number of the people as well of London, as of all
other places in the Realm, has not with diligence been made and preserved, the
knowledge whereof is the Substratum of all political measures that can be taken
as to a Nations strength or riches, and the part thereof that is spareable for
Colonies, and the value of the branches of the public Revenue, and the
equality in proportioning any Taxes or Levies by Act of Parliament, and the
satisfying the World about the value of our Alliances, a thing one would think
somewhat necessary when it is published in Print that a Foreign Minister, who
has spent much time here and is deservedly famous for being a Critical Judge
in the Politics, and in many sorts of Learning, makes the people of England to
be but two Millions, and when a late famous French Author of la Politic
Francoise, who sets up with his Goose-quill to be a Governor of the World,
reproacheth us after his manner with the fewness of our people, and says, How
insolent soever the English are, they must confess that all the British
Islands laid together, do not equal the half of our Continent, either in
extent, etc. or number of Men, in Wealth, in Valor, Industry and Understanding.

Mr. James Howel in his Londinopolis Printed Anno 1657 says, That in the Year
1636, King Charles sending to the Lord Major of London to make a Scrutiny of
what Roman Catholics there were in London, he took occasion thereby to make a
Cense of all the people, and that there were of Men, Women, and Children, above
7 hundred thousand that lived within the Bars of his Jurisdiction alone: and
this being 21 years ago, it is thought by all probable computation that London
has more now by a third part then it had then.

In his Parallel of London there with other great Cities in the World, he
observes that the weekly Bills of Mortality in Amsterdam, come but to about 60
a week, whence says he, It may be inferred that London is about 5 times as
populous, more dying in a week commonly in London then 300.

And as to the quantity of the people in London, there is no doubt to be made
but that if in the year 1636, there lived 700,000 within the Bars of the Lord
Majors Jurisdiction, there lived then so many more in the other Parishes within
the Bills of Mortality, and that there live in this year within the Bills of
Mortality, more then double the number that did in the year 1636; and at that
Rate their number would now amount to near two Millions.

But I am to suspect that there was no such return of any Cense of the people
within the Bars of the Lords Majors Jurisdiction in the year 1636 as is before
mentioned, and do suppose that Mr. Howel did in that point mistake, partly for
that I think him mistaken in his Allegation before as to the people of Paris
being returned as above a Million of Souls at the last C^nse made there, and do
as to their number give more credit to the Bishop of Rhodes, who in his History
of Harry the 4 th, written since the year 1660, says in part 2d, That there
were in Paris when 'twas blocked up only 200000 persons, and that there were
then retired thence 100000 of the Inhabitants, so that in those times there
were no more then 300,000 Souls in Paris, whereas it is now believed there are
twice as many, and partly because I find it mentioned by the curious Observator
on the Bills of Mortality, p. 113, and 114. That Anno 1631, Ann. 7. Caroli 1.
The number of Men, Women and Children in the several Wards of London, and
Liberties, taken in August, 1631. by special Command of the Lords of his
Majesty's Privy Council, came in all but to 130178, and finally because the
said curious Observator (for that name I give that Author after my Lord Chief
Justice Hales has given or adjudged it to him in his Origination of Mankind)
having by rational Calculations proved, that their dies within the Bills of
Mortality a thirtieth part or one in thirty yearly, and that there dies
ordinarily there 22000 per Annum, that if there were there according to Howel a
Million and an half of people, it would follow that there must dye but 1 out of
70 per Annum, and that they must live one with another 70 years.

There is an ingenious Author and that is the Author of the present State of
England, who tells us in his 2 d part, That in 1588; there went forth from the
Queen Commissions to Muster in all parts of England, all Men that were of
perfect Sense and Limbs from the Age of 16 to 60, except Noblemen, Clergymen,
University, Students, Lawyers, Officers, and such as had any public charges,
leaving only in every Parish so many Husbandmen as were sufficient to Till the
Ground. In all those Musters there were then numbered three Millions: but of
those fit for War about 600,000.

I would scarce desire better Evidence for an Opinion that the people of
England were in all 12 Millions, then that 3 Millions of Males between 16 and
60 were then returned; for the said Observator having by Calculation assured
us, that there are about as many Females as Males, and about as many people
under the Age of 16 as are above it, the said opinion would stand firm and
unshaken.

There is too another Author who much enlarges the number of the people of
England, and that is Gerard Matynes in his Lex Mercatoria first Printed in the
year 1622, and there in Cap. 46. he makes them to be 16 Millions and 800,000:
but any one will hardly take his word for it, who considers that he there makes
the people of Scotland to be 9 Millions, who are but about one Million and
reckons 5500 Parishes in Ireland, where there were never more then 2 thousand 2
hundred Parishes.

But it is the fate of Nations to have their numbers sometimes inconsiderately
Assigned by considerable Authors, and thus it happened particularly to France
from an error of Campanella who in his discourse of the Spanish Mochy, C. 24.
says that France has in it 27000 Parishes, and 100 and 50 Millions of Souls.

At this rate there would be in the Parishes in France one with another 5555
Souls, whereas Sir W. P. in a Manuscript discourse of his, says, That a
substantial Author in his Treatise concerning France, sets it down as an
extraordinary Case if a Parish in France has in it 600 Souls.

We have too an Author of great Vogue for the Politics, Sir Robert Cotton who
in his Abstract of the Records of the Tower, touching the Kings Revenue has
these words, viz. That London ( which is not the 24th part in people of the
Kingdom) had in it found above 800,000, by a late enquiry by the Order of the
late Queen, meaning Queen Elizabeth.

But so far have we been from enabling our Political Writers to satisfy
themselves in the Numbers of our People, that we have not done it yet as to the
very Numbers of Parishes, wherein Blunt tells us in his Law Lexicon that our
Authors differ; and we generally reckon them as they were before many new ones
have been built.

One late writer has accounted the Parishes in England and Wales to be 10260:
and Mr. Adams says in his Villare Anglicum p. 408. That he is of opinion that
there are about 1500 Parishes in England and Wales not valued in the Kings
Books, and of which he can get no account so as to make the same perfect, and
'twill be difficult for him to do it, unless the several persons concerned in
the particulars give an account of it.

Cambden in his Britannia Printed Anno 1607, when he reckons the Parish
Churches in the Bishopric of Durham and in Northumberland to be 118, adds
praeter sacella plurima: and says in Yorkshire, Parishes besides Chapels, and
Parishes to which many Chapels are subject that are equal to great Parishes,
etc.

Moreover the Grants from the Crown of Extraparochial Titles in several
Counties, may serve for an indication of great numbers of people that are not
Inhabitant in Parishes, and so likewise may the Multitudes of those people who
live in Forests, and which places are generally accounted by the Law to be
Extraparochial.

The Number of Parsonages and Vicarages in Edward the 1 sts valuation, whereof
there is a Manuscript Copy in the Bodleian Library was about 8900, and into
that number the Chapels are not accounted; but of the Chapels many since have
grown up into Parsonages: and this would likewise induce one to think the
number of our Parishes at this time to be greater then the common Estimate,
especially when according to the Kings Books which respect the valuation in
Harry the 8 ths, time, the number of them is considerably above 9000.

But what may seem more strange is that some men of Thought and Learning have
attempted even by Calculation, to prove that the people of England have for a
very long space of time decreased in their numbers, and particularly the Author
of a Book in Quarto called, An account of the French Usurpation on the Trade of
England, and the great damage the English yearly sustain by their Commerce,
Printed in the Year 1679, and Writ with excellence of Calculation in some parts
thereof: and yet that Author does p. 16 say, And I can easily believe that 1000
years since, this Nation had a much greater stock of people then now it has,
for the Rome-Scot, or Peter Pence which was but one Penny a Chimney (granted by
Offa and Ina Saxon Kings to the Pope) did amount to 50000 yearly: and the
Hearth-money, which is two Shillings the Hearth (and one Stack of Chimneys may
have many Hearths) does not amount to 300,000l. yearly; whereas if the number
of Chimneys charged with the Romescot had been two Shillings a Chimney, it
would have amounted to 1,200,000 l. yearly. So that we may conclude there were
then more Buildings and Chimneys, and so by consequence more people.

But had that Author considered that the Romescot or denarius sancti Petri was
only an annual Penny from every Family or Household, and that it amounted to 300
Marks and a Noble yearly, as Blunt says, by that reckoning it would have
appeared that there were not then in all England 50000 Families liable to that
Duty, whereas there are now above a Million of such Families: so that now the
people and Families of England are twenty times as many as they were then,
which agrees pretty well with my Lord Chief Justice Hales's reckoning.

That great person in his Primitive Origination of Mankind, yields that the
people of England are at least 6 Millions, and does too in Page 205, say, That
he does not know any thing rendered clearer to the view, then the gradual
increase of Mankind by the curious and strict Observations on the Bills of
Mortality: and does very elaborately make a comparison between the numbers of
the people in Glocestershire, and particularly some great Towns and Buroughs
there, as Thornbury and Tedbury as they were at the time of the making up of
Domesday Book and as they now are, and shows, That there are very many more
Vills and Hamlets now then there were then, and few Villages or Towns or
Parishes then which continue not to this day, and that the number of
Inhabitants now is above 20 times more through the general extent of the
Country then at that time: and afterward says, if we should institute a later
Comparison, viz. between the present time and the beginning of Queen Elizabeth,
which is not above 112 years since, and compare the number of Trained Soldiers
then and now, the number of Subsidy men then and now, they will easily give us
an account of a very great increase and multiplication of people within this
Kingdom even to admiration.

It would be no difficult thing to fortify the observation of the great
gradual increase of the people, and particularly of those in the Parishes of
Glocestershire, by the showing the increase of their worth and riches in the
several public Valuations, and their present real value, from whence their
growth in the numbers of their Inhabitants may be well inferred; as for example
in Edward the 1 sts Valuation, Tedbury is valued, Ecclesia de Tedbury 36. m. i.
e. Marks, and in Harry the 8ths Valuation, is valued at 36l. 13 s 2d, and is
now worth about 100 l. per Annum. Thornbury in Edward the 1 sts valuation is
valued at 47 Marks and a half, and in Harry the 8 ths to 32 l. 14s. 8d. and is
now worth about 120 l. per Annum. Berkley in Edward the 1 sts Valuation comes
to 36 Marks and a half, and in Harry the 8 ths to 32 l. 14s. 8d. and is now
worth about 100 l. per Annum.

I have instanced in these places, as referred to by Hales, and shall here as
to Gloucester only further observe, that there are more places in the Decanatus
Glocestriae in Harry the 8 ths valuation, then were in Edward the 1 sts: as for
instance, Edward the 1 sts Valuation does in the rural Deanery of Gloucester
comprize 6 Churches and a Chapel, but Harry the 8 th does in the Deanery
contain above 20 Churches and a Chapel.

I shall here corroborate his Lordships remark of the increase of Families in
another Town in Glocestershire, which he calls Dursilege, and which is in
Edward the 1 sts Valuation called Dursly, and valued as a rectory there at 10
Marks per Annum, and in Harry the 8 ths as a Rectory at 10 l. 14s. 3d. and is
now let for 72 l. yearly.

I have observed a suitable difference between the former valuations of other
Livings in that County and their present real values.

His Lordship having before justly acknowledged that it was a laborious piece
of work to make a Calculation of the number of Inhabitants at this day
throughout England; did however in a way very worthy of his great judgment
adapt his Estimate to the extent of one entire County; for had he gone less,
and restrained it to this or that Parish, the gradual increase of the People
there, might have fallen short by particular accidents; and to this purpose we
have it in Mr. Bentham's Christian Conflict, p. 322. that 11 Manors in
Northamptonshire have been enclosed with depopulation, and have vomited out
their former desolate owners and their posterity.

Many ingenious persons have applied their thoughts to several ways of
Calculation whereby to discover the total of the number of the People in
England, and in the Investigation thereof some concerned in the management of
the Hearth-money have reckoned that in England and Wales the number of Hearths
of rich and poor is 2 Millions and 6 hundred thousand, and that at a Medium
there are between 4 and 5 persons to a Hearth, and accounting but 4 persons to
a Hearth, they suppose that at that rate the people of England and Wales will
appear to be 10 Millions.

The slowness of believing great things which is incident to Humane Nature, and
my inclination to desire that any thing may be proved to me by ocular
Demonstration, where the Subject Matter will bear it, do make me as to any of
the greater forementioned Quotas of the People of England contended for by
Calculators, to reserve my Judgment till some such accurate Survey has been
made thereof, as I have heard Sir W. P. that Mathematical Stat^s-man wish for.

But this I will venture to affirm, that by what may be observed out of the
Returns on the late Pole-Bills, and the Bishops Survey, it is very highly
probable that the Total of the number of the people here will upon any actual
view hereafter to be made by public Authority, appear very considerably
greater then any cautious Calculators have made it.

Another account of the same great Quaesitum was sent me into the Country from
a Gentleman of London, who acquainted me that he received the same from a very
knowing and ingenious person whom the late Lord Treasurer, as great a Master of
the Science of Numbers as perhaps ever any that Acted in that high Sphere of
State, employed to effect an Impartial Return of the number of the people in
London and in Middlesex, and every other County both in England and Wales, and
the Total resulting from them was as I cast up the same 8,272,062. But I judge
that this account was not taken upon ocular View of the several Counties, but
by way of Estimate not absolutely perfect, and by Calculation or comparing
several former accounts together.

There is no doubt but the most satisfactory way that we can at present take
for our Estimates, and whereby we may Trace the Numbers of the people from
somewhat that looks like matter of Record is, as I hinted, from the Returns on
the Pole Bill and the Bishops Survey.

And as to the Poll-money of Anno 1666, 2 hundred thirty seven thousand Pound
was the gross Charge: and if on the consideration of Counties whereof the
Charge was not returned, as Buckinghamshire, Durham, Northumberland, Kent,
Oxon, North Wales, Brenoc, Radnor, Glamorgan, Pembroke, (of which the
proportions in numbers with the Counties returned are not hard to be
Calculated) and of the omissions perhaps through partiality whereby great
numbers of persons chargeable were not returned, and withal on a supposal that
there had been in the Act no qualifications and exceptions of many persons from
being Charged, and particularly of persons under the Age of Sixteen, and of
Paupers, etc. we may further venture to make the Total chargeable to be 600,000
l. and every one paying for his Head, there would then apppear 20 times as many
people, i. e. 12 Millions.

I know that out of such a Sum as 600,000 l. supposed chargeable, it will be
obvious to consideration that what was paid by the Nobility and by Titlers and
Officers must be subtracted: but when it shall be likewise considered that in
that Poll-money that of the Peers paid into the Receipt, came to but 5693 l.
6s. 8d. and that perhaps as much went beside the Nett of the Receipt under the
notion of imaginary Paupers, and by persons not returned; as came into it from
the Officers and Titlers, and that the persons excepted under the Age of 16
were about a Moiety of the people, the supposition of 600,000 l. chargeable by
way of Capitation will not seem so strange as at the first view.

The great difficulty of having the Total of the people chargeable by any
Poll-Bill exactly and impartially returned, appears in the Case of a PollTax in
Holland.

The Author of the Interest of Holland mentions that Anno 1622, The Tax of
Poll-money was laid on all the Inhabitants of Holland, and none excepted but
Prisoners and Vagrants, and those that were on the other side the Line, and all
strangers, and that then there were found in South Holland no more then 481934
Souls, though yet the Commissioners instructions were strict for the making
true returns, and the particular returns are thus Registered in the Chamber of
Accounts, viz.

Dort with the Villages, 40523. Harlem with the Villages, 69648. Delft with the
Villages, 41744. Leyden and Rynland, 94285. Amsterdam and the Villages, 115022.
Goud with the Villages, 24662. Rotterdam with the Villages, 28339. Gornichem
with the Villages, 7585. Schiedam with the Villages, 10393. Schoonhoven with
the Villages, 10703. Briel with the Villages, 20156. The Hague, 17430. Heusden,
1444.
In all 481934.

And supposing that West Friesland may yield the 4 th part of the Inhabitants
of South Holland, it would amount to 120483.

In all 602417.

The Author there delivers his opinion, That many evaded the being returned on
that Poll, and that the number returned was very short and defective, but
adheres to the account of them being now as is before mentioned, viz. 2
Millions 4 hundred thousand.

And this as it does in some measure fortify my foregoing notion of the
prodigious growth of the people of Holland under the Reformation, so it does
likewise afford an instance of the partiality used in the returns of the
numbers chargeable in Poll-Money.

But that which does chiefly induce me to believe the Total of our numbers may
very much exceed the sentiments of Cautious Calculators in this point, is the
Result of the Bishops Survey, which was made for the Province of Canterbury,
and wherein none under the age of Communicants or 16 were returned, and but
very few Servants, or Sons, and Daughters, or Lodgers, or Inmates of the people
of several persuasions of Religion: and the thing endeavored was that the
heads of Families or Housekeepers, i. e. Man and Wife might be truly returned;
and at that rate, the Total at the foot of the account for the Province of
Canterbury is 2,228,386, the which according to the forementioned current Rule
of Calculation to be necessarily about doubled on the account of the people
under 16, makes the Total of the Souls in that Province to be 4 Millions, 4
Hundred 56 thousand, 7 hundred seventy two; and the Province of York bearing a
sixth part of the Taxes, and having therefore the 6th. part of the people that
the Province of Canterbury has, which is 742,795, that being added to those of
Canterbury, makes 5 Millions, a hundred ninety nine thousand, five hundred
sixty seven: and since it is apparent that not more persons were returned in
that Survey then did really exist in Nature, and live within the Province as
returned, it will hereafter seem a very unnecessary thing and indeed absurd to
question whether the people of England were not then at least 5,199,567.

But since it appears by the inspection of that Survey, that there was so vast
a quantity of places that made no returns at all, some of which presently
occurred to my view in the Cursory reading and taking some few Notes thereof,
and without my designing to make any Collection of all the places that made no
returns, as for example, in the Arch-Deaconry of Colchester, 11 Parishes made
no returns, and in the Decanatus Tendering twelve Parishes, in the Decanatus
Colcestre seven Parishes, in the Decanatus Lexden ten Parishes, in Decanatus
Witham eleven Parishes, in the Arch-Deaconry of Middlesex and Decanatus
Braugling and Harlow fourteen Parishes, in the Decanatus Dunmo^ 7 Parishes, in
the Decanatus Henningam 9 Parishes, in the Decanatus of Middlesex 16 Parishes
(some of which were St. Clements Danes, St. Mary le Bow, Vxbridge) and in the
ArchDeacony of London St. Bartholomew Exchange, are therein expressed to have
made no returns; it may hence seem rational for any Man to suppose in general
that the number of the People of England revera is very great beyond the said
total of 5,199,567. and that it would have risen to a much greater number if
exact returns had been made of all the heads of Families in England and Wales;
and much more if all Persons in all Families above the Age of 16 had been
returned.

But yet according to the Returns that were de facto made in that Survey, I
observed that in some, where the totals for Counties were cast up, that they
doubled the totals of the People returned for the same Counties, upon the Poll
Act of 66. as for example, the Poll for Devonshire and Cornwel was fourteen
thousand three hundred Pound; and the number returned for those Counties by the
Bishops Survey was two hundred and thirteen thousand, doubling which number for
those under the Age of Communicants there, makes 426000 Souls there; so then
the 14000 l. at 12 d. the Head makes there 280000 Shillings, or Persons at 12
d. a Head, to which as I showed the number in the Bishops Survey is double.

And further to show the Omissions of great Numbers of People, returnable in
that Survey, I shall acquaint your Lordship that in the year 1676. in the which
the Bishops Survey was made, there died within the Bills of Mortality 18730.
and according to the rule of 1 in 30. there yearly dying, there will be
supposed to have then lived there 533,170. and the total of the People returned
of all Persuasions of Religion above the Age of 16 in the whole Diocese of
London in the year 76. was 286,347. and the doubling of that number for those
under the Age of 16 in that Diocese, makes the total of the People there then
to be 572,694. But here it is to be Considered that tho the Peculiars of the
Archbishopric of Canterbury in London were de facto returned then within the
Survey of the Diocese of London, yet the great and populous Parishes in
Southwark and others in Surry within the District of the Bills of Mortality,
were not returned with any respect to the Diocese of London, but were in that
Survey by the Bishop of Winton returned as belonging to his Lordships Diocese;
and that in a late year of ordinary health, viz. in Anno 1677. there dyed in
the Parishes in Surry, that are within the Bills of Mortallity 2803. and
therefore according to the Rule of the 30 th. part then dying there, it is to
be judged that there then lived there, 81287. and therefore we being to
Substract that last mentioned Number out of the 533,170, then the number of all
the Souls in the other Places in the Bills of Mortallity will be 451,983. and
so at that rate the number of all the Souls within the whole Diocese of London,
will be but 120,711 more then those that were in the other Places within the
Bills of Mortallity, the which Diocese takes in all the other Places in
Middlesex that are without the Bills of Mortallity, and all Essex, and part of
Hartfordshire. And to conclude this point, the omissions of Great Parts of the
Numbers of the People, and particulary of Sons, Daughters, Servants, being
supposed to be in other places proportionable; I am hence induced to believe
that on the occasion of any actual and exact Survey of the People of England to
be made, their number will rise to a greater height then what it has been
advanced to by the most judicious Calculators.

And now if after all this, one should tell me that any vast increase of the
numbers of the People of England beyond the quota supposed by Cautious
Calculators, is incredible, and to be added to the number of things incredible;
I will answer him out of Salust, Incredibile est memoratu, quantum adepta
liberate, in brevi Romana Civitas creverit; and will tell him, that it is
almost incredible to relate how much we have gained by our abandoning Popery
and its Incredibility, and the almost incredibile as well as intolerable
Servitude, that the Papacy so often oppressed both our Kings and People with.

We are told by the Observator on the Bills of Mortallity, that anxiety of mind
hinders Breeding, and from sharp anxieties of diverse kinds has the Protestant
Religion rescued English minds, and from their former daily yariness for their
daily Bread, and their fears of being Arbitrarily dispossessed of it. What
Princes (as I may say) are the English Infantry, and even the Boors of Holland
to the Pesants of France, who with Chains on do propagate their Species, and
Servitude it self? And what pity was it that Commerce which with its infant
Smiles cheered our Isle in the Reign of Edward the 6 th. was almost frighted
away from it by the Frowns and Arbitrary Practices of Queen Mary; and that
after that Edward the 6 th. consulting the Advancement of our Trade had legally
Suppressed the Corporation of Merchant-Strangers, and nulled their Monopoly;
Queen Mary endeavored the Suppression of our Native Merchants, and that too by
Illegal Impositions. It is not denyable that in the fourth year of her Reign
she did lay an Impost upon our Cloth: and one who had been a Judge of the
Realm, and who had no spite to her Story mentioning it in his Book called, The
Rights of the People Concerning Impositions, says there, This Religious Prince
Environed with infinite Troubles in the Church and Commonwealth, and
Impoverished by her Devotion in Renouncing the Profits of the Church Lands that
were in the Crown, was the first that made Digression from the steps of her
worthy Progenitors, in putting on that imposition without assent of Parliament:
And the same Author in page 91. mentions another unjust Imposition of hers on
Gascoyn Wines.

And her expulsion of the Dutch Church and their Pastors from London, and her
Canselling of the Legal Privileges that Edward the 6 th. (for himself, his
Heirs and Successors gave them, and other Strangers by his Letters Patents, was
an Arbitrary blow given to the Trade of the Kingdom in general, and of that
City in particulars; The Copy of her Proclamation for the Expelling them is
Printed in Fox, in which they are styled, a Multitude of evil disposed Persons
being Born out of her Highnesses Dominions in other sundry Nations, flying from
the Obeisance of the Princes and Rulers, under whom they be Born, some for
Heresy, some for Murder, Treason, Robbery; and are there further represented
as such, whose secret practices have not failed to stir her Highnesses Subjects
to a Rebellion against God and her Grace, etc. But secret Traitors they were
found by the Realm, and secret they were left by it. Two of them were John a
Lasco, Uncle to the King of Poland, and Peter Martyr, that were thus sent out
of the Realm with Sanbenitos on: and so far were our Popish Ancestors from
Hospitality to Strangers, and thereby unawares entertaining Angels, that they
made Devils of them, and as such used them: and to make amends to the multitude
of Foreign Artists for the Gold they brought here, they had the Dirt of Shams
thrown at them by a Proclamation.

And as if not only the Biting, but the very Barking of Mad Dogs had power to
make others Mad, she grew so enraged by the Books of Heresy and Sedition,
Printed in Foreign Parts and here Imported, that she Published a Proclamation
Printed likewise in Fox, wherein she Declared to all her Subjects that, Whoever
shall after the Proclaiming hereof be found to have any of the said Wicked and
Seditious Books, or finding them do not forthwith Burn the same without showing
or reading the same, shall in that Case be Reputed and taken for a Rebel, and
shall without delay be Executed for the Offense according to the order of
Martial Law.

But nothing can palliate the Arbitrariness of Queen Mary's Proclamation, for
the Exercising of Martial Law, but that she thought her Reign a time of War,
and perhaps not altogether Improperly; for that Heretics have the Title of
Hosts given them by Popish Masters of Ceremonies.

There was another reason that induced Queen Mary to use the Arbitrary Power,
that her Popish Predecessors did not, and that is this: The People of England
in the days of Popery were like to the three Fools in Lipsius, that being tied
together by a twine Thread, went Whining about the House, and consenting that
they who would unty the Knots of it, should have what Money from them they
pleased: And thus were our Foolish Ancestors innodated with Papal Censures, and
the Priests did but Arbitrarily ask and have their rewards to Absolve them. But
that Queen finding that the Reformation begun had proved Physic to Cure those
Idiots of their dull Stupidity, she therefore supposed that the Fools who
before were held by the twine Thread, must then be bound to the good Behavior
with Chains.

In fine, by these three Important Acts of Arbitrary Power (the which presently
occurred to my remembrance out of her Story, and without my troubling my self
to rake for more) she gave the alarm to her Subjects newly after their Eyes had
been opened, and their Hands untied by the Reign of K. Edward, that they were
to expect no free Trading where there was no free Living, and to hear nothing
but the dying Groans of Liberty and Religion. So very exact indeed is the Frame
of our English Government, and of the Sovereigns Power and Peoples Liberty
therein, that as in an Arched Building, if one Stone be removed from it, the
whole is immediately endangered, and nothing could probably have saved it from
ruin, but the Restoration of our Law as well as Gospel, by such a Reign as
Queen Elizabeth's, who was so far from the exercise of Arbitrary Power on her
good Subjects and Friends, that she did it not on the worst, nor on her Enemies.

One would have thought that after the many attempts against her Life, and
after the forementioned threatening Letter of Campians, which notifies that the
Jesuits had entered into a Covenant or Association to Kill Heretical Princes,
etc. that she might have been provoked to have declared that Order by a
Proclamation to be Hosts, a thing that she or any Protestant Crowned Heads
might do without Violating the Laws of Nations in reference to those Foreign
Princes that were their Allies, and to whom any of that Order were Subjects: a
thing not only Consonant to the jus gentium, but to our Lex terrae as it was
resolved in Cambden's Elizabeth; by the Lord Chief Justice Catelin, who being
asked, Whither the Subjects of another Prince, Confederate with the Queen,
might be held for the Queens Enemies? Answered, That they might, and that the
Queen of England might make War with any Duke of France, and yet in the mean
time hold Peace with the French King; and a thing that if done, would have
tended more to their Extermination out of this or any Country perhaps, then all
other Laws against them, in regard that it would have more effectually bereaved
them of the benefit of Correspondence, Aids and Assistance from thence; all
Subjects being every where by the Law rendered Traitors, who Correspond with, or
give Aid and Assistance to declared Enemies.

Nor would the term of Hosts bestowed on such be more then a Retaliation; and
to this purpose Mariana makes the people authorized to Proclaim a King upon
occasion, to be a Public Enemy: and so likewise Lessius even in his Book de
Iustitia and jure, says, That a Tyrant is to be declared an Enemy by the
Common-welth: and thus Parsons alias Doleman in his Book of the Succession,
Part 2. Cap. 4. terms an Evil King an Armed Enemy.

The term I mentioned before of inimicus homo is certainly proper enough for
those that sow such Tares in the World as the Jesuits do, and make not only
Lollards of ordinary Heretics, but as the Commenter on the Epitome of
Confessions, otherwise the 7 th. Book of Decretals tells us in Commendation of
all the Jesuits in these words, Tyrannos aggrediuntur, lolium ab agro Dominico
evellunt.

I shall here observe how in the year 1596. the Hollanders and others of the
States of the United Provinces did Publish an Edict, That none of the Bloody
Sect of the Jesuits, or any that gives himself to Study at this time among the
Professors of that Sect, whether he be B^rn in any of the Provinces that are
Confederate, or be a Forraigner crept secretly into the same Province, should
longer remain there then the time prescribed, under the pain of being accounted
and killed for an Enemy.

But that Magnanimous Queen did as much think it Inglorious for her to employ
her Anger in such a Proclamation on such fiery pedants, as I believe our potent
Neighboring Monarch, whose Name will look as great in all ^uture Story, for
mighty diligence, and for exact prudence in the Conduct of his Affairs of
State, as for the Success of his Arms, would to Honor with the Title of
Enemies such little great talkers, who here in the CoffeeHouses Arraign his
Political Measures.

And the truth is, as it is not worthy the Grandeur of Princes, who are Heavens
Vicegerents to squander away its thunder, in experiments on Shrubs and
Mushrooms, or on slight grounds, to call any of slight mankind, and who are of
no Name, by that dreadful one of Enemies, a name that the Impotent passion of
Subjects makes them so familiarly vex one another with, and thereby shows them
not such fit depositaries of Heavens Artillary as Sovereigns are; so is it
extremely unbecoming the Glorious height to which the Doctrine of the Cross
has exalted humane Nature, for men (as I may say) to de^cend from Heaven to
Earth for Dirt, and to Hell for Firebrarnds to throw at one another, and
petulantly to call those that were sometime Aliens and Enemies in their mind,
etc. always such after the Divine reconciliation, or even to manage the most
lawful and just War, Sine quadam been volentia, as St. Austines words are, or
to think that they can justly assume the great Name first used at Antioch, and
yet retain a Constant and Stated enmity against any Person whatsoever; For
according to the Excellent saying of Tertullian, Christianus nullius est hostis.

But the Bosom of that wise Princess was no resting place for Anger, and all
the Popes Thunder could not discompose her; and as in all Games they who in
their play retain a Constant Equabillity of mind, are generally most
Successful; so was she in the great Political Game she played, by being Semper
eadem; and the Papal Excommunications seemed to her as despicable, as the
Curses of loosing Gamesters: and I doubt not but by her Prudent and just
Administration of the Government of Church and State, she has laid the
Foundation of the English Nations being Semper eadem in the Royal Line, and of
the Protestant Religions being so too, and that no delendam fore can Issue out
against either; (humanly Speaking) and that any Popish Successor that can come
here will find it his interest to use the Politics of Queen Mary, as a Sea
Mark to avoid, and Queen Elizabeth's as a Land Mark to go by; and it being
clear accordingly as Sir W. P. in his Manuscript discourse called, Verbum
Sapienti, demonstrates it, Cap. 2. of the Value of the People, that each Head
of Mankind is as certainly valuable as Land, that the many Strangers who have
Transplanted themselves hither need never fear that they will be so undervalued
as in the Marian days.

The Families of French Protestants that have lately come here have filled 800.
of the Empty New Built Houses of London, and have given us too an occasion of
entertaining Angels in those untenanted Houses whose Ruinous appearance before
made them seem to the vulgar such as they call haunted; but from which no
Prince can ever think of exorcising the inhabitants without Conjuring away his
own Revenue, of which about one moity depends on that City, and where the
Rents, tho fallen as I say, would yet have been much lower but for the Tenancy
of these Foreigners, and the expectation of others.

There is a very great President in our English Story, and that is of a Prince
of the Popish persuasion, and yet one who was a sharp persecuter of the
Extravagances of the Power of the Pope and his Clergy, and one who by the
Introducing of Forreignors here to Manufacture our Wool saved the Life or
Being of the Nations Trade, which his Predecessors had left in a Gasping
Condition, and one who by his Patronizing of Wiclif sufficiently showed that if
those Foreigners had been Wiclifists, he would yet have been a Fautor of those
Heretics, and one who more disobliged the Pope by seizing on the Lands of the
Alien O^thodox Clerical Idlers, then he could have done by the entertainment of
many Heterodox lay Alien Manufacturers. It Is needless to say that I here mean
our great Edward the third, of whom and of Queen Elizabeth, the prudence was as
memorable, as of any Princes that ever Sat on the English Throne; And I will
never despair of any Heroic Prince here, of the Roman Catholic persuasion,
with his Scepter upholding the trade of the Kingdom, as those two great Names
did, and that too by the same methods, if ever he shall come to find it in the
tottering Conditon that they did; and it may be well supposed that the
experience the Kingdom has since gained under King James and the Royal Martyr,
and His Present Majesty, of the public benefit that has arisen from the
reception of Foreign Artists, who have been Heterodox in some ritual points
about our Religion, will make their expulsion seem a Solecisme: And every
Sagacious Person will (I believe) accord with me that the Spider has done much
more good to humane kind by furnishing it with the Invention of Weaving, then
harm by any thing of Poison.

I shall be glad to know from your Lordship, whether on your search among the
Records of State, either in the Exchequer or Paper-Office, you can find
Footsteps of any thing like those returns of the Numbers of the People in
London mentioned out of Howel and Cotton.

I am sure that the knowledge of the Numbers of our People ought by Statesmen
to be accounted their (...), and in this conjuncture, as the opus diei, and to
pass no longer for a (...), and that those of them who take their measures
either of the public Strength or Revenue without respect to this, are but
State-E^thusiasts, and such who in their reckonings do according to our Common
Phrase reckon without their Host, and do not govern their Politics by the
Arithmetic the Scripture suggests, in the question of What King goes to make
War against another King, sits not down first and Consulteth whether he be
able with ten thousand to meet him that comes against him with twenty thousand?

Bodin in his de Republica, speaking of the Numbering of the People, says,
That the benefit that redounds to the Public thereby is infinite: and that
thereby Princes and States know what Soldiers they may have, and what Numbers
they may send abroad to Collonys.

I have been informed by a Person belonging to the Custom-house, that near
10000. Persons have had their Names entered as gone out of the Ports of London
and Bristol, for our Plantations in a years time: And no doubt but the Number
was great that then went away thither from other Ports, and likewise of such
that went from London and the out-Ports, whose Names were not entered. But I was
not a little surprised of late, when I read it in a Book newly Printed, called,
The Negros and Indians Advocate, and Dedicated to the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, where the Author page 171. Speaking of the Kidnappirs trade or
mystery, says, A Trade, that it is thought Carrys off and Consumes not so little
as 10000. out of this Kingdom yearly, which might have been a Defense to their
Mother Country, etc.

It Is certainly a sign that we are very rich in the number of our People, when
we can endure such a quantity of them to be yearly stolen, without the pursuit
of a Hue and Cry.

Yet in this point Scotland is reported to be somewhat more unhappy then
England, for those who go hence for our Plantations do Contribute some way to
the Trade of the Kingdom, and many of them return hither again; But Mr. Roger
Coke in his Book called, Englands Improvements, page 21. says, Its believed
above 12000. of the Kings Scottish Subjects yearly go out of Scotland into
Poland, Sweden, Germany, France, Holland, and other places, and never after
return into Scotland: And that Author having before in the same page mentioned,
That 5 l. given with an Apprentice to be instructed in the Woollen or any
Manufacture, by which means be afterward earns 30 l. per annum, this in 20.
years becomes 600 l. etc. which is more valuable to the Nation then if 600 l.
had been given it, and the People not employed: Thereupon he afterward
Computes, That the benefit which might accrue to the Nation by employing so
many thousands of the Scottish Subjects there might in 20. years time be above
6 Millions. And according to the opinion of that Worthy Gentleman, we may
further be inclined to think the Number of the Scots removing into Foreign
parts to be very great, when we find among Sir John Denhams Poems, one with
this Inscription or Title, On my Lord Crofts, and my Journey into Poland, from
whence we brought 10000 l. for his Majesty, by the Decimation of his Scottish
Subjects there.

But moreover the satisfying the Inquisite genius of our People, concerning the
greatness of their Numbers, may be of some importance to them and the public
quiet, in satisfying them of the Vanity of the former Moddellers of a Republic
here, a form of Government tho easily supposed Practicable in large Cities, yet
not so in great and populous Nations; and likewise of the Vanity of all fears
of a Universal Monarchy, bridling the world again, a thing which though it was
of old feasible, when Mankind made not so mighty a Mass, is now far from being
so.

'Twas easy to imagine it possible, and indeed to effect it in the days when
Aristotle taught men, that no City ought to have above 10000. Citizens; and
when, however the Number of Citizens was grown at Athens to 20000. and when in
the Roman Empire the number of the Citizens was not so vast as is by many
imagined; and so accordingly the Excellent Discourser de Magnitudine Romana
Lipsius, lib. 1. cap. 7. then Speaking of the Multitudo Romanorum under
Augustus, says, Ipse de se in Lapide Ancyrano clare hoc dicit. In consulatu
suo Sexto lustrum condidisse: quo lustro Censita sunt Civium Romanorum Capita
quadragiens Centum millia and Sexaginta tria, i. e. four Millions and a hundred
thousand: And Lipsius afterward mentioning, that the Number of the Romans
increased under Claudius cites Tacitus for making it then Sexagies movies
centena Sexaginta quatuor Millia, i. e. about seven Millions.

There is no doubt but the People of the Provinces did vastly exceed that
Number; but since according to the estimate of Bodin in his de Rep. it is
probable that the Roman Empire, when at its greatest extent in Trajans time,
scarce contained the thirtieth part of the World, and that the prolifit North
styled generally by Authors officina and vagina gentium by the increase of its
populacy, so humbled the Roman Sword, that within about 154. years afterward
some of the Roman Emperors became their Allies, and Gallus submitted to pay
Tribute to the Goths, it is no wonder that the thirtieth part of the World was
since reduced to cease from domineering over all the other parts of it: And
notwithstanding Maximines boast to the Senate in the fragment of his account to
them of his German Successes, cited by Iul. Capitolinus in his Life, tantum
Captivorum abduxi ut vix Sola Romana sufficiant, his Resvery of the Immortality
of the Roman Power on the Stage of the World was liable to Confutation from the
same way of arguing, as his Conceit of his own Immortality was; which having
been observed to have tainted his fancy on the occasion of his great and robust
Body, the same Capitolinus in his Life says was corrected by a Players
reciting these Lines on the Stage in his presence: Qui ab uno non potest a
multis occiditur,
Elephans grandis est and occiditur,
Leo fortis est and occiditur,
Tigris fortis est and occiditur,
Cave multos si Singulos non times.


But what I find by Lipsius in the second Book, third Chapter there cited out
of Tertullian is much more applicable to the present State of the World, then
to that wherein it was Writ: He says there, At Tertulliani locum non insuper
habeo, qui egregie asserit Copiam hominum, cultumque orbis in suo, i. e. Severi
Saeculo. De anima Cap. 30. Certe quidem ipse orbis in promptu est, cultior de
die, and instructior pristino. Omnia jam pervia, omnia nota, omnia negotiosa.
Solitudines famosas retro fundi amaenissimi obliteraverunt: Sylvas arva
domuerunt: feras pecora fugaverunt: Arenae Seruntur, Saxa panguntur, Raludes
eliquantur. Tantae urbes quantae non casae quondam. Iam nec Insulae horrent,
nec Scopuli terrent: ubique domus, ubique populus, ubque Resp. ubique vita.
Summum testimonium frequentiae humanae, onerosi sumus Mundo. Vix nobis elementa
sufficient, and necessitates arctiores, and querelae apud omnes, dum jam nos
Natura non sustinet.

Then adds Lipsius, Nihil impressius dici potest de pleno frequentique orb.

And that strong and populous Nations Conspired to break their Chains has
nothing of wonder in it; and the truth is, the freedom the World has gained
since the decay of the Roman Empire, and even by means thereof, has hung out
such a Picture before all men's Eyes, of Populous Mankind, drawn to the bigness
of the Life, as has made the Notion of erecting another Universal Monarchy,
seem but a Portraiture of Imagination, containing nothing but bold Strokes of
Color, without regular Proportion and Design; and the Copying only a Landscape
of the Devil's Mountain, and his showing thence all the Kingdoms of the World.

How is the World ashamed now of its having been in the last foregoing Age,
amused with the thoughts of the King of Spain's being its Catholic Monarch,
and of having tormented it self with Jealousies about such a great Nothing: And
which I believe was never modeled in the fancy of that Prince, and was only
projected by Court-Sycophants, and Mercenary Writers; and that he himself never
entered any express claim to it, one would think who reads the Duke of
Buckingham's answer to the Spanish Embassador's Informations, etc. Anno 1624.
where the Duke having aggravated some State-Practices, the Spanish Minister
adds, And is not this a Proclamation to all the World, that they aspired to
such an absolute Monarchy as so many Books, Stories, Discourses, and the
general Complaints of all Princes and States have long charged them with?

But for such Writers as I last mentioned to flatter a Prince with Insinuations
of the Greatness and Extent of his Power, is not more unusual then for
Mendicant Poets to over-act their part in Panegyricks, or for the Celebrators
of any particular bright beauty in Verse, to represent her as the Empress of
all Hearts: and thus the Famous Campanella after he had made his Present of the
Universal Monarchy to Spain, sent it too a Begging into France, as appears out
of Archbishop Laud's Book against Fisher, page 210. where he says that lately
Friar Companella has set out an Eclogue on the Birth of the Dauphin, and that
permissu Superiorum, in which he says, that all the Princes are now more
afraid of France then ever, for that there is provided for it, Regnum
Universale, the Universal Kingdom or Monarchy. The words there are in the
Margin, Quum Gallia alat 20000000 hominum, ex Singulis Centenis sumendo unum
collegit 200000 strenuorum militum stipendiatorum commode perpetuoque,
propterea omnes terrae Principes metuunt nunc magis a Gallia quam unquam ab
aliis. Paratur enim illi Regnum Universal. F. Tho^ae Companellae ecloga in
Principis Galliarum Delphini Nativitatem; cum annot. discip. Parisiis 1639. Cum
permissu Superiorum.

Yet with a Non obstante to the Politics of Campanella, and his pittyful great
Flatteries, I shall venture to pronounce the Great French Monarch, who is
certainly as great a Prince in the Intellectual World, as in the other, and is
truly by the bright Sun of Reason non pluribus impar, no Designer of taking the
Dimensions of the whole Globe of the Earth with Chains; and do think the most
Christian King, out of his Royal Prudence, less inclined to favor the servile
Flatterers, who would set him up to be King of Christendom, then was formerly
the Catholic Monarch to encourage those who rendered him aspiring to be the
Universal one: a Title which according to the excellent saying of Mr. Cowly in
his Brutus, None can deserve, but he who would refuse the offer.

Nor do I doubt but that if ever the greatest Prince in Christendom should be
abandoned to the Vanity of attempting the particular Conquest of Great Britain
and Ireland, his Power in the Balance of the World would as soon and as
sensibly grow insignificant thereby, as did the King of Spains', by the Design
of 88. And as the Fate of the great temporary Disturbers of Mankind has been
their constant Augmentation of their own Expenses, (which was a just pecuniary
mulct from Heaven on their Ambition for their increase of the charge of diverse
Nations in the posture of Defense,) so is it likely to be more and more to the
end of Time: And it was sufficiently exemplified in the Result of the Pope's
and King of Spain's Politics in 88, which reduced them to attempt the
Remedying of the Prosu^ion of their Treasure by sending (as I may say)
Canonical Waste-Paper to the West Indies, and the loss too of their Cargo of
that, as appears by Malynes in his Lex Mercatoria, where he says, page 126.
That in the year 1561, Pope Sixtus Quintus caused two Ships to be Laden out of
Spain for the West Indies with a 100. Buts of Sack^, 1400 little Chests
containing each of them three ordinary small Barrels of Quicksilver, weighing
50 l. apiece, to refine the Silver withal in the West Indies; and a great
number of Packs of Printed Bulls, and Pardons granted at that time to make
Provision against Heretics, because the year 1588, had so much exhausted the
Treasure of Spain. These two Ships were met with at Sea by Captain White ( who
was Laden and Bound for Barbary) and brought into England by him, where the
Commodities were Sold: But the Popes Merchandise being out of request, and
remaining a long time in Warehouses at the disposal of Queen Elizabeth, at the
last at the request of her Physician Doctor Lopez, she gave all that great
quantity of Bulls to him, amounting to many thousands in number: And he and
another sent those Bulls into the West Indies, where they were no sooner
Arrived but the Popes Contractors for that Commodity did Seize on all the said
Bulls, and caused an Information to be given against them, that they were
Infected, as having been taken by Heretics. It Was alleged that they were
Miraculously saved; but they were lost and Confiscated. Malynes further
mentions, That he was employed to appraise the Lading of those Prizes, and to
certify what it cost, and what it might have been worth in the West Indies
according to the rate of every Bull taxed at two Rials of Plate, and some four,
and some eight Rials, according to their Limitation, every one being but one
sheet of Paper, and by Computation the Lading did not cost 50000 l. and would
have yielded above 600000 l. He had before said, That every Reasonable Soul of
the Popish Religion in America must have one of these Bulls yearly; and that
these Bulls contained a Mandate, that their Beds should be sold who would not
take off one of them.

It seems (by the way) that all that Treasure of Indulgences, bestowed by Queen
Elizabeth on Doctor Lopez, could not oblige him from designing afterward to
take away her Life by Poison. But this was the result of the Trage-Comedy, or
rather, Farce of 88. and Broyl on the Coast when Spains Invincible Fleet that
had in it but 8350. Seamen, proved the sport of Fortune and of the Winds, and
the fatal VVrack of its Treasure, insomuch that it could never since (if then)
aw the world by the Number of Mariners; Men who love not to be paid with
Tickets even in this World, and much less to receive them as payable in
another, the which is the true Notion of Paper-Indulgences.

It is agreed on by all Writers, that the Spanish Armada, consisting of 130
Ships then had in it but the Number of Seamen beforementioned (and of those
too a great part borrowed from diverse Countries) and 19290 Land Soldiers,
which Naturally clogged its Sea Service; for the Antipathy between those and
Seamen in Ships is such, that unless the Seamen are the Major part there, they
are apt to look on those as intruders, and as such who stand in their way, and
in their light: But in a Remonstrance to the Earl of Nottingham, Lord High
Admiral, from the Trinity House, Anno 1602. Extant in Sir Julius Caesar's
Collections, it is mentioned, that in 88. The Queen had at Sea 150. Sail of
Ships, whereof 40 only were her own, and 110 were of her Subjects, and that in
the same year there were English Ships employed in Trading Voyages into all
Parts and Countries, to the Number likewise of 150 Sail, of about 150 Tunn one
with another, and that all those 300 Ships were Manned with 30000 Seamen, that
is, the Queens Forty with 12000, and the 110, with 12000, and that in the other
150, were 6000 Seamen.

But it is not unworthy to be remarked, that notwithstanding the Concurrence of
Providence with the Gallantry and Numbers of her Seamen, and the great event of
the Confusion of the Armada, that made the World so willingly Tributary to her
praise; She was so far from giving it any umbrage of her claiming any Universal
Empire of the Sea, that she as semper eadem, who some years before 88. (as we
have it in Cambden) had on the Spanish Embassador's Complaining that the Indian
Ocean was Sailed by the English, Replied, That no Title to the Ocean belongs to
any People or particular Man, for as much as neither Nature, nor regard of
Public Use permits the Possession thereof: Did likewise after 88 Notify the
same thing by her Embassador's Expostulation with the King of Denmark, and that
the Sea is free for all Men, and that Princes have no such Dominion of the Sea,
that they can deny Sailers the use thereof, no more then of the Air, according
to that saying of the Emperor Antonine, I am Lord of the Earth, but the Law is
Lord of the Sea; and she urged, That Princes have no Jurisdiction of the Sea,
but of that which is near adjacent to their Territories, and that only for the
securing the Navigation from Pirates and Enemies: and that the Kings of England
never prohibited the Navigation and Fishing on the Irish Sea, that is between
Ireland and England, tho they are Lords of the Coast on both sides; No less
then the Dane is of Norway and Izeland, who challenges this Right to him on no
other account.

I intend not to awaken any Controversy about this matter that is asleep in
the World, and if it were not, do suppose that Loccenius's distinction in his
De Iure Maritimo, namely the Imperium Maris Universal, and Particulare, and
ancient usages, and the Pacta Conventa of Princes and States might send it to
rest. I have only spoke of the Fact of the Point in Queen Elizabeth's Story, who
probably foresaw that her great example of advancing Navigation, would oblige
the World to follow it, and that the claiming an Universal Empire of the
Shore, would not have sounded harsher then the pretending to such an one of the
Sea, an Empire as easily drawn in a Poets Imagination, as a Ship usually in a
Geographer's Map, and with the like proportion; since if the Ship were Measured
by his Scale of Miles, it would appear perhaps two or three hundred miles long.

Thus the samed Venetian Poet Sannazarius long since in an Epigram of six
Verses, that begins with Viderat Adriacis, etc. put the Complement of the whole
Empire of the Sea on the City of Venice, and was rewarded by the Senate with
about a 100 of our Nobles for every Verse; but they knew better things then to
espouse more of the Sea, then their own Adriatic, and of that too a Pope once
demanding the Original of their Right: they returned him an answer very like
Poetry, That their Charter for it, was enrolled on the back of Constantine's
Donation, of which the Record was in his Custody: They knew that the enclosing
the Common of the whole Sea would have been too chargeable an Adventure, and
that the Dominion of their Adriatic was no sine cure, but brought its Load of
Obligation with it, and particularly to protect their Subjects and Allies
there, and to purge it from Pirates, and punish Delinquents therein.

Nor could it be a remote Consideration to our Queen and her whole Council,
that the securing her particular Interest, even in the British Seas, was
liable to difficulty and uncertainty, in regard of the uncertain humor of the
Seamen her Subjects, and of the aptness of all Mariners to change their
Quarters, and Embarque in Foreign Service, sometimes on a Capricio of their
reputing themselves disobliged at home, and at other times on their expectance
of better Pay abroad: And accordingly the said Remonstrance from Trinity-House
sets forth, That in a little above 12. years after 88. the Shiping and Number
of our Seamen were decayed about a 3d. part.

But tho the World has no Universal Empire, yet Seamen by the moveable Scenes
of their Lise, and their being every where useful and welcome, have the
Previledge of being Universal Subjects, and are easily tempted to seek good
Entertainment in other Countries, if they find it not in their own.

What I have before observed concerning the Influence of Numbers on the
Government of the World, will make it appear to any man of ordinary thought
and sense, that the Science of the increase of the People is not a nice
Speculation, or an expedient in knowledge to salve Phenomenon, but is indeed of
much more use to the Body Politic, then the discovery of the Circulation of
the Blood is to the Body Natural: And I may add, That men's now gravely
proceeding just in those tracks of Policy, that they have read and took notes
of out of the Classick Authors, who writ when there were not so many Millions
of Readers and Observers in the World as are now, would be as absurd as is
Astrologers, taking the measures of their Predictions now from the Tables of
Ptolomy, since whose time the Equinoctials and the whole Systeme of Heaven are
moved from the Position they then had among the fixed Stars, a whole Sign or
more, and as is some Astronomers pertinacy in following the error of Aristotle,
who asserted the unalterableness of the Heavens, because in so many Ages
nothing had been observed to be altered, when the many Experiences of new Stars
have since confuted the Reason that moved Aristotle to thing as he did.

Princes and States will now in the Administration of Public Affairs find
themselves obliged to mend their pace, and no longer travel so unconcerned
through the World as formerly, while now they see the new tides of Generation
coming in so fast: And no doubt but the great example of the French Monarch,
and his admirable exact proportioning of his Receipts with his Expenses (the
which was so remarkable in that active and expenceful year of 1673. that then
his Receipts came to 8,232,709 l. Sterling, and his Expenses exceeded that
total but by 25548 l. Sterling) and the strong Current of his successes will
enforce Political Arithmetic on the World, as the overflowing of Nile did
Geometry.

And it will be but Natural for us to Conclude, that the great increase of the
Number of the People here and abroad in the World, must of necessity be Fatal
to the Papacy which has been so long as importunate Candidate for a fifth
Monarchy of the World: But it is now too late for any one Man to be a precarious
King of Kings, and particularly to think, that after the necessity and
populousness of the Northern Principalities has made them resume their former
Donations of Land to the Bishop of Rome's Hierarchy, that those Countries that
before broke the old Roman Yoke by force, will now when better peopled, and
stocked with better brains, be again brought under a New Roman one by fraud,
and that the omne Malum ab Aquilone will not be able in that Quarter to put an
end to that which begins in Nomine Domini, and that they will not be the rather
willing so to do, in regard that the North made the World feel the Malignity of
both those Proverbs by its old well-meant charity to the Bishops of Rome.

And since in the days of Popery here in Harry the 8th's time it did pass in
Rem Iudicatam, that the Pope had no more power over us by the Scripture then
any other foreign Bishop; it cannot now but seem ridiculous to scruple whether
he can thence claim more authority here than any other foreign Prince; and he
who was exploded here formerly when the Critical Spectators were not so many,
for having ill acted the part of a King on our stage of the World, would be
thought mad for personating one after the Play is over.

Thus too in a less people World Bartolus the famous Lawyer pronounced it to be
Haeresie to deny the German Emperor to be King of the Universe, the which any
one would now account Madness to affirm.

And if in France hundreds of Years ago its Monarch greeted the Pope with the
terms of fatuus and amens, for claiming a Supremacy in Temporals there, it is
impossible he can be otherwise thought there now, prosecuting a claim to
Supremacy in things Ecclesiastic; for even his pretensions to that the Clergy
of France have damned in their Declaration, by setting a General Council above
him: and which Declaration the great Monarch has there ratified by a perpetual
and irrevocable Edict. And it is but with a Consonancy to the nature of things,
that the Papal Infallibility should be concluded against in that Declaration:
and since as the Author of the Policy of the Clergy of France relates, the
Roman Catholic Church there does so much swarm with New Phil sophers there
called Cartesians and Gassendists, whose new Philosophy has been there by
Zealous Catholics observed to have ruined the mystery of the Real Presence,
(for so the words are in that Book) it is no wonder if the growth of the
Messieurs les scavants increasing with the Populacy of that Realm, makes any
man's belief of his infallibility pass for a degree of madness, accordingly as
Mr. Hobbes, Chap. 8. Of Man, well observes, that excessive opinion of a man's
own self, for Divine Inspiration and Wisdom, becomes distraction and
giddiness: and this probably may be the final result there of the late
fermentation about the Regalia, etc. and the Pope be tacitly thought so as
aforesaid, and his Power there insensibly evaporate, and without any visible
distrubance given to it by the ratio ultima Regum: for no prudent person would
declaim reproachfully against any of a quiet Phrensy, or molest and vex such a
one tho living near him* and would much less project the disgrace or mischief
of such an one living at a great distance, tho he should assume to himself
bigger Titles than ever the Kings of India or Persia did, and call himself Son
of the Sun, or Lord of the Sea and Land; or like some of the Roman Emperors,
challenge Divinity, or be styled Dominus Deus noster Papa. And thus may the
Pope quietly go on longer to call himself Monarch of the World, without being
called Names for it in France, just as the Dukes of Savoy style themselves
Kings of Cyprus without any gainsaying from the Turk; who likewise did not
menace the Pope for causing the Brother of the Viceroy of Naples to be in Rome
proclaimed King of Jerusalem: nor when that Gentleman in Requital of that
favor from his Holiness, caused the Pope to be in Naples proclaimed Caliph of
Bandas, was the Mogul aggrieved thereby.

And thus probably too will the Enthusiast's who assert a Millennium or
Universal Reign of Christ on earth, with that quietness and gentleness that the
ancient Fathers before the first Nicene Council did, pass off the Stage of the
World; but it will seem ridiculous not to bind such Fifth Monarchy Men in
Chains as Madmen, who have in England and Germany endeavored to bi^d Kings
so, and Nobles with Fetters of Iron, and who would again make Convulsions in
the State, by the Diseases of their minds, as once Mahomet's Epileptic Fits
shook the World, and who by promising us a new Heaven and a new Earth would
confound the old, and only give us a new Hell broke loose. But the World will
not now be blunder'd into Confusion by such wild Reformers.

In the Book of the Apocalypse (of which Bodin tells us in his Methodus ad
facilem Historiarum Cognitionem, that Calvin's Opinion being asked, he
answered, Se penitus ignorare quid velit tam obscurus scriptor) it must be
confessed that the Majesty of the Style is agreeable to that of the rest of the
holy Text, and that the predictions of the future State of the Church, and of
its splendour in the World are not grosso modo uttered, or attended with any
irregularity, but on the contrary that God appears there as the God of Order,
and applying all the exactness of proportion and number, and its very fractions
to the great things foretold. After one Verse has accounted the number of the
Beast to be 666, the next mentions St. John's Vision of a Lamb standing on
Mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand. The Bodies of the
Witnesses are mentioned to be unburied three days and an half. The 4 Angels
were loosed which were prepared for an hour, and a day, and a Month and a Year
for to s^ay the third part of Men. The Woman was to be in the Wilderness 1260
days, and to be nourished there for a time, and times, and half a time. Blood
came out of the Wine Press by the space of 1600 Furlongs. There were Sealed of
all the Tribes of Israel 144000. And in the State of Babylon mentioned in Cap.
18th, where the voice from Heaven is heard, Come out of her my People, though
all the various Sects of Religion that thrust one another into Babylon, will
admit of no proportion in their revenge, yet it is there said, Reward her even
as she rewarded you, and double unto her double, according to her works, in the
Cup which she has filled, fill to her double.

But near the end of that Book, where the great Scene of The New Heaven and the
New Earth opens, and the Vision of the New Jerusalem is described, a Golden Rod
was given the Angel to measure the City, and the Measures thereof are
particularized.

And tho I pretend not to understand the meaning of any of these obscure
passages of Scripture, yet one thing seems to me there as Conspicuous as the
Meridian Light, namely, That as the Divine Providence did found the Old World
in Number, Weight and Measure, so it likewise will the foretold New One.

The exactness of the Numbers described by St. John in that Prophetic Book
written in the Island of Pathmos, has assured us that his imagination was much
above the Vapors that fumed into Men's heads in several Islands anciently, and
made them Prophetically Fanatic, as Gryphiander de Insulis mentions, and in
his Chapter there, De Mirabilibus Insularum, says, Alibi fatidici specus sunt,
quorum exhalatione temulenti futura praecinunt, ut Delphis nobilissimo oraculo.
Homines eo Spiritu Correpti dementes ac fanatici dicti, quod circum fana
bacchentur.

But it is confessedly too true, That some of the Expositors of this Book, and
particularly in this our Island did too long here Bacchari circum Fana, and
have therefore justly had the name of Fanatics, and may as justly expect that
their Oracles should be silenced as the Delphic was, and that any persons of a
sober Party drunk with Enthusiasme will not be again allowed to make all things
reel into Confusion.

Those likewise who did here more cum ratione insanire then the Fifth
Monarchy-men, I mean the Assertors of Presbytery, and who by the pretense of
putting the Scepter into Christ's hand, projected to put it into their own,
will find the numbers of knowing men now so increased that our World will be
more averse then formerly against their offers to mend it by their assuming of
Regal Power.

What well willers they were to the Mathematics of stretching out on our
Church and State, the Line of Confusion, as the Scripture-expression is, and
how they thought Confusion as commendable a thing, as I mentioned Antony's
thinking Sedition, sufficiently appears out of Mr. Nyes Book I quoted before,
where the great Architectonical Rule for settling a Government in the Church is
rendered to be the destroying its Government by Law Established: and he there
names it, viz. Tollatur lex and fiat certamen: and thereupon he says, p. 187.
It was moved by some Parliament men Friends to Episcopacy when it was to be
removed, that it might remain till a better Government were concluded; but on
the other hand it was prudently considered how while that form stood and had
the advantage of the Law, there would be no freedom in arguing about it.

But I account that the great Fundamental Principle for the quiet of the World,
as well as of a man's own Conscience, is contrary to that of tollatur lex, viz.
that no man is warranted by any intention of advancing Religion to invade the
right of the Sovereign Power, that is inherent in Princes, by the Municipal
Laws of their Countries. When ever any man quits this Principle, he has made
his first step from a Precipice: he is fallen from the Pinnacle of the Temple,
and has very presumptuously tempted Omnipotence to save him, after he has thus
begun to destroy himself, and Religion too, and has to Heavens secret Will
sacrificed its Revealed.

The shaking of this Principle is, as I may say, the shaking of the Earth; and
as Aulus Gellius tells us in his Noctes Atticae that the Romans did not know to
which of all their Gods to offer Sacrifice in the time of an Earthquake, but
did then only worship an unknown Deity, this too will be the fate of Nations
where the lex terrae is shook by Enthusiasts, namely that too many people will
not know what God to adore, and their pretended Illuminations will only serve
to conduct them to such an Altar, as at Athens ground under the Subscription to
the unknown God, and if perhaps some Enthusiastic weak Brethren arrive not at
the denomination of the Forts-sprits applied in France to Atheists, they will
be abandoned to a disposition to close with the next Hypothesis of Religion
they shall meet, whether that of Deists, Papists, or Muggletonians, or
Mahumetans; as Bodin speaking of the Cause of several Nations, being fixed in
their particular soiles says, alii longo errore jactati, non judicio elegerunt
locum, sed lassitudine proximum occupaverunt.

To this purpose our incomparable Bishop Sanderson in his Lecture de ad^^quata
Conscientiae Regula does with great weight and a profound pious passion,
reflect on the effects of the breaking the Established Religion in England by
our late Reformers, and says, Stetit hic aliquamdiu, sed non diu stetit
effraenis hominum temeritas, etc. hoc font derivata audacia, effluxit tandem
in apertam Rabiem, and exivit jamdiu in furorem Anabaptiscum: and quamvis quo
porro progrediatur vix habet, usque tamen progreditur indies, and nova quotidie
parturit opinionum monstra: ut nisi ex sacrosancto Dei verbo didicissemus
firmum stare fundamentum Dei, neque adversus ecclesiam Christi praevalituras
unquam ex toto Inferorum portas, omnino metuendum foret ne Vniversa Christi
ecclesia Atheismi velut diluvio obruta, toto orb funditus periret.

Little did many of our deluded Reformers when they broke the hedge of the Law,
think what Serpent bit them, and as little did many of their wellmeaning
followers think, that while their Pastors did speak the Cause of Religion so
fair, that at that time the very poison of the aspes of Popery and
Superstition, was under their tongues, for that No Principle has in it more of
the Popishness of Popery, if I may so say, in the resemblance of the
aggravation of Sin by it self, viz. the sinfulness of Sin, then the
legitimation of unjust things by holy ends; and this too our last mentioned
Bishop brands in his Praelectio secunda De bona intention, where having
mentioned that a Cardinal telling the Pope in a Conclave, that somewhat he
propounded to be done was not just, and that the Pope replied, Licet non posset
fieri per viam justitiae, oportere tamen fieri per viam expedientiae, he goes
on thus, Nimirum is thoc est sapere! haec est ex Iesuitarum ni fallor officinis
deprompta Theologia, omnia metiri ex Commodo Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae,
sacrosancta dei eloquia qua lubet inflectere, Nasi ad instar Cerei torquere,
distorquere, invita Cogere in rem suam.

And too little do many who justly Complain of Popery's having supported it
self by Arbitrary Power on Earth, reflect on their having supported that Power
against Earth, and even against Heaven it self, and that the fumes of their
Enthusiasme do vainly try to erect a Pillar of smoke against Heaven, as I spoke
before of the Jesuits Morals, setting up one of Ignominy against it, and that
it is an unlucky part of the Arbitrariness of Popery to transplant some of its
odious Principles among other Sects, as the Devil can at pleasure transform
himself into an Angel of light.

The general received notion of Superstition is, that it is a needless fear
about Religion, and there is no fear more needless and irrational than that of
Gods being unconcerned in its Protection; the which to imagine, is more
unworthy of the Deity, and a greater tendency to Atheism, then was the delirium
of Epicurus about God's Carelessness of humane affairs; and in relation to
which, Tully in his De Natura Deorum having discoursed of one that denied the
being of a Deity, says, Nec sane multum interest u^rum id neget, an Deos omni
procuratione atque action privet: mihi enim qui nihil agit, esse omnino non
videtur.

He there moreover acquaints us with the origin of the word Superstition,
saying, that Non enim Philosophi, verum etiam Majores nostri superstitionem a
Religione separaverunt: nam qui totos Dies precabantur, and immolabant ut sui
liberi sibi superstites essent, superstitiosi sunt appellati, quod nomen patuit
poslea latius; qui autem omnia quae ad Deorum Cultum pertinerent, diligenter
pertractarent, and tanquam relegerent, sunt dicti Religiosi ex religendo, etc.
But those things that those ancient Heathens carefully discriminated, many
Modern Christians as carefully Confound, namely Superstition and Religion, and
by the innate pride of Humane Nature leading men to worship the Gods that they
make, rather then the God that made them, and which enslaved the ancient Jews
almost with a Continuando to the Adoration of stocks and stones, and to the
neglect of the worshipping the God that delivered them from the House of
Bondage; degenerate Christians adore the Births of Religion in their own
fancies, and having there Modeled a Deity do Act over the old Superstition with
Anxious wishes and Formal Prayers that those their monstrous Births may
outlive them, and do outgo all examples of the heathen World in the (...),
immolating Nations by War to those Children of their imagination; and thus
Popish Superstition within our Memory turned Ireland into one Akeldama, and
Enthusiastic Superstition converted England into another; and as Lipsius tells
us, that the gladiatory Combats did in some one Month cost Europe 30000 men's
life's to divert the old Romans, so fanatical have some that call themselves
Protestants been as to afford sport and diversion to the new Romanists, and
even the very Jesuits by Superstition, having made so many of us Gladiators
against one another, and as if we were Brute Animals, we give them the
recreation of seeing us like Cocks attacking each other with the keenest anger
when they please, and give the Arbitrary Power to the Jesuits to make our Land
their Cockpit.

But the set time (humanly speaking) for the extermination of the superstition
of Popery here being come, and the worst thing in Popery being its Fanaticism,
and Holy Church being the great Asylum of that, as our Learned Dr. Stilling
fleet has taught the World in his Book of the Fanaticism of the Church of
Rome, it is in vain for Popery or Jesutisme to save-themselves from the blow of
Fate by standing behind Presbytery. The Conclusum est contra Manichaeos before
mentioned that is now the Vox populi, does with its full cry pursue Presbytery
as well as Popery, for the making duo summa Principia in States and Kingdoms,
and claiming an Ecclesiastic Power immediately derived from Christ and not
dependant on the Civil: and it is in vain for any Principle, that an awakened
World pursues as a Cheat to try to save it self by changing its name. There is
no observation more common, then that Popery and Presbytery that seem as
distant as the two Poles, yet move on the same Axle-tree of a Church Supremacy
immediately derived from Christ; and Mr. Hobbs his Leviathan might have passed
through the World with a general Applause, if no Notion had been worse in it
then in Chap. 44. The making his Kingdom of darkness to consist of Popery and
Presbytery.

The measures that the Genius of our Nation inclines it to take of things from
experiment, will Naturally Perpetuate its aversion from Presbytery as well as
Popery.

For tho the Divines of the Protestant Churches abroad that are fautors of the
Presbyterian Form of Church Government, own not the doctrine of Rebelling for
Religion, and tho thus on the occasion of a Iesuite's formerly Printing
somewhat in defense of his Order, and alleging that several Protestant Writers
had allowed the Rebelling of Subjects against their Princes, and instanceth in
Buchanan and Knox, yet Rivet the Professor of Divinity at Leiden, in his Answer
to that Jesuit, says, that all other Protestant Writers Condemn that
doctrine; and he ascribes the Rashness of Buchanan and Knox, praefervido
Scotorum ingenio, and ad audendum prompto: and tho the persons who in Holland
and France live under that Form of Church Government, have pretended to no
authority from Christ to resist Sovereign Powers, and that the Loyalty of the
French Protestants has been so signal under all their Pressures that D'Ossat
in his Letter to Villeroy from Rome, January the 25 th, 1595, having discoursed
of the horrid attempt against the Life of Harry the 4 th, acknowledges,
Concerning the Hugonots, il's n'ont rien attente de tell, ny contre lui, ny
contre aucun de cinq Roys ses predecesseurs, quelque boucherie que leurs
Majestez ayent faite des dits Huguenots: i. e. They have attempted nothing of
this Kind either against him or against any of the five Kings his Predecessors,
notwithstanding the butchery or slaughter that their Majesty's made of those
Huguenots, yet is it too notorious to be denied that that sort of
Church Government having in Scotland in the time of our former Princes been
accustomed continually to hold their Noses to Grind-stones, which was a
preparatory way to have brought their Heads to Blocks, and that Nation invading
us with a Covenant, the very entering into which and the imposing it without
leave from the King so to do, and much more against his Command, was a thing
that perhaps to the Associators themselves seemed illegal and contrary to the
Petition of Right, which provides against the administering of any Oath not
warrantable by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, there was by that means a
Coalition between the Presbyterian Divines of our Nation and theirs in
principles of Enthusiasme and Rebellion Principles that our Nonconformist
Divines in King James's time here abhorred; for in the Protestation of the
Kings Supremacy made by those Ministers and Published Anno 1605, the conclusion
of their 4th Tenet is, That the Supremacy of Kings is not tied to their Faith
and Christianity, but to their very Crown from which no Subject or Subjects
have power to separate or disjoyn it: and their 9th Tenet is, We hold that
though the King should command any thing contrary to the Word unto the
Churches, that yet they ought not to resist him therein, but only peaceably to
forbear Obedience and sue to him for Grace and Mercy, and where that cannot be
had meekly to submit themselves to the Punishment: and their last Tenet is, We
hold it utterly unlawful for any Christian Churches whatsoever by any Armed
Force or Power against the will of the Civil Magistrate and State under which
they live, to erect and set up in public the true worship of God, or to beat
down or suppress any Superstition and Idolatry that shall be countenanced and
maintained by the same.

And I believe none will imagine that those Nonconforming Divines would take
any Oath but in the imposers sense, or Casuistically advise others so to do.

It Is therefore no marvel if our later Presbytery being so unconformable to the
Law of the Land, and to the Tenets of the former Nonconformists, soon grew
weary of it self, and did with its horrid Visage only face us and march off.
Your Lordship found that in another thing it resembled Popery, namely in that
it would be all or nothing, and you helped it to the latter part of the
Alternative.

Mr. Nigh who made a great Figure in the Assembly of Divines, has in that Book
of his forementioned, p. 98, helped this Age to know how Arbitrary they would
have been in delivering men to Satan; for says he there the exercise of
Discipline in our Congregations was ordered by the Parliament, but limited
likewise to an enumeration of the Sins for which we might excommunicate,
exempting other Sinners that were as much under our charge. This was looked on
by the Assembly as a great Abridgment of their Ministerial Liberty, and so
great as they professed it could not with a good Conscience be submitted to, as
not being able to perform their trust which they received from Jesus Christ,
and must give an account of to him, resolving to stand fast in the Liberty
wherewith Christ has made them free.

So ridiculous were those Divines that tho no Pope ever arrogated a power to
Excommunicate one, but for the Crimes nominated in his Canon Law, and tho our
Church of England never claimed a power of excommunicating, but for a Crime
expressed in the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws, yet those froward Disciplinarians
would have been allowed to shoot their Thunderbolts of Excommunication upon a
Capricio. But not only the Parliament but the whole Nation in a manner
pronounced them Contumacious: the people saw how Arbitrarily they would have
interdicted the whole Land from the use of the Cup and Bread too in the
Sacrament, and have railed in the Communion Table with fantastic
Qualifications, and they soon judged those Clergymen guilty of Irregularity,
and the rather for that they had engaged so far in Causa sanguinis, and the
same Sun of Reason and Knowledge that with the strength of its Beams had here
put out the Popes Kitching Fire of Purgatory, did soon without noise and
insensibly confound their Dominions in the Kingdom of Darkness, and those
Divines themselves found that their destroying Episcopacy here, had in effect
by the Parliaments being their Superintendants, enthroned Erastianisme, that
which indeed their Principles led them to hate more then Episcopacy it self.

Mr. Baxter in the Preface to his second part of the Nonconformists Plea
speaking of Presbytery says, I do not hear of many out of London and
Lancashire that did ever set up this Government, and I know not of one
Congregation now in London of Englishmen that exercises the Presbyterian
Government, nor ever did since the King came home, etc. And says, they have no
National Assembly, no Classes, no Coalition of many Churches to make a
Presbytery, and I hear of none (unless perhaps some Independants that I know
not) that have so much as ruling Lay Elders.

Alluding to some expressions before applied to Papists and Popery, I may say
that the Cato's of Presbytery came here on the Stage, tantum ut exirent, and
that Government soon had its period here per simplicem desinentiam: 'Twas
obvious that Presbytery as well as Popery directed men where to stand in a
place divided from the Civil Government, and so to shake the Earth: and it
appeared very inauspicious to the Model of the Covenant, that in its first
Paragraph, it should stumble upon implicit Faith, by swearing to a Government
and Reformation that shall be, and to the preservation of the Reformed Religion
in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, the
particulars whereof, the Lay-Covenanters of England, if not the Clerical also
were far from understanding.

And tho in that Paragraph the Covenant binds its takers to endeavor to
advance the Reformation of Religion according to the word of God (a Clause that
Sir Harry Vane declared to a very worthy Gentleman now living, that he caused
to be inserted into the Covenant after much debate about the same, and
opposition from the Scotch Commissioners with whom he was interested in the
making of it, and thereupon said, That ^e was three days in getting the word of
God into the Covenant) yet that Covenant having almost extirpated Root and
Branch, those spiritual Guides from whom the people might expect a more
Rational and Learned Interpretation of the Sense of the word of God, then from
the Presbyterian Divines, they were soon sensible of their danger both as to
the perverting of the Scripture and subverting of the Church from the new
Correctors of Magnificat, and found that such an Inundation of Vile Religionary
Tenets was got into the Church, that the Houses of Parliament ordered the 10 th
of March, 1646. To be set apart as a solemn day of humiliation to seek Gods
Assistance for the suppressing and preventing of the growth and spreading of
Errors, Heresies and Blasphemies, and that Mr. Vines on that day Preaching
before the Commons, p. the 4 th of his Sermon printed, acknowledged, That that
day was the first that ever was in England on that sad occasion, and p. 67 of
that Sermon mentioned a most detestable thing then broached by the Press,
though yet in the way of Query, namely, what is meant by the word Scripture
when it is asserted that the denying of the Scriptures to be the word of God
should be holden worthy of death: for says the Author, either the English
Scriptures or Scriptures in English are meant by the word Scriptures, or the
Hebrew and Greek Copies or Originals, the former cannot be meant with reason,
because God did not speak to his Prophets and Apostles in the English Tongue:
nor the latter, for the greatest part of men in the Kingdom do not understand
or know them.

Mr. Vines declared his just Abhorrence of that insinuation, and says, If this
dilemma be good, what is become of the certain foundation of our hope, or
faith, or comfort? how can we search the Scriptures without going first to
School to learn Hebrew, and Greek? And 'twas obvious to every one to consider
that if the English Scriptures are not the word of God, there was an end, not
only of the Reformation according to it mentioned in the Covenant, but the
substantial one promoted by the Protestant Religion, that helped us to the
Treasure of our English Bibles, and that we should soon be stranded on the
Shore of Implicit Faith.

Nor could it long be hid from common observation, that those Divines who
exclaimed so much against the Ceremonies of the Church of England; as an
oppressive Yoke, would have imposed on us such a rigid observation of the
Sabbath, the great Scene of Ceremonies among the Jews, as would have made it
forgot that it was ever made for man.

The thinking sort of men found that tho the Principles of those Divines did
not like the Jesuits make Calumny no mortal Sin, that yet as the Adherents to
Presbytery did calumniate the Constitution of the Church of England for
bordring on Popery, and the Royal Martyr for being a Fautor to it, so they did
by their Censorious tempers transfuse such an acid humor among the people,
that very much loosned the Nerves of the English good nature, and distorted the
English hospitality, and therefore it is but by a natural instinct that that old
Pharisaical Leven is now so nauseous, that probably any one suspected of an
inclination to replant the old Presbytery here and its Arbitrary Power to
excommunicate, would too be staked down to a narrower tedder in Conversation,
and be it as it were excommunicated from Gentlemen's Company, as much as
Make-bates, or common Informers upon Penal Statutes.

The people heretofore found out that as Popery endangers men by the Priests
not intending to make the Sacrament of the Eucharist when he administers it: So
that these, as I said, intended it should not be at all administered but to
their own Sect, and that the gesture of sitting at the Communion that they
invited men to, and thereby to their being rescued from the Popish Posture of
Kneeling, was but a sort of Sham in its way, for that kneeling, was the gesture
used in the ancient times of the Church, and the first that was ever observed
to sit then was the Pope to express his State.

The observing sort of Men then judged that as Sibthorpe and Manwaring had been
exploded for going beyond their Credentials from Heaven, as God's Ambassadors,
in straining the Prerogative of Princes, these deserved to be so too, for
scruing the Power of Parliaments above Law, and for thrusting down the King
into the Class of The Three Estates; and that as Sibthorpe was exposed to
severe Animadversions, from the Age for his Sermon of Apostolic Obedience,
showing the Duty of Subjects to pay Tribute and Taxes to their Princes, etc.
And p. 21. of that Sermon, applying the words of Curse ye Meroz, yea curse them
bitterly, etc. to the promoting his illegal purpose; they deserved to be
censured for going on too with the Alarm of Curse ye Meroz thousands of times
over, when the Subjects were slack in paying Tribute to one another, to
dethrone their Prince.

They saw that those Divines in trying to salve the Phenomenon of the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy and the Covenant that they had taken, were in the
Course of their Theology continually put to it, to deliberate of Rebellion, and
that their very deliberation of it was ipso facto one, and a thing that
included the horror of a man's deliberating to kill his Father: and 'twas but
natural for the people representative and diffusive to fancy it lawful for them
silently to resume the power given to those Churchmen and abused by them, who
were always in the Pulpit and Press lowdly trumpeting forth the Iesuitical
Notion of the lawfulness of the peoples resuming the Power given to Kings; and
as I shall never fear that the King of Spain will ever be able to take the
World in a Ginne by Campanellas advise to him in Chap. 5. of the Spanish
Monarchy to employ Divines, to set up the Roar of unus Pastor and unum Ovile
every where for the Pope, so neither shall I, that men's vociferating the Clause
in the Covenant, viz. That the Lord may be One and his Name One and in the
three Kingdoms, will ever again be able to embroyl them.

In short any one who shall consider that in Scotland Presbytery's former
Kingdom of Darkness, the people have been so of late illuminated as to find the
way to be Latitudinarians, need never have any fears and jealousies of that
Governments, jus Divinum, again Marching hither. In the first Session of the
second Parliament of this King at Edinburgh, November the 16th, 1669. There
passed an Act wherein 'twas declared, That his Majesty has the Supreme
Authority over all Persons and in all Causes Ecclesiastical within this his
Kingdom, and that by virtue thereof the ordering and disposal of the external
Government and Policy of the Church does properly belong to his Majesty and his
Successors as an Inherent Right to the Crown, and that his Majesty and his
Successors, may settle, Enact and Emit such Constitutions, Acts and Orders,
concerning the Administration of the External Government of the Church and the
Persons employed in the same, and concerning all Ecclesiastical meeting, and
matters to be proposed and determined therein as they in their Royal Wisdom
shall think fit, etc. And his Majesty with Advise and Consent aforesaid does
rescind and annual all Laws, Acts and Clauses thereof and all Customs and
Constitutions Civil or Ecclesiastic, which are contrary to or inconsistent
with his Majesty's Supremacy as it is here asserted, and declares the same void
and null in all times coming.

This Act of Parliament is the more observable for that it declared the extent
of the Regal Power in Ecclesiastics, after that in the Year 1663, An Act
passed there for a National Synod under the Government of Bishops, and for that
Presbytery which was before like Hame, the only body in Nature that does not
content it self to take in any other body, but would either overcome and turn
another body into it self, as by victory, or it self to dye and go out, was
then grown so amenable to the Course of Nature in all other bodies (of which
one is a glue to another) that not satisfied with its own former consistence,
it did as suddenly, and easily, and quietly receive in the body of Episcopacy
(as I may say) as Air takes in light, and as readily as Metals themselves
receive in strong waters; and then it was that Episcopacy which in the Forms of
Church Government seems by its weight as Gold among Metals (and indeed all
bodies) to be the most close and solid, did there greedily drink in the
Quicksilver of Presbytery.

But tho Presbytery then was and now is considerable in the Internal part of
the Government of the Church of Scotland, and is likely so to be till Christ's
second coming (humanly speaking) with a non obstante to any thing that time can
cause, and will be preserved in perpetuity by the means of what my Lord Bacon
calls the drowning of Metals, namely when the baser Metal is incorporated with
the more rich as Silver with Gold, yet so willing were they in Scotland to give
to Caesar the real Supremacy that was Caesar's, that knowing the Protestant
Religion can be no more there destroyed under any external form of Church
Polity then as I said, Gold can be destroyed in Nature, they thought it more
prudent to trust the Crown with a Power of melting down that on emergent
occasions, and altering the Superscription of its Coin in infinitum, I mean its
outward polity and denominations, rather then that the Crown it self should be
once more so fatally melted down by any of those denominations as formerly.

And as the Covenanting Divines of Scotland by at last consenting that some
things in their Presbytery (which whether tolerabiles ineptiae or substantially
good, I now enquire not) should be preserved by Episcopacy's being the
Paramount National Church Government, have done that which would make it appear
ridiculous for them ever again to attempt to replant Presbytery and extirpate
Prelacy as formerly, so likewise have the most eminent sort of our Presbyterian
Divines, who were associated with them, by desiring since the King's
Restoration to submit to Dr. Usher the Archbishop of Armagh's Form of
Episcopacy, done the self same thing (over and above their being then
reordained by Bishops who had before received Orders only from the hands of the
Presbytery) and especially when it shall be considered that that Form of
Episcopacy as described by that Learned and Pious Archbishop Courted them and
was refused by them, before our Civil War began wherein they were the
Trumpeters and before three hundred thousand men were slain in England, as Mr.
Carew Reynel in his Book called the true English Interest Accounts the number
to have been.

It Is therefore with the justice of Fate that our old Presbytery too is gone
among Pancirolls Res Deperditae: and if it could be supposed that there was any
Order of Forraigners, whose avowed or known design it was by force or restless
artifices and retaining Pensioners to revive that Government here in spite of
our Laws, I shall think the term of hosts with justice applicable to them too.

But there is another thing beside the Coincidence of some of the Principles of
our Presbyterians, with Popery, that we have now too loud a Call to think of:
and that is that the great real part of the danger that we now are in of the
inundation of Popery, and its idolatrous worship, is to be imputed to their
having broke the Banks of the Regal Power, and enforced the Royal Issue for the
Safety of their Persons to be exiles abroad in Popish Countries for many years,
and where they might be in danger of the Poison of Popery conveyed into them in
the Vehicle of the Civilities they received from Popish Princes after they had
been so barbarously treated by their Protestant Subjects, who after they had by
secret whispers calumniated them for being Papists here, did in effect by the
loud outrage of their Actions bid them go and be Idolaters there.

When I think of the cruelty in the late Usurpation they showed to his Majesty
in his being thus not led but driven into temptation by his Subjects, I am
minded of applying to it, part of those words in 1 Samuel c. 26. v. 10. of
David to Saul, If the Lord has stirred thee up against me, let him accept an
Offering, but if they be the Children of Men, cursed be they before the Lord,
for they have driven me out this day from abiding in the Inheritance of the
Lord, saying, go serve other Gods: as to the meaning of which words, I shall
consult no Commentators among the Critics but shall rather take it from the
Assemblies Notes, and I may say that in their Comment on it they write their
own Commentaries, and they thus a propos say, I am now driven so as I cannot be
present in the Tabernacle to worship God and enjoy those holy Privileges, but
am forced to wander from place to place, etc. saying, go serve other Gods, that
is, tho not verbally yet really they have done it, and as much as in them lies,
they have compelled me to Idolatry, by forcing me an Exile to fly into
idolatrous Countries, etc.

It cannot have escaped the observation of a person so curious as your
Lordship, that among the many allowed ways of Punishment among the Jews,
banishment was not one, and the reason thereof is supposed among the Rabbinical
writers to be this: the Laws of the Jews and their Religion being the same
thing, to have banished men from their Country and the benefits of its
municipal or Civil Law there, had been to have banished them from their
Religion and the means of their salvation, and from doing with the Jews were so
averse that even the Excommunicate among them were not removed from all parts
of the Temple, and were admitted there to a peculiar place. But this cruelty to
Souls unknown even among the stiff-neck'd, hard hearted Jews, was by such
Christians as pretended to the greatest tenderness of Conscience practiced
toward their Sovereign, and that to such a degree that as if they designed that
the Lords Anointed the Breath of our Nostrils should be only in the infectious
Air of Popery, after they had exiled him from his own Protestant Realms, they
effected by the power of the prevalent Faction in Holland, that he and his R.
H's and their Adherents should be banished thence also: nay, out of France
where the Air was less infected with Popery, into one more pestilential, I mean
into the Dominions of Spain.

If therefore there is any number of men in these Realms that owns the old
Scotch Platform or Presbytery, and the former Methods to advance it here who
shall be excessive in aggravating our danger of Popery, I shall think that
herein they practice a great deal of Self-denial, and do not consult their own
rest while they disturb that of the World, and are of all men the most obliged
to speak softly of that Subject.

But more then enuf has been said to argue the paucity of the number of such
in England. The Bishops Survey of the number of the perverse Opiners in
Religion* mentions that two or three are called Self-willers professedly: and
by that number of that Sect (for ought I know) may be meant so many of the
lovers of the old Platform, and no name can better fit any who would maintain
the Garrison of an opinion after their Commanders have slighted it, then
Self-willers.

But so much gratitude does Popery now show to Presbytery and to those who are
called Presbyterians, that because they magnify and enlarge the Numbers of the
Papists on all occasions, the Papists do the like for them. And because it is
now the mode of many timid Protestants to value themselves upon their
Timidity's, and on the fear of the Papists and their numbers being falln upon
them, as if Christ who commanded his little Flock not to fear, could be pleased
with his great Flock of Protestants here being in continual fear of Antichrists
little one, I shall now entertain your Lordship with an Account of the present
number of the Papists here, and some little historical Glanses about the
gradual decrease thereof in this Realm in several conjunctures of time since
the Reformation, and in every one of which the highest tide of their numbers
has been but introductive to their lowest Ebb.

Of all Nations the English are observed to be the least addicted either to
fear or jealousy. The Pencil of Nature has in English minds on the dull and
vile color of fear (the which is said to be aversion with the opinion of hurt
from any object) laid on that more noble and bright one, which is said to be
the hope of avoiding that hurt by resistance, and is called Courage: and this
Age which is so inquisitive into the Causes of things, will be naturally apt to
abominate that fear that is causeless, or without the apprehension of why or
what, and which from the Fables of Pan (as Mr. Hobbs says) is called
Panic-fear: and methinks the very English genius does now begin to rouse it
self up and call on us to weigh our fear, and if we find it just to prevent our
being surprised by danger, and if causeless, to abandon it, according to the
words of the Orator against Catiline, Si verus ne opprimar, sin fallus ut
tandem aliquando timere desinam, and not to contribute to the increasing the
numbers of the Papists which has in all times most fatally happened (and that
too according to the course of Nature) by the fearing them, according to the
Instance of the increase of the number of the Jews mentioned in the Book of
Esther, where it is said, And many of the people of the Land became Jews, for
the fear of the Jews f^ll upon them.

On the account of our having most justly deserved the Visitation of Popery we
may very reasonably apprehend the danger of it: but the immoderate fear of the
Plague is so far from being an Antidote against it that we use to say, it comes
with a fear. And as we have justly deserved to be punished by the rage of
Popery, so have we likewise to be tormented with those Epidemic fears to which
we are abandoned, a Judgment mentioned by the Royal Prophet, where he says, Put
them in fear O Lord, etc. and likewise one Concomitant of our fear, namely, the
shame we are exposed to for it from the Papists themselves. An instance of it
occurred to me in the Reading a Pamphlet called the seasonall^ Address of the
Church of England to both Houses of Parliament, Printed in the Tear 1677, but
writ by a Papist and in the way of Sarcasme, where in p. 30. the Author says,
And here I cannot omit to tell you that this partiality of our Rigor has
already given Protestants the consusion and Papists the comfort to imagine that
our fears and jealousies of Popery which at present disturb and distract the
Nation, are but the self same sprights that haunted Caiphas his house, lay
under the Jews Council Table, and scared them with the Romans coming and
overrunning their Country. There have been men of so weak a judgment that they
have dyed only with the fear of death, and it is not without all ground that
our Adversaries now hope that we shall at length turn Papists with the fear of
Popery.

But that I am not heterodox in my Notion of Poperies not being now so
formidable, by the strength of its numbers as the timid Protestants make it, is
sufficiently manifest from the Conditional Vote of two Houses of Commons
relating to the being revenged on the Papists.

Part of the entertainment I just now promised your Lordship, I shall borrow
from Dr. Glanvile, and for it do refer you to his Zealous and Impartial
Protestant, p. 46, 47. where he says, in the year 1676, Orders came from the
Archbishop to the several Bishops, and from them to the respective Ministers
and Churchwardens in the Province of Canterbury, to enquire carefully and to
return an Account of the distinct Numbers of Conformists, Nonconformists and
Papists in their several Parishes, viz. Of all such men and women that were of
Age to Communicate, etc.

The number of Papists there returned was but eleven thousand, eight hundred
and seventy. Now tho in this Account Conformists and Nonconformists were not so
distinctly, could not so justly be reckoned, yet for the Papists they being so
few in each Parish and so notoriously distinguished as generally they are, the
Ministers and Churchwardens could easily give account of them, and there is no
reason to suspect their partiality, etc.

In St. Martins alone I have heard of twenty or thirty thousand: but the
Account was taken there and as exact a one as could be, and I am assured by
some that should know and had no reason to misinform me that the number
returned upon the most careful Scrutiny was about 600. I have found the like
fallings short of the reputed Number in diverse other noted places. In one City
talked of for Papists as if half the Inhabitants were such, I am assured there
are not twenty Men and Women: In another large and popular one, a Person of
Quality living in it told me, there were at least 600, but when the enquiry was
made by the Ministers and Churchwardens in each Parish, the Number was not
found to be 60; and it is very probable such a disproportion would be met
between the reputed and real Numbers in all other places if Scrutiny were made.
In all the West and most Populous part of England they are very inconsiderable.
I hear frequently from Inhabitants of those places, that in Bristol the second
or third City of England there is but one, and in the City of Gloucester one, or
two at most: in the other great Towns and Cities Westward scarce any, and those
that are in the Counties at large are extremely few, thinly scattered, here
one, and at the distance of many Miles, it may be another, etc.

We hear of the vast Numbers in the North, and there are more no doubt in those
parts then in the Western: but I believe they are much fewer then we hear, and
no way able by their Numbers to make any kind of balance for the exceeding
disproportion in the West.

The truth is People are mightily given and generally so to multiply the
Numbers of Papists, and they do it in common talk at least ten-fold, etc. And
after says thereupon, God forbid, I should diminish the real force of our
Enemies, or endeavor to render us secure in dangers. The Malignity and
Principles of Papists, their unwearied zeal and diligence to overthrow our
Religion, I very well know and thank God that the whole Kingdom is awakened to
apprehend: but I think we shall encourage them and dishearten our selves, if we
over magnify their strength, etc.

There came out in Print in London in the year 1680. a Sheet of Paper called a
Catalogue of the Names of such Persons as are or are reputed to be of the
Romish Religion, not as yet Convicted, being Inhabitants within the County of
Middlesex, Cities of London and Westminster and Weekly Bills of Mortality,
exactly as they are ordered to be inserted in the several Commissions appointed
for the more speedy Convicting of such as shall be found of that Religion; a
Paper, that was not Published I think by a friend to the Papists: for the
Author there Names them and the respective Parishes they lived in, and the
total number of Men and Women there was 317, of which only one Man was there
called Monsieur, tho yet six others seemed to me there to be of French Names;
and one there has a Dutch Name, and only one person in there called an Italian;
so that notwithstanding the great Cry of Foreign Papists in, and about London,
they did but little more then make a Number: and the persons there reckoned for
St. Martins in the Fields are but 22, and for Covent Garden but 4, where yet
the Bishops Survey makes 64, and for St. Margarets Westminster that Printed
Paper makes but 4, of which the Number it seemed in 41, proved so dreadful to
Justice Howard.

St. Andrews Holborn has in that Paper but 6, which in the Bishops Survey has
13. St. Giles in the Fields has in that Paper but 23, which has in the Bishops
Survey 126. The Savoy in that Paper has but 6, which in the Bishops Survey has
just the same Number, and St. Giles Cripplegate has there but 2, which in the
Bishops Survey has 20.

Of the care that was probably taken in those Parishes in London that made
Returns in that Survey, Covent-Garden-Parish, and some others are Instances in
one thing, namely that there are near so many houses as Returns are made for,
or not many more. Thus in Covent Garden the Conformists returned are 790: the
Papists 64, the Nonconformists 6: and so Servants and Children and Lodgers
being not returned (as Dr. Glanvile says,) the persons of Men and their Wives
returned in all there, are 860, which agrees pretty well with the number of
houses there which are about 460. I suppose that Printed Paper by the Number of
Inhabitants included only Housekeepers as the Bishops Survey did, and tho it
is not to be doubted but that when that Survey was made, there were in the
respective Diocesses, Deaneries and Parishes therein returned, at least the
full Number of the Papists therein mentioned, yet the Popish Plot about two
years after occasioning the other Paper, it may be supposed that what by many
Popish Families removing out of the Realm, and what by many of them coming to
our Churches, the Number of the Popish Recusants did there considerably
decrease, as it has from the beginning of the Reformation gradually done,
unless in some particular Intervals, or Conjunctures, and is likely so to do,
till the uncouthness and strangeness of their Principles and Scarcity of the
persons that own them shall make them tolerable as Rarities.

I did before in this Letter thus far accord with Mr. Nigh that Popery since the
Reformation may have sometimes acquired a new vigor, and that it has not
always since its first assaults against Popery gained ground of it
proportionably, but whatever the Fate of the Ejected Puritan Divines in Queen
Elizabeth's days was, and whether deserved or not, and properly or not timed, I
enquire not (tho yet in our days the plenty of Conformist Divines is such
visibly that the supply of all our good Livings needs not crave Aid from
Dissenters) but do on all thoughts made persist in my opinion, that Protestancy
has since its being first espoused here as a Religion propagated it self by
the great increase of its followers, except in some infectious Intervals of
time, as I may call them.

Thus tho the Obsarvator on the Bills of Mortality has taught us as aforesaid
that every Marriage with another produces four Children, yet in times of
Pestilence (we are told by him) that the Christnings decrease, and that a
Disposition in the. Air toward the Plague does also dispose Women to Abortion,
and considering this, we may well infer, when the Burials do much exceed the
Births in any City revera (and not seemingly, by the not Registring all the
Births) that tho the Bills of Mortality tell us that there dyed then none of
the Plague, and that there were then Parishes infected with the Plague none,
yet there is then a Pestilence there Reigning. And thus is it a Pestilential
time with a Church, when more Apostatise from it then are born or as I may say
regenerated into it, or converted; and therefore by such times we are not to
estimate the increase of the propagation of the Numbers of the Church of
England.

There was a time in Queen Elizabeth's Reign that the Reformation was honored
by all Englands, populace, being of a piece almost, and worshipping God in the
way prescribed with one heart and one mind: and then as we are told by Sir Re.
Cotton, p. 42, and 43. Of his considerations for repressing the increase of
Papists, till the 11th of her Reign, a Recusants name was scarce known, etc.
the name of a Papist smelt rank even in their own Nostrils, and for pure shame
to be accounted such, they resorted duly to our Churches: but when they saw
their great Coriphaeus Sanders had sl^ly pinned the Name of Puritans on the
Sleeves of Protestants that encountered them with most courage and perc^ived
that the word was pleasing to some of our own side, etc. That (says he)
brought plenty of water to the Popes Mill, and there will most Men grind where
they see appearance to be well served.

But the accidental increase of their Numbers in any Conjuncture was carefully
regarded by the State, and to this purpose we are told it in Heywood Townsends
Collections, that Dr. Bennet acquainted the House of Commons that there were
1500 R^cusants in Yorkshire, which he vouched upon his Credit were presented in
the Ecclesiastical Court, and before the Council at York.

Popery it seems then gained ground in the poor North, having lest it in the
warm South, and to this day in the Northern parts of England where the Livings
generally are poor, the light of the Gospel has not quite dissipated the Mists
of Popery, in so much that if any one shall tell me that the Province of York
which bears but a 6 th part of the Taxes, and has not in it much above a 6 th
part of the people that the Province of Canterbury has, yet contains at least
the half of the number of Papists that the Province of Canterbury does, I shall
not contradict his Estimate.

It is the Observation of Dr. Fuller in his Church History of the part of
England, Trent North, that it is scarce a third of England in ground, but almost
the half thereof for the growth of Recusants therein.

And thus as the Observator on the Bills of Mortality has observed that
Northern as well as Southern Countries are infected with great Plagues, although
in the Southern Countries they are more vehement and do begin and end more
suddenly, it may be said that the infection of Popery does yet continue in our
Northern parts.

But that the Papists valued themselves on their numbers throughout England,
toward the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, appears out of that
Pestilential Book of Father Parsons about the Succession, part. 2 d, where he
weighs the several parties of England in the Balance of State, and says, It
is well known that in the Realm of England at this day there are three
different and opposite Bodies of Religion, that are of most bulk and do carry
most sway and power which three Bodies are commonly known by the Names of
Protestant, Puritants and Papists: and afterward speaking of the Great Power of
the Protestant Party for wealth and force. He says p. 140. A chief Member of
the Protestant Body is the Clergy of England, especially the Bishops and the
other Men in Ecclesiastical Dignities which are like to be a great back to this
Party at that day, etc. meaning the time after the death of Queen Elizabeth,
when her Successor should enter on the Stage: and then having weighed the
Puritan Party and its interest, he says, The third Body of Religion which are
those of the Roman who call themselves Catholics, which is the least in show
at this present by reason of the Laws and Tides of the time that run against
them, yet are they of no small consideration in this Affair to him that weighs
things indifferently, and this in respect as well of their Party at home as
their friends abroad: for at home they being of two sorts as the World knows,
the one more upon that discover themselves, which are the Recusants, and the
other more close and privy that accommodate themselves to all external
preceedings of the time and State, so as they cannot be known or at leastwise
not much touched, we may imagine that their Number is not small throughout the
Realm, etc.

The Vigor of the hopes that Popery had in that Conjuncture appears out of
that great Historical Letter of D'Ossat to his King, Anno 1601, where he makes
such a judicious abstract of this goodly Book of Parsons (for so he calls it Ce
beau livre) and Animadversions on it, and says, It Is about four years ago that
the Pope did Create in England a certain Arciprestre to the end that all
Ecclesiastics and Catholics of the Realm should have one to whom to go and
have recourse about the things relating to the Catholic Religion, and by means
thereof to be united among themselves, and to understand what shall be good to
be done for their preservation and the re-establishment of the Catholic
Religion, and some have given his Holiness to understand that by that means he
would make a great Party of the Catholics in England for what he would effect,
and then acquaints the King, That the Pope had sent three Briefs to his Nuntio
in the Low Countries for him to keep till the death of Queen Elizabeth, and
after that to send them to England, one to the Ecclesiastics, another to the
Nobility, and another to the third Estate; by which the said three Estates are
admonished and exhorted by his Holiness to remain united together to receive a
Catholic King that his Holiness shall name, and such a one who shall appear
acceptable to them and honorable, and all this for the Honor and Glory of
God, and for the restoring the Catholic Religion, etc.

Here was it seems one Brief more sent to England then Mr. Marvel mentions in
his Growth of Popery, where he says, That the Pope sent two Briefs in order to
exclude King James from the Succession to the Crown.

In fine, Popery was in a Storm during the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and in it
the Papists were sometimes carried up to the Skies, and then down again, and in
their Enterprises with variety of success in some conjunctures, their fortune
was to reel to and fro and stagger like a drunken man; and as in a Storm many
hands are necessary, so on the whole matter they found need of the numbers of
more hands then they could command, and their Numbers decreased in the balance
of the people here, as much by the King of Spains Ambition, as did the numbers
of the Papists in the United Provinces thereby.

And as they looked big on the account of their numbers in the latter end of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, so they did in the beginning of King James's: and as
D'Ossat said in that Letter to Villeroy of April 2d, 1603. You will find that
the Spaniards who are most troubled about this Event (meaning of the
Succession) will be the first to Congratulate the King of Scotland, so it
happened here with the Papists, as appears by a Book in 4 to, Printed for
Joseph Barnes at Oxford, Anno 1604 called, A Consideration of the Papists
Reasons of State and Religion for toleration of Popery in England, intimated in
their supplication to the Kings Majesty and the States of the present
Parliament, where in their Supplication at large Printed they in the beginning
thereof in a profession too as inauspicious as was possibly, say that His
Majesty's direct Title to the Imperial Crown of the Realm both by Lineal
Descent and Priority of Blood, and your Highness most quiet access to the same
do exceedingly possess and englad our hearts.

The Tide of the Succession against which they had striven was made by Fate to
run smooth and clear, and they were resolved to appear on the Surface of it
with a nos poma natamus.

Gabriel Powel of St. Maryhall in Oxford, the Publisher of that Book says in
his Animadversion on the said beginning of that supplication, How can Papists
without blushing acknowledge his Majesty's Title to the Crown of England to be
direct, seeing they have heretofore most indirectly and most unjustly oppugned
the same; which Traite^ous Parsons confesses albeit for excuse, he assures
himself that whatsoever has been said, writ or done by any Catholic against
his Majesty which with some others might breed disgust, has been directed to
this end, to make his Majesty first a Catholic and then our King, as if
Treason and Treachery against his Highness could make him a Catholic, and
impugning of his direct and just Title, tended to make him King. Rob. Parsons
in his Treatise of three Conversions in the dedicat. Addition to the Catholics.

But tho they gave themselves (as it were) an Act of Oblivion as to the many
Treasons of Parsons his Book of the Succession, yet in this supplication they
forgot not again in effect to use Parsons his division of the people of England
into three parts, and so to shape the Estimates of their Numbers: and they say
in their first reason of State, the World knows that there are three Kinds of
Subjects in the Realm, the Protestant, the Puritan and the Catholics affected,
and by general report the subject Catholickly affected is not inferior to the
Protestant, or Puritan either in number or alliance, etc. And says Powel in
his Notes on that Clause, If by Catholickly affected you mean plainly Papists,
the World knows that in comparison of the Protestants they are but as it were a
handful of Thieves among honest Subjects, however you are bold to brag that at
this present there are within the Realm more Catholics and Catholic Priests
then there were forty years since. Math. Kellison in his Survey in the Epist.
dedic. almost at the latter end.

They afterward in their Supplication use the word Catholickly affected to make
it comprehensive of both parts of Parsons his distinction of Papists, more
open, and close, and therein have the honor of the Invention of the Phrase of
Popishly affected, that has so much galled them since, and at this day
continues to do: and I shall accord with them that the Number of Papists or of
Popishly affected was apparently grown great in the juncture of time, after
King James came here to the Crown: but it is not deniable that after the Epoche
of the Gun-powder-Treason, it did more sensibly decrease; for they cannot say
that by the intended blow from the Gun powder, they designed to make him
Catholic in order to make him continue a King.

The Dean of Bangor in his excellent Sermon in Print, and Preached at St.
Martins on the 5 th of November, 1678. Speaking, p. 29, of the Conspirators in
the Gun-powder-Treason says judiciously, For the Number I believe the design
it self was known to few, but that there was a design was known to many more.
King James himself tells us so in his works, p. 291. A great number of my
Popish Subjects of all Ranks and Sorts both Men and Women as well within as
without the Country, had a confused Notion and obscure knowledge that some
great thing was to be done in that Parliament for the Weal of the Church, tho
for Secresies sake they were not to be acquainted with the particulars.

And no doubt but that great Number took occasion to slip their Necks out of
the Collar of Misprision of Religion as well as of Treason thereupon, and a
vast increase of the Numbers of the Protestants was thereby occasioned. But
there afterward appeared another Conjuncture of time in which the Catholickly
affected did in his Reign multiply in the which however implicit faith could
never come so much in fashion but that (as Gondomar observed in the Kings
Chapel) when ever the Preacher quoted Texts of Scripture, the Auditors would
immediately turn to their Bibles to find them.

Mr. Pryn says in his Introduction to the Archbishop of Canterbury' s Trial,
p. 13. That the number of Priests and Popish Recusants enlarged out of Duress
by King James, if we may believe Gondomars Letter from hence to the King of
Spain, or the Letter of Serica that Kings Secretary, Dated from Madrid, July 7
th, 1622, to Mr. Cottington was no less then 4000. He had before in p. 10. and
12. set down the Petition and Remonstrance intended to be sent to King James by
the House of Commons in December 1621, where among other things it is said, That
the Popish Recusants were then dangerously increased in their Numbers, and
complaint is made of the swarm of Priests and Jesuits dispersed in all parts
of the Kingdom.

It Is probable that not many Papists except Priests were then imprisoned, and
it may be conceived that the Number of Priests who escaped the Net of
Imprisonment was more then double to that which was took therein, and that the
Number of Lay-Papists was very growing in that Conjuncture.

Mr. John Gee's Book of the Foot out of the Snare of 4th Edition Printed in
London, 1624. mentions the Names of many Romish Priests and Jesuits resident
about London in that year, and begins with the Bishop of Chalcedon, and shortly
after him mentions Collington the Titular Archdeacon of London, and Wright
Treasurer for the Jesuits, and Smith Vicar General for the South parts of
England, and Broughton Vicar General for the North parts of England, and Bennet
Vicar General for the West parts of England, and the whole Number of them there
named together with the places of their Lodging, is two hundred sixty one: and
the number of the Jesuits out of that Total is 72. Moreover out of that Total
he mentions only 3 as having been formerly in Prison in England, and but one
who was at that time in Prison. At the end of the Catalogue of the Priests
there he says, These be all the Birds of this feather which have come to my
Eye or Knowledge by Name, etc. yet above four times so many there are that
overspread our Thickets through England as appears by the empty Nests beyond
Sea, from whence they have flown by Shoals of late, I mean the Seminary
Colleges which have deeply disgorged by several Missions of them, as also is
gathered by particular Computation of their divided Tro^ps: when as in one
Shire where I have abode sometime they are reputed to nestle almost three
hundred of this Brood.

In the following Pages he there Prints a Catalogue of Popish Physicians in,
and about the City of London, and makes the Number of them 27; and no doubt but
that in that Conjuncture of time the number of Papists increasing, there were
enough Patients of that persuasion to afford Livelyhoods to so many Physicians.

In that Book immediately after p. 116. he Prints a Catalogue of such English
Books that he knew of to have been Printed, reprinted or dispersed by the
Priests and their Agents in England within two years last past or thereabout,
viz. 156.

So fortunate was that Conjuncture to the Papists then that the odious Name of
Puritan was bestowed on any of the Magistrates that went to put any Laws in
execution against Popery, as we find it from Sir R. Cotton in his serious
Considerations for repressing of the increase of Jesuits, Priests, and Papists
without shedding of blood, p. 33. his words there are, There is no small Number
that stand doubtful whether it be a gratful work to cross Popery or that it may
be done safely without a foul aspersion of Puritanisme, or a shrewd turn for
their labor at some times or other, etc.

In the Petition and Remonstrance of the House of Commons in December 1621
before mentioned, among the Causes of the growing mischiefs here the fifth
Paragraph assigns one what would make Popery very prolific with Proselytes
here, viz. The strange Confederacy of the Princes of the Popish Religion aiming
mai^ly at the advancement of theirs and subverting ours, etc. and another is
assigned in the 6 th Paragraph, viz. The great and many Armies raised and
maintained at the Charge of the King of Spain, the chief of that League, and
another in. 8th, The interposing of Foreign Princes and their Agents in the
behalf of Popish Recusants for Connivance and Favors to them.

But in fine, in King James his Reign, the gross of the Number of the
Protestants was generally reckoned to be ten times greater then the Papists,
the which is hinted in the Posthuma of Cotton who then said, To what purpose
shows it to muster the Names of the Protestants, and to vaunt them to be ten
for one of the Roman Faction.

In the Reign of the Royal Martyr their Numbers decreased faster in many active
Conjunctures of time then they increased in any lazy one. The Author of the
Regal Apology, and supposed to be Doctor Bate the Physician says in p. 39. It
is well known there are not 24000 Papists Convicted in all England and Wales:
And if we should suppose the Number of the Papists then not Convicted to be
double to that of the Convicted, yet would such their number appear
considerably dwindled from what it was swollen to in any Conjuncture before in
King James's Reign. And I believe if our Civil Wars had not happened, one Canon
even of the Convacation of 1640, as ill as that Convocation heard among many, I
mean the third Canon would have effected the extermination of Popery from
England in the Reign of the Royal Martyr.

The Title of the Canon is for Suppressing of the growth of Popery. No doubt
but a little before that time Popery did again lift up his head as if its
Redemption were to draw nigh in Ireland and England, and therefore the
Convocation then with great conduct and skill did lead up our Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy to confront its growth: and I do not remember to have found that
Phrase of the growth of Popery (which has in later days so filled our Mouths)
used in any Author before the writing of that Canon: and do think that all the
Committees that have been appointed to prevent the growth of Popery, or Books
of that Subject have not produced to the World any means or expedient so likely
to make Popery have done growing here, as is the excellent Scheme for that
purpose drawn in that Canon, and which when ever it shall be with vigor
executed will make our fears grow out of fashion either of the number of the
Arguments of the Papists, or of the Argument of their Numbers.

That since that Restoration of our King and Laws, and of the discipline of our
Church, a Conjuncture happened that made the barren Womb of Popery here fruitful
of Numbers none will deny, who consider how all our great Divines of the Church
of England did so lately lift up their voices like a Trumpet against it, as I
before observed.

In the account of the Numbers of the persuasions in Religion in the Province
of Canterbury that Dr. Glanvile said he had seen, and which is contained in a
Sheet of Paper, among the nine Preliminary Observations, the first is, That
many left the Church upon the late indulgence who before did frequent it.

I believe by the many there are meant those that veer'd toward Popery, and I
suppose that few had for several precedent years repaired thither from fear of
the Penal Laws.

We have a Remark given us by that Learned Statesman and Noble Confessor of
the Church of England, the Earl of Clarendon in his judicious Animadversions
printed Anno 1673, on Cressy' s Book against Dr. Stillingfleet, That the rude
and boisterous behavior of some of the Roman Catholics here disturbed the
happy Calm they all enjoyed, and the vanity and folly of others made that ill
use of the Kings bounty and generosity toward them, that they endeavored to
make it believed that it proceeded not from Charity and Compassion toward their
persons, but from affection to their Religion, and took upon them to reproach
the Church of England and all who adhered to it, as if they had been in a
condition as well as a disposition to oppress it, and to affront and
discountenance all who would adhere to it, and so alienated the affections of
those who desired they should not be disquieted and kindled a jealousy in
others, who had believed that they were willing to attempt it, and had more
power to compass it then was discerned, etc. and this mischief the wisest and
soberest Catholics of England have long foreseen, would be the effect of that
petulant and unruly Spirit that swayed too much among them, and did all they
could to restrain it, etc. And afterward says, As if they could subdue the
whole Kingdom and so care not whom they provoke.

A friend of mine in the Kings Loyal long Parliament wrote to me for News after
one of their Sessions, that the Speaker of the House of Commons, Mr. Seymour
opening according to the customary manner in a public Speech to his Majesty in
the House of Lords, the nature of the Bills then ready for the Royal Assent,
spoke thus concerning that sharp one that will forever here cut Popery to the
quick, viz. And for the severity of this Bill to the Papists, they may thank
their own petulant insolence.

The word petulant being very significant, and importing saucy, malepert,
impudent, reproachful, ready to do wrong, one would suppose that those two
great observing persons would not apply it to any body of men without just
occasion.

It seems the House of Commons at their next Session in an Address to the King,
October 31. 1673. had this Clause, That for another age at the least this
Kingdom will be under continual apprehensions of the growth of Popery, and the
danger of the Protestant Religion, and in an Address to his Majesty, November
the 3 d, 1673. Speaking of the Popish Recusants, they have these words, whose
numbers and insolences are greatly of late increased, etc.

It was then high time for that Great Minister of the King, the Earl of Danby
when he saw that of all Dissenters chiefly the Popish ones had sascinated so
many with a belief of their Numbers, to cause that great enquiry into them to
be made, and it was his fortune by the very enquiry to strip the Papists of
many of their valued number, for the very next observation to that I before
mentioned is this, The sending forth these Enquiries has caused many to
frequent the Church.

Alsted in his Chronology ventures to say, p. 112. David ex mera (...) numerat
populum, and the thing perhaps done with an ill intent was punished with a
Plague from God: but the Fact of our Noble and Profound Statesman did abate
the Plague of the late Conjuncture of pragmatical insolence, and too the Plague
of the fear of Papists that was then so epidemical among Protestants, and did
in effect console us as with the words of Elisha, viz. Fear not for they that
be with us are more then they that be with them: and indeed the numbering of
people in the Bills of Mortality who dye of the Plague is not more necessary to
the State, then is the numbering of the Souls infected in any Conjuncture with
destructive opinions, and the omission thereof in a public Minister when ever
it should be as necessary as at that time it was, would appear in him a
Lethargy that would be as Penal as a Plague to a Kingdom.

That useful undertaking of his Lordship as it was worthy of his very great
abilities, and vigilance for the public, so was it of the great power he had
in the Government, and could not have been conducted so far as it was by any
private persons: the Book called Popery absolutely destructive to Monarchy,
printed in London in the year 1673. shows the danger of ordinary Magistrates
intermedling with the numbers of Papists in particular Parishes, by instancing
p. 115. how when the long Parliament was first called, Justice Howard was
ordered to deliver up a Catalogue of all Recusants within the Liberties of
Westminster, to prevent which Mr. John James a Zealous Popist stabbed the
Justice in Westminster Hall: and Sir George Wharton in his Gesta Britannorum
says Anno 1640. November 21. Justice Howard assaulted and stabbed in
Westminster Hall. It seems that Justice of Peace as well as Justice Godfry
found what it was to anger St. Peter, and so has that Noble Earl done (I
believe) by some Papists murdering his reputation and shamming the Blood of
Godfry on him in vallanous Pamphlets, of which I hear that 32000 were dispersed
in one Week, and that it appeared at an Honorable Committee that no
inconsiderable quantity of them was dispersed by Celier.

It Is probable that the time that was taken for discovering the number both of
Papists and other Dissenters was most proper, in regard that the Declaration of
Indulgence visiting them as with a Sunshine after the Rain, invited them out
of their Recesses to appear abroad visibly, and as the words of the Scripture
in another sense are, To move out of their holes like Worms of the Earth. And
as if any man would give himself the trouble to essay the numbering of the Worms
that are in the Earth, the properest time for that his affected Curiosity would
be after the Rain making the earth soft, and the Sun then warming it had
invited those Animals to come out of the Earth, the which lie within a few Foot
of the Surface of it; so for the above reason was the investigation of the
numbers of the Papists most properly timed.

I am therefore of opinion with the aforesaid Dr. That the number of the
Papists was near the matter retained with truth, and that their number is still
waining and will be so more and more, but in some accidental Conjunctures of
time.

A late Author has published it, That in England in these twenty years last
past 250 Families of the Gentry and 12 of the Nobility have quitted the
profession of Popery.

And if any one shall affirm, as some considerate Papists have done, that the
number here of secret Papists and who go not to Mass is as great as the number
of the professed ones, I shall say that the number of the people of England
having been in this Discourse represented so much greater then it was in former
Estimates, the number of secret Papists cast into that of the known ones will
perhaps signify little more then the dust in the Balance of the Nation.

Their Numbers that did somewhat increase in the beginning of the Conjuncture
of their petulant Insolence that went before the time of the Popish Plot, as
the Purples, Smallpox and other Malignant Diseases forerun the Plague, did
sensibly and suddenly decay by the change of the Air, that the Loyal long
Parliament and its Act of the Test made, just as the Observator of the Bills of
Mortality has let us see that by the reason of the changes and dispositions in
the Air, the Plague does by sudden Jumps start back in a very few days time
from vast numbers to very small ones: insomuch that presently after the
breaking out of the Plot they took the advantage of the detection of the
paucity of their Numbers, that the Earl of Danby's aforesaid Prudence had made,
as thence to raise an Argument ab impossibili that they should design a Plot to
turn the Tide of Nature in the Nation.

And thus as Men once passed the valuing themselves on the Charms and Vigor
of Youth, do it for the Reverence of their Old Age, and hope to be the better
treated as Guests in the World for the shortness of the time they are to stay
in it, they did resemblingly too look big upon the smallness of their Num^e^s.
The Author therefore of the Compendium printed Anno 1679 tells us, a propos p.
85, That there are not 50000 of the Roman Catholic Religion in England, Men,
Women and Children, and that agrees well enough with the Surveys of the Numbers
of those of that Religion in the Province of Canterbury of the Age of
Communicants; and admitting the Total of such to be doubled on the account of
Papists below the Age of Sixteen, an account that ought to be admitted, the
Observator on the Bills of Mortality having taught us (as aforesaid) that there
are in nature about as many under the Age of 16, as above it, and with the
making the Total of all the Papists in the Province of York, according to
Fuller, equal to that in the Province of Canterbury, the number of the Papists
throughout England will appear to be probably near what the Author of the
Compendium has estimated.

That their Numbers did considerably decrease after the fermentation in peoples
minds relating to Religion followed the Declaration of Indulgence, and after
the severity of the Parliament to Papists thereby occasioned, a convincing
Argument may be had from the Letters of Mr. Coleman, the which did confute
several imp^tations of it in Mr. Marvel's Growth of Popery to the King's
Ministers, better than any Apologies could have done, and has enabled Fame to
Trumpet them forth to Posterity as Confessors, whom Envy here whispered to be
Traditors; and let the present Age see that their alleged Closing with Popery,
was but in the way of contending Wrestlers, and not of friendly Embracers: And
no doubt then but the many Dependants and Followers those Ministers had, and
the Candidates for their favor and expectants of Offices thereby, were then
Enemies to all implicit Faith, but only for what they thought the Religion of
their Chiefs.

In his Letter to le Cheese of September 29, 1675, He says, That the Lord
Treasurer, Lord Keeper, and Duke of Lauderdale were become as fierce Apostles
and as Zealous for Protestant Religion and against Popery, as ever my Lord
Arlington was before them, and in pursuance thereof persuaded the King to issue
out those severe Orders and Proclamations against Catholics, which came out in
February last, by which they did as much as in them lay to extirpate all
Catholics and Catholic Religion out of the Kingdom. And he in his Letter to
the Internuntio of the 5th of February 1674/5 tells him, That the King had
signed a Proclamation last Wednesday to banish all the Priests, Natives of this
Kingdom, to forbid all Subjects to hear Mass in the Queens Chapel, and at the
Houses of Ambassadors, to bring home all the Youth that is now out of the
Kingdom in any Popish Colleges, to prosecute all Persons, as to their Estates,
according to the Laws, which are so insupportable, that it is impossible for any
that is reached by them to have wherewithal to eat Bread, if they be executed
according to the said Proclamation.

It was but about October 1673, that the House of Commons in an Address to the
King, took occasion to say, It is now more then one Age that the Subjects have
lived in continual apprehensions of the increase of Popery, and the decay of
the Protestant Religion; but what Mr. Coleman's apprehensions were of the
Growth of Popery on the 5th of February 1674, I have shown before, and am of
opinion, That though possibly in the following course of time to the birth of
the Popish Plot, the coming of many Romish Missionaries here might make some
accession to the Number of the Papists, that however the Laity of them, here
Inhabitants, has in its Numbers sensibly decreased, and will do so more and
more, till the most timid Protestants shall be no more aggrieved at their
Number, then of that of the Muggletonians, or of the Sweet Singers of Israel.

That the discovery of the Popish Plot has had a natural Tendency to the
abating the Number of their persuasion, must be granted by all who believe
there was one, and who know that the blustering attempts of the Conspirators to
subvert the Protestant Religion, and which have therein failed, must end in the
better settlement of it, as all Storms that do not overthrow a Tree confirm its
growth.

Mr. Care in his History of the Popish Plot, mentions, That the Jesuits and
Seminary Priests in England at the time of the Plot were about 1800, a Number
far inferior to that in the Conjuncture in King Iames' s time before mentioned:
And short of the Number mentioned by Prynne in a Book of his, Printed Anno
1659, called A True and Perfect Narrative of what was done, spoken by and
between Mr. Prynne, the old and new forcibly Secluded Members, and those now
sitting, etc. where he says, p. 44, That an English Lord returned from Rome
about four years since averred, that the Provincial of the English Jesuits,
when he went to see the College in Rome, assured him, That they had then above
1500 of their Society of Jesuits in England able to work in several
Professions and Trades which they had there taken upon them, the better to
Support and Secure themselves from being discovered, and infuse their
Principles into the vulgar People.

Mr. Coleman complains of a Conjuncture as to Popery that he writ in, that tho
the Harvest was great, the Laborers were very few; but Mr. Prynne supposes
the Laboring Jesuits who wrought in the Trade of Religion, and in other
Trades too, were here after the year 50 above 1500; and it may therefore be
well conceived that there were many Jesuits here beside who could only manage
their Tools in the former Trade, and perhaps as many Seminary Priests as
Jesuits: And no doubt without some hint of notification from some one of the
Jesuits Provincials, their Number in any Protestant State can hardly be
conjectured, in regard of their Proteus-like varying their Shapes, accordingly
as a Description of them is given in the Book called, The Emperor and the
Empire betrayed, where it is said, There are in the Society of Jesus Men of
several sorts, some of which are dispensed with not only to lay aside the
Habit, but to marry and bear all sorts of Dignities; and he further presumes to
say, That the Emperor was thus in this Order in his younger days.

Mr. Prynne in p. 42. of that Book averrs, That Oliver Cromwell declared to his
Parliament Anno 1654, That the Emissaries of the Jesuits then came over in
great swarms, and that they had then fixed in England an Episcopal Power, with
Archdeacons and other Persons to pervert the People: a thing they never since
the Reformation, I think, attempted in any Conjuncture till Quarto Caroli, and
then (as appears out of Rushworth' s Collections) in a Conference between the
Lords and Commons, and managed by Secretary Cook, he said, There was at that
time a Popish Hierarchy established in England, that they had a Bishop
Consecrated by the Pope, and that Bishop had his subalternate Officers of all
kinds, as Vicars General, Archdeacons, Rural Deans, Apparitors, and that they
were not Nominal or Titular Officers only, but they all Executed their
Jurisdictions, and made their ordinary Visitations throughout the Kingdom, kept
Courts, and determined Ecclesiastical Causes.

But it appears not that they had any such Hierarchy here at the time of the
Plot, or that they have any thing like it at this time in this Realm.

Mr. Prynne tells us in p. 49. of that Book, That in that Conjuncture in
Cromwell's time above 30000 Popish Pamphlets were permitted to be Printed and
Vended in England, and that of this the London Stationers complained in Print.

But it is very little that they have Printed here since the King's
Restoration, and the same private Presses which gave Birth to the few
Pamphlets they printed, would have done it to as many Volumes as ever Tostatus,
as Mr. Prynne writ, if they had pleased.

The great Number of the Protestants must still be naturally attractive of the
lesser to it, for the preservation of their Persons, tho at the price of the
diminution of their Numbers, as a drop is best preserved in the Sea, tho it be
there swallowed up. This Notion is well confirmed by Edmund Spencer in his
Observations of the History of Ireland in former times, where he shows in what
course of time a handful of English, planted among the Numerous Irish must of
necessity become Irish, as indeed his own Family there did, as I am told, and
that Cromwell speaking to the Grandchild of Spencer in English, that on the
account of the Fame of his Ancestor he should enjoy his Estate, was not by him
understood.

And there is no doubt but time will illuminate the Papists as to the Pope's
Politics being inconvenient to them, and only convenient to himself: For the
same Principle in Politics that makes every lesser State have a regret against
being United to a greater, namely, for fear of its being absorbed thereby (a
Notion lately in vogue when the Union of England and Scotland was agitated)
engages the Pope to keep the Papists from a Coalition with the Protestants
here, that would drown the visibility of their Numbers, and consequently the
appearance of the Numbers of his Subjects in this Realm, for so in effect they
are.

The true Cause therefore in Nature that made the Pope by his Bull in Queen
Elizabeth's time prohibit the Papists from continuing to come to our Churches,
and to our Common Prayer, a thing they would else still have done, was the
Pope's being enabled by such Prohibitions to put Marks on his Sheep whereby to
know them, and their Numbers: And which had he forborne, there had probably been
no Number of them returnable in the Bishops Survey.

It Is therefore not to be wondered that our Church got nothing but the
destruction of its Hierarchy in the last Age, by the Policy used then by some
of our well-meaning Churchmen, who thought that the use of some Ceremonies
more than our Law required would have brought the Church of Rome over to us. '
It Is aut Caesar aut Nullus that the Pope would be; and he will here keep as many
Subjects as he can, since not able to acquire as many as he would. And the
truth is, as the attempt of an excellent Swimmer to save one totally inexpert
therein usually proves fatal, so likely will the generous and charitable design
of a Church of a rational Discipline interposing to save one of an irrational,
and that can do nothing by vigor of reason to bear up it self, and is
therefore mere dead weight.

Since the Epoche of the Popish Plot that the Press has been to all writing
Mankind so much unrestrained, the World has seen little of the Papists Learned
Writings, or scarce any thing writ with Art and Wit, except the Compendium, and
instead of proving in Volumes that the Church of England is no true Church, or
that St. Peter was ever at Rome, they have extended all the Nerves of their Wit
in Pamphlets, only to prove that Doctor Oats is no true Doctor, and that he
was never a ^alamanca.

And I believe that as the asserting of Popery here, per viam Thomae, (or in
the way of the Schools) is in the Course of Nature Eternally over, so will the
adorning it by the way of Curiosity of Wit or Fancy grow obsolete.

But here it is proper to be observed, that in all the Conjunctures before
mentioned, and in those wherein our former Protestant Princes for deep reason
of State have been most favorable to their Popish Subjects by the Relaxation
of the Penal Laws, and when some Papists made great Figures in the Court, and
got the Balance of Court-preferment a while by stealth into their hands, and
that Holy Church being anew Whitened over with some temporary Prosperity, many
Proselytes did Flock to it as Doves to their Windows, yet the Ground that
Popery got then was but Made Ground and not natural, and was too chargeable to
be kept. And as the vulgar have falsely imagined that a great Plague has
happened in the beginning of every Princes Reign, so has it been obvious to the
more refined observers, that in the Reign of every new Protestant Prince,
Popery has made a fresh essay to augment it self in the Epoch of a new
Conjuncture. And that as in the most Pestilential times of Mortality, even in
our Metropolis, almost only the poorer sort of People are swept away by it,
Thus was it too in in those Conjunctures here, when Popery boasted of its many
Converts.

But Nemo decipit lumbos, and Popery when pampered, did but Counterfeit a sound
strength, and as Quintilian's words are, Verum robur inani sagina mentiri, and
was but in bad traveling Case by that washy adventitious flesh, and soon tired
in its furious Race; while Protestancy had that permanent Motion which Dr.
Iackson on the Creed supposes the Heavens would have if God should move them
in an instant, and which if he did, were (he says) more properly to be called
A vigorous permanency, alluding perhaps to things seeming to stand still when
they move fastest. Dr. Twisse in answer to him does to the Expression of a
Permanent Motion, with a mirth and raillery unusual in him, apply that Verse of
a Poet whose Horse being tired, and not moveable by the Spur, said to his
fellow Traveller, who Rein'd in his Horse to go easily; Your Horse stands still
faster then mine will go. And thus (raillery apart) I do believe that
Protestancy will stand still faster than Popery can go, let it be never so high
mounted: And we may properly resemble the course of Protestancy in any
Conjuncture to the Sun, which enjoys its Natural Motion at the same time it
suffers its Forced, and according to Mr. Cowley's Expression does at the same
time run the day and walk the year.

And we may as properly resemble the height and greatness of Popery in any
former Conjuncture, and the greatness of Peoples fears of its Growth and
Continuance to the dreadful Entrance and dull Exit of a Comet.

Many Comets have hung over our heads, and lasted some considerable time, that
were bigger than the Globe of the Earth, which as they appeared on a sudden, so
has that great Mass of Matter, of which they consisted, and which threat'ned
destruction to the Earth, by little and little dwindled to nothing, or
disappeared. And this has been the Event of the Growth of Popery, and
over-growth of its Fears here, and I believe will be in any Conjuncture that
can come.

I believe that if such an extremely improbable thing should ever happen, as
that the Legislative Power should allow the Papists a public place for their
Devotion in every great City in England, the very sight of their Ceremonies
would increase and sharpen the Popular aversion against their Church.

Du Fresnes in his Learned Glossary in three Tomes, as to the Scriptores mediae
and infimae Latinitatis, mentions the origination of the use and name of the
Surplice, and quotes Durand in Ration. lib. 3. c. 1. n. 10. 11. for it, viz. Eo
quod antiquitus super tunicas pelliceas de pellibus mortuorum animalium factas
induebatur, quod adhuc in quibusdam Ecclesiis observatur: And cites many
Authorities about its being used by the Clergy; and while the Ancient Monks
lived upon the labor of their hands, and wore such Leathern Clothes as
laboring Rusticks in the Towns with whom they wrought, it was but a necessary
piece of decency when they retired to their Oratories to Worship God together,
to have that covering of Linen that might hide the sordidness of their
Clothes, and so probably that Linen Surplice appearing in it self decent, and
carrying with it more respect from the just Reverence those Innocent Ancient
Monks attracted, it came by that means first in fashion in the Church to be
worn by the better habited Priests, and being here enjoined by the Laws of our
Sovereign, and therein declared to be a thing not in its own nature necessary,
it seems to me to be an uncivil humor in our Dissenters so much to quarrel the
use of it; and do suppose that the Civility of the French Nation appearing in
the Protestants of that Realm, who are here, and to whom it is natural not only
to comply with Princes but even their fellow Subjects in the use of all
Ceremonies they expect to be treated with, may instill such a humor of
Complaisance into some of those here who were aggrieved at our Churches, or, as
I may say, our Kings Ceremonies, as all the Learned Books of our Divines have
not yet done.

But if after the disuse of our Ceremonies in the late Usurpation the sight of
a Surplice does fright them so much from our Church, how would they be
disgusted to see one with a shaven Crown, with his Amice Girdle, Aube, Maniple,
Stole, Chesible, and other pretended holy Vestments, and see him use Crossing,
Turning, Ducking, Lifting, Whispering, Gaping, mingling of Wine and Water,
Lickings, and other variety of Gestures, and to hear Prayers in Latin, and to
the Saints, and for the Dead, and to have our Bells Baptized, to have Vailes,
Holy Water, Holy-Ashes, Palms, etc.

Erasmus says in his Epistles, p. 108. Ep. 10. An hic sacrificulum illum
mal^unt imitari qui suum mumpsimus quo fuerat viginti usus annos, muta^e
noluit, admonitus a quopiam sumpsimus esse legendum? The Verse of Scripture in
which he read that word, was Joshua 9. 12. En panes quando egressi sumus de
Domibus nostris ut veniremus ad vos Calidos [Mumpsimus] nunc sicci facti sunt
and vetustate nimia Comminuti, no other Verse appearing to me by the
Concordance of the Vulgar Latin to have Sumpsimus in it: And the folly of the
Priest in so reading was so famous as to come to the knowledge of our Harry the
Eighth, and to occasion his saying (as my Lord Herbert tells us) Some of the
Clergy are too stiff in their old Mumpsimus, others too curious in their new
Sumpsimus.

But that Verse in Joshua was as unlucky and as ill boding a one to Popery for a
Priest thus to signalize en ridicule, as any he could have found in Holy Writ,
and carries in it self a revenge for its barbarous usage: For it naturally
suggests to People that the Antiquity of the Doctrine of Popery is but a
Gibeonitish or mere pretended one, and that even its Transubstantiated Bread is
not brought from so far a Country as is pretended, and that it was no longer
ago then Anno 1212, that Innocent the Third in the Lateran Council brought in
Transubstantiation as an Article of Faith, and Decreed those to be Exterminated
who did not believe it, And that Kings were to be compelled to Exterminate
them, and that the Pope had power to depose Kings, an effectual way to put not
only the nature of Things but Men on the Wrack, and then make them say they
believe any thing.

But we having been used to the New Sumpsimus these hundred years, shall be so
Curious in it as to make what is barbarous the object of our Mirth, as much as
Harry the Eighth and Erasmus did, and the Novelty of Popery coming again here
in the Masquerade of Antiquity, would appear as nauseous as would the moudly
Bread of the Gibeonites to the Men of Israel, if they had come to treat them
with it a Second time.

From what has been in this Historical way glanced at, concerning the gradual
decreasing Popery here in the several past Conjunctures, we may without the
Amentia Prophetiae (as Tertullian calls it) say, That in any Conjuncture that
can hereafter come it will more and more decrease, and that under any new
Prince Protestancy will be the Rising Sun, whose light will be then increasing,
and Popery acquire no more luster then the short one of a parelius.

Doleman alias Parsons in his Book Of the Succession, publishing his thoughts
how ponderous the Papists would be in the Balance of State in the Conjuncture
of time attending the next Successor, speaks thus, as if it were before him in
Vision, With these many others do join; Et omnes qui amaro animo sunt cum illis
se conjungunt, as the Scripture says of those that followed David' s Retinue
(1 Kings 12.) pursued by Saul and his Forces, which is to say, that all that be
offended, grieved, or any way discontented with the present time, be they of
what Religion they will, do easily join with these Men.

And when I consider how many there are, qui amaro sunt animo, by reason of
their Condition being embitter'd by Poverty, and that it has pursued them like
an Armed Man, and is likely so to do; when I consider that the Multitude of
Free-Schools in the Kingdom, diverting the Education of the poorer sort of our
Youth from useful laborious Trades, to the uselesly appearing Scholars and
Gentlemen, or (according to the Dutch word) Idlemen, has at last brought them
but to fragments of knowledge and likewise of Bread, and tho wearing better
Habits then their Ancestors, yet to be little better than Thiefs in a handsome
disguise, robbing the World of their Labor, and its own quiet by their being
Sollicitors, Make-bates, Informers, proulers into the rights of other Men's
Estates, Tamperers with Witnesses, Tales-men, Promoters of Office, Suers of
others in the way of qui tam, etc. quam, etc. And when I consider what is so
truly observed by the Author of Britannia languens,. That of all other
employments we have the greatest questing after Offices, that Men will almost
give any thing, say any thing, do any thing for an Office, so that some Offices
that were thought hardly worth the meddling with of late years, will now yield
near Ten years Purchase for one Life; And when I every where behold the t^rn
Limbs of the Estates of so great a Party among us as may be called the
Luxuriants, and who have sold the same Estates and Consciences three or four
times over, and do likewise recollect the Number of all such Idle men, who have
been observed of late years in Shoales so much to depopulate the Country to
plant themselves about London, insomuch that tho according to the Observator of
the Bills of Mortality there usually did come out of the Country to live in
London but 6000, yet there dying within those Bills 17249 in the Year 75, and
18732 in the Year 76, and 19064 in the Year 77, and 20678 in the Year 78,
wherein the Popish Plot was discovered, and 21730 in the Year 79, whence
according to the Rule of one in 30 Yearly dying, and there having died gradualy
above a 1000 a year since the year 75 to the year 80 (although all years of
ordinary health) so the remaining part in London did thence appear gradually
increased proportionably, that is, as a 1000 died each year more than other, so
29000 lived there each year more than in the other, and that there lived in the
year 79 in London 120000 more than did in the year 75, and that many of these
People having broke in the Country, through the Poverty that the Plot
occasioned, came to London to hide themselves and their shame: I say, when I
consider all these things, I may well conclude that all these Indigents will be
ready to hope for a Golden Age, and call any thing a Religion that will bring
it them: And by a new shuffling of Religion will be indeed hoping for better
Cards in this World.

Some of those who have been Trumpeters to the Puppet-Shows of little
Enthusiastic Religions, and movers of the Wyres there, would if ever the great
one of Popery should come on the Stage, be glad to be sharers or quarter
sharers in it, and to be either Actors or Ministerial to them, and especially
to be applauding Spectators when by the ill Poets of the Play, they shall be
well paid to line the Pit Boxes, and Galleries to cry it up: and thus the Wit
and Philosophy of a great Lady have been Celebrated in the Universities by
Heads of Colleges, and lodged there in Libraries on the expectance of her
being a Benefactress.

And if any Tecelius would come not as a sturdy Pardon-Pedlar as before to
require Money (the which thing then proved so destructive to Popery) but to
distribute it, there would be enough to receive it; and among the Indigents for a
while, according to the Stylus curiae Romanae in Mr. Colemans Letter of March
the 12 th 74, to the Internuntio, a little Money, I say a very little will do.

But Conclamatum est as to the state of Religion it self as well as of the
Power of any Prince, when men come to be bought by him either into Religion or
Loyalty. The profusion of Money in the way of Legacies by any one, is a sign of
his being near his end, and Tacitus therefore says it not improperly of Otho,
Pecunias distribuit parce nec tanquam periturus. And thus is any Princes Power
and likewise Religion near expiring, when once he comes to buy of Hydras heads,
as Mr. Hobbs's expression is in his History of the Civil Wars.

I know that it has been the common practice of Kings to buy of Demagogues,
and some of their Ministers have perhaps been apt to think that those who
formerly were by their Artifices able to make the Disease of Sedition in the
minds of the people, had likewise the greatest skill to cure it; in like manner
as any Doctor of Phsick who could make a Quartan Ague, or any other Disease,
would be held in the greatest repute for ability to cure it, it being perhaps
more easy to make a Disease then to cure it, as composition is more easy then
Analysis and Multiplication then Division: but the too dear bought experience
of Princes, has sealed the Probatum est, in this case of all popular Wizards,
losing their power of charming, when they have been Captivated with Royal
gifts, Witches according to the vulgar received opinion, being unable to hurt
when they are in Jayles.

There is another Notion I d^scanted largely on before, and that overstocks the
Market of expectants to be bought off, Namely, that all men naturally think
themselves equally wise, and therefore as any Ship that sails faster then
another, is in the Sea-phrase said to wrong it, so are men apt to think
themselves wronged by those who with Gales of Court preferment get beyond them.

Moreover tho the power of Gold be still what it always was namely the most
ductile thing in nature next to degenerate Man made ductile by it; yet will any
Prince be impoverished who buys Gold or Men of golden Abilities and great Parts
too dear by Preferments and Donatives: for such Donees will be
Continuando-beggers, and everlasting expectants of further Gifts, and their
conversion either to a Princes Interest of State or Religion must be still
nourished by the same thing it was made of; and therefore it was worthy the
wisdom of Solomon to observe, That he that oppresses the Poor, and gives
Gifts to the Rich, shall surely come to want.

And most certainly here, as in France, the Play of a Prince who shall use that
Game to win Souls, will not be worth the sorry Candle of Conversion he shall
light up; and the Conversion of Sharpers will be of such who will soon run away
with the stake of their Souls they have laid down.

The Fisherman of Rome St. Peter's pretended Successor, can neither in France,
nor here with a drag-net of Conversion, catch thousands of Souls* at a draught,
as St. Peter elsewhere did: but must Angle for every Convert, and that with a
golden Hook, of which the value is more considerable to be lost, then is that
of the Fish to be taken, and from which Hook too it can invisibly get off at
pleasure.

A Prince of that Religion will have more occasion for the multiplying Miracle
of the Loaves, then that of Transubstantiation; and the Multitude that follow
his Converters for the former Miracle, will be apt as soon to leave him as they
did our Savior who followed him on that account.

The Observator on the Bills of Mortality shows us, that in December 1672. The
Protestants in Paris were but as one to 65: and it is confessedly true on all
hands, that the great Scene of the late French Conversions lies in Paris, and
even there the present Ecclesiastical Policy is to Attaque the Fleet of the
Heretics, rather by Merchantmen then by Fire ships. I have never heard of any
Bishops Survey of the persuasions there relating to Religion, but in the Index
of Mersennus his Comment on the first 6 Chapters of Genesis, I find it said,
Atheorum numerus Luteciae, p. 671. and Athei in Gall^a, Germania, Scotia,
Polonia, p. 673. I could find neither of those places in the body of the Book;
but observe that in the Learned Friars Dedicatory Epistle to De Gondy the
Archbishop of Paris, he says, Quibus addo te hujus urbis and orbis Parisiensis
ut vigilantissimum Praelatum sapientissime constitutum esse, in qua sicut
eximiam plurimorum virtutem atque pietatem admiramur, a multorum etiam infesto
and immani scelere longissime abhorremus: ad cujus fastigium non video quid
adjungi possit, cum numen omne pernegent, and ex eorum mente quibuscum
familiariter degunt, sensum Divinitatis, and consensum pro viribus evellunt.
Quamobrem impii suorum numerum in hac Parisiorum luce ingentem esse aiunt atque
gloriantur. But I have heard some more conversant in that Book then I have
been, relate, how that great Master of Numbers does make the Atheists in Paris
to be 20,000: and it being justly to be supposed that those 20000 Miscreants
being wretchedly poor (for that as Aristotle has long since well observed, rich
men are naturally (...) or lovers of God, who has provided so well for them)
they would presently seem Protestants to qualify them for turning Papists, and
receiving their Conversion Money, and would say as of old, accipe pecuniam and
dimitte asinum, and instantly swell up the number of Converts in Paris. But
Popery gains nothing in reality by those fugitive Converts: for the Fool that
says in his heart there is no God, will be easily brought to say in his Soul,
there is no Soul: and therefore say I, caveat emptor to Messieurs the French
Converters: the volatile Converts for a good quantity of solid Gold, sell them
but a little Quicksilver, or rather Smoke: and I think they may as well employ
their Money in converting the Poysoners.

There is another thing that makes it very impolitick thus to throw away good
Money on bad Converts, and that is what has been observed to be the effect of
this expenceful project in France; namely, that it makes the remaining part of
the Adherents to their former Religion to be really the more strong, powerful
and united. The Wine that was at first in colder weather preserved by the Lees
in it, yet in the hotter season improves best by being racked off the Lee, and
thus it is with the Adherents to a Religion, when in the heat of Persecution
they are defecated from the viler part of its Numbers.

But yet on the other hand the Mercenary Religionists and Religion-traders, do
grow impoverished with their very Gifts, and the vigor of their minds, and
natural disposition to industry is thereby emasculated. I shall here once for
all say, that by the word Religion-Trade, I intend no profane reflection on
Religion as it is in the Scripture sense, the calling of a Christian: but it is
they that profane it, who by prostituting that high Calling (as St. Paul
styles it) to low and vile ends, do indeed miscall it, and occasion others to
do so too. And indeed we are out of the Sacred Writ advertised of the
Religion-Trade and Religion-Traders. St. Peter gives the Alarm of False
Teachers, that shall through Covetousness with feigned words make Merchandise
of them: And one Chapter in the Apocalypse, as generally interpreted by
Protestants, makes his pretended Successor to deal in the Merchandise of Gold
and Silver and Precious Stones, and Pearls, etc. and Slaves and Souls of Men.
And as in Rome at present, and long since, the only considerable Trade that is
driven, is that of Religion, there being scarce any Secular Merchants there but
Jews, and those too chiefly dealing in Frippery, so is the great Trade thence
forced upon the World from the Apostles See, relating to the Souls of Men. It Is
there the great Bank of Souls is kept, and the security of Rome is exposed for
that Bank, as that of the whole City of Amsterdam for its Bank, the which does
not more enrich the Merchants that deal with it by saving to them the expense
of their time, and preventing their receiving of bad Money, then the other Bank
of Souls does impoverish its Merchants by defrauding some of their good Money,
and others of their precious Souls by it, and by the lavish wasting of the time
of others, and making them who embanked their Talents of good Natural Parts and
Wit there, but in effect to wrap them up in a Napkin, and both by believing
some of the Papal Tenets, and by being paid so much and no more for the same,
and not providing for their Families as they might have better done by
substantial and even Mechanical Trades, to be worse then Infidels.

It Is but Natural to Suppose that a Man of two Trades will neither to any high
Degree improve them, or his Estate by them, suitably to him who minds wholly
one Trade: And the adventitious gain of a Man in any Profession, who is a
Religion-Trader does but entice him to the idleness whose effects render him
unfortunate in both; and therefore I account that the Sea of Rome, unless it
could pretend to infinity of Treasure, as well as Infallibility of Judgment,
and whereby it might plentifully by Pensions tie all its Devoti only to the
Religion Trade, loses its Oil and Labor in the largesses it affords Men of
other Trades.

The prying People of England, next to their Algebraing out (as I may say) the
Authors of Murder, have that Curiosity too to discover the ways by which any of
their Neighborhood do subsist, and when they knew them to have no Paternal
Estates, nor to have acquired any by Marriages, or by Skill and Industry, and
Success in their particular Professions, yet see them live with Equipage and
Splendour, they often with Justice resolve the Cause of their Living so, into
the Contributions they receive from the Religion-Trade: But yet it is a Familiar
thing to observe that other Artists in the same Secular Calling with them are
therein more diligent, and more dextrous, and more thriving, and too more
frugal (as having that only to depend on for their Maintenance) then such
Journey-men of Rome as are aided in their Expenses by Contributions from Holy
Church, by which the births of their Fortunes are thus in a manner over-laid.

Of trading Persons and Companies being undone by Donatives, and being diverted
from necessity, compelling them to an excellence therein by their being
provided with Golden Bridges to retreat from want and hard labor by, we have a
remarkable instance in St^w's Survey of London, where he inserts the famous
Will of Mr. John Kendrick Citizen and Draper of London, who died in the year
1624, wherein he, for the advancement of the Woollen Manufacture in certain
Country Corporations that were then and before Eminent for and by that
Manufacture, bequeathed great Sums of Money to them, as for Example, to Redding
7500 l. and 4000 l. to Newbery, and moreover ordered 500 l. to be lent gratis
to the Clothiers of Newbery and Redding; but under the weight of that Charity
of his their Trade was in the event really depressed, and many Merchants of
London occasionally broke by that means.

And sutably to the Operation of the Religionary Trade and the other Secular
one, impoverishing several of our Iesuited and other Lay-Papists, the late
times gave us the Experience of several Tradesmen who being of a slothful
disposition, thought it for their ease to get some little Salaries from the
State, or voluntary Contributions from some of the Sectarian Populace to eek
out their Maintenance, and that particularly under that great Idol Oliver
Cromwell, who so fatally ruined the Trade of England, and resembling the Pope in
being a Cape Merchant of Souls, was not undeservedly in the time of his Reign
greeted in print by the Title of (...) by a Reverend Divine of the Church of
England, the which was applied to Oliver in the Title of the Book, and he it
was that beggered the Nation, and then taught it to Cant; and then did that
Pharaoh otherwise then in a Dream make the lean Cattle of Canting Words and
Phrases devour the Fat of the Land, and much of solid improvement, even in
Mechanical Arts and Sciences, and then it was that various Clanns or
Corporations of Canters only by being such, Monopolis'd the Preferments of
Church and State, and few were admitted to prattique there but such who had the
Plague, and were as idlers, pests to the Kingdom, and who had Embanked their
Souls in that great Religionary Bank of his setting up: And yet then those
adherents of his that sold the Wind of inspiration were in comparison of the
substantial other Traders, who soly depended on excelling in their particular
Trade, as poor almost as the Lap-landers who sell other Winds.

But that which is much more Momentous than the impoverishing of all these
Particular Religion-Traders, and even the diminution of Trade in general,
ensuing the profusion of profit by donations on the account of Religion, is
that Religion it self is hereby impoverished, and its most vital part Sincerity
hereby in danger to be exterminated. For as it is a thing well known to
Merchants and Goldsmiths and Mint-Masters, that if the Par (as they call it) or
exact Proportion between Gold and Silver be not observed in any Country, either
the Gold will carry all the Silver out of it, or the Silver all the Gold; so it
may be affirmed too, That if there be not a Par or Proportion observed as to
Religion and Profit or Wealth, either the Religion of a Country will carry out
all the profit or Proventus of it, or the profit will carry out or exterminate
Religion. I will not therefore here Prophecy that the World will never, but say
that it can never be fixed in a quiet and orderly State, and free from the
Importunity and Sedition of Hypocrites till its Present State be such that Men
can neither get nor lose by Religion: And till the World recovers this Golden
Age, namely, that Gold cannot carry out our Religion, (and People us with
Hypocrites) or our Religion Gold, the World will be but a great disorderly
House and scarce worth any Man's being Monarch over it.

As the Irish call their last Rebellion by the name of the Commotion, so some
have happened to call the Present State of Peoples Minds in England which is so
disorderly by the name of a Fermentation, and this Fermentation can never be
over in our English World, till there shall here be neither profit or loss by
Religion, and that no Man shall be more or less Rich by more or less Combining
with any Party, to cry up or decry any Religionary Tenets or Propositions.

One would wonder that since Religion, and particularly the Christian, with its
Credenda does Crown the reason of Man, and likewise annex by the exuberance of
the Divine benignity a Crown of Glory hereafter to the Believers, that any Men
should for their belief of Propositions not contrary to reason, and wherein the
credit of the propounder was supported by Miracles, expect to be rewarded in
this World, a humor that has been regnant even among Christians, from the
time of our Savior's being on Earth to the present Age, and a humor that so
poisoned the Jews of old, that they thought it not Tanti to have their minds
freed from the slavery to Error, unless the Messiah would have delivered them
from the servitude of the Romans (and because he did not, and did decline the
being made an Earthly King when the Jews with their Hosannas were tempting him
to it, they Accused him Capitally for saying That he was a King, whenas it was
not he, but they that said it, and they put him to Death revera because his
Kingdom was not of this World) and a humor that would not quit the Stage when
the first Christians did, but boldly still faced the World, as appears by the
notion of the Millennium having been so much applauded by all the Fathers of
the Church and the Christians before the first Nicene Council.

But methinks from the Example of the Christians of old who did Ambire
Martyrium to such a degree that St. Gregory says, Let God number our Martyrs,
for to us they are more in number then the Sands (as if the work had been too
hard for another Archimedes with his Arenarius to Calculate the number of the
Martyred Christians, and one Author accounts that, excepting on the first of
January, there is no day for which Records do not allow 500 Martyrs at least,
and that for most days they allow 900, and who did ennoble the Christian
Religion, by showing to the World an Example of Contempt of Death, and even of
Life beyond that of the Ancient Romans) I say from the Example of those
Christians who did in shoals dye daily for their Religion, Ours may, if they
please, be taught the modesty not to expect daily livelihoods from it, and to
account they have very fair play if they do not lose their livelihoods by it.

It Is moreover observable that under the Jewish Theocracy Providence had then
so ordered things, that no Man should get or lose by Religon. The Tribes had
then their shares of the good Land by lot, and the Levites only had that
affluent proportion of the Proventus of the other Tribes that I have before
Calculated, and which would have tempted many of the other Tribes to have
marched over to the Officium and Beneficium of the Priesthood, had not God
their Monarch provided against that, by the confinement of the Administration
of the Priesthood to one Tribe, and its descendents by natural generation.

But as to the notion of getting or losing by Religion, I shall recommend to
your Lordships reading a small Pamphlet printed in two sheets of Paper in
Folio, and called The great Question to be considered by the King and this
Parliament, etc. to wit, How far Religion is concerned in Policy or Civil
Government, and Policy in Religion, etc. On the disquisition of which a
sufficient Basis is proposed for the firm settlement of these Nations to the
most probable satisfaction of the several Parties and Interests therein, and
subscribed by the name of Philo-Britanicus.

Who the Author of it was I cannot learn, but do easily find by the Book that
he is a Man of great Acumen of thought, and that Matters of Religion and State,
especially relating to this Kingdom, have been very much thought of by him, and
that the Author was certainly neither Papist nor Presbyterian, and so far from
being a favourer of the Church of England that he does interminis make the
public Maintenance of the Clergy to have been the Bone of Contention in these
Nations, p. 8. and there says, It will be found to stand on the same foot with
Abbeys and N^^neries and their Lands, and there further as a propounder would
give all the Church Lands to the Crown, and the Tithes to the People; and then
tells us, That all Fears and Iealousies and Animosities on the account of
Religion, will be plucked up by the Roots. That Author in p. the 5th does very
acutely observe, That Popery has two Parts, the one is that which is merely
Religious, that is which relates properly to Religion or Conscience, and which
is peculiar to them, such as the believing of Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
Adoration of Saints and Images, yea, and the superiority of the Bishop of Rome
over other Churchmen, all which and those of this kind may be believed and
professed without prejudice to Civil Society, and as being matters relating to
Conscience come not properly under the Magistrates Cognizance: the other part
is the opinion of the Pope's Power over Princes and States, his obsolving the
people from their Obedience, his giving them dispensations to kill Princes and
destroy them, and allowing them not to keep faith to Heretics and such like,
which as they are destructive to Government, are truly no part of Religion, but
a politic contrivance, long hatched by the Bishop of Rome and his dependants
for the establishing to himself a firm Monarchy in the World, and therefore
ought to be guarded against and punished by the Magistrate, not as errors in
Religion, but as destructive to the Government.

The Author of Omnia comesta a Belo as great a Calculator as he would go for,
was yet but a Blunderer in respect of the Author of this discourse, in which
there is so much smoothness of words and plausibleness of notion, that if it
were possible he would deceive some of the very Elect, and that too, of their
Established Maintenance.

But whatever the Sentiments of that Author were, I must affirm that as ample
as the Revenue of the Church of England shows, if compared with that of other
Protestant Countries, it is yet so far from excess in its proportion as to ward
off all inconveniences from the State of men's getting by Religion.

The over balance of Land here was so much on the Churches side in the times
of Popery, that it was then in our Provincial Constitutions sulminated as a
Menace to the Layety that in case of some particular Contumacy, none of their
Children should be admitted into the Clerical Calling for three Generations.

But how Nugatory would such a threatening now be! There are few or none of the
inferior Clergy, but might have in inferior Callings arrived at greater
Incomes and with less charge of Education, and the most envied of our dignified
Clergy might in the other two of the great professions, viz. in Law and Physic
raised their Estates and Families on better and easier terms then they now can.

And that the Men of the most eminent natural parts would be losers by
Religion, I mean by the Clerical Profession but for the encouragement of these
Dignities, we have an indication from the quality of the Divines in the late
times, who were generally so unlearned, that Learning it self then seemed to
have retreated from our Universities to the College of Physicians in London.
Notwithstanding the great Sums of Money by the Usurped Powers employed in the
Augmentations of Livings, one may well suppose that all of the 10000 Livings in
England except 600 needed, for that was the number of the Livings in England as
beforesaid averred to have afforded a Competent maintenance for a Minister, the
dearth of Learning and Learned Men still continued, insomuch that the teeming
press then brought forth few Learned Discourses, relating to the faculty of
Theology but what was published by Dr. Hammond, Dr. Tailor, Dr. Sanderson and
some other Divines born and bred in the Sunshine of the Church of England.

And I do believe that in Holland the Livelihoods for their Parochial Divines,
are better then those that our Livings at a Medium yield, especially
considering that the Dutch Ministers Widows have 40 l. a year paid them during
their Viduity: but for want of such encouragement as our Dignities afford for
the Educating their Natives in Learning, they are constrained as Mr. Philip Nigh
observes in his Book called Beams of former light, p. 152. To send to Foreign
Parts to men to be their Professors, in their Academies.

And I account that nothing less then the hopes of being Dignitaries, could in
the flourishing condition of the Church of England make so many of our Learned
Divines take up with the poor generality of our Livings, which are such that
the Answer to the Abstract published by Authority in the Year 1588, mentions in
p. 27, That surely if a Survey were taken of all Parish Churches and Parochial
Chapels in England, I dare affirm that it would fall out that there be double
or treble as many more Livings allotted for Ministers under the true value of
30 l. a year, ultra omnia onera and reprisas, as are above that Rate. And that
our Divines in the late Times looked on such a yearly Sum as an uncomfortable
pittance for a Minister, we have an instance in the Story told in a History of
the late Times in Print, where a Patron desiring one to recommend to him a
godly man for a Living of 50 l. a year he then had void, was answered, That a
godly man could not be had to accept of a Living of so small a value.

It is moreover a lamentable thing to consider what an Excisum has been put on
the value, even of our poor Livings, by the Simoniacal Practices of
Lay-Patrons: and in their hands the greatest part of the Impropriations has
been computed to be.

Sir Benjamin Rudyard a Famous Parliament Man of the last Age, in a Speech of
his in behalf of the Clergy, spoke in Parliament and Printed at Oxford, Anno
1628, speaks there of the Scandalous Livings we have of 5 l. and 5 Mark a year,
and Cites Bishop Jewel for complaining in a Sermon before Queen Elizabeth, That
the Simony of our Lay-Patrons, was general throughout England, and that a
Gentleman cannot keep his House unless he have a Parsonage or two in farm for
his Provision.

And how generally a Simoniacal disposition has continued to infect our
Gentry, appears by the vile Bonds that have been so much by Lay-Patrons imposed
on the Ministers they presented, viz. to resign their Livings again to them at
pleasure; and it is for the lasting Glory of the Lord Chancellor, that he has
in Court declared that he will on occasion Null all Bonds of that sort, and no
doubt but the accidental increase of the poverty of the Gentry, which has
tempted them to sell the same Land twice, and to sell the same Living once,
will tend to the increase of Simony.

Moreover when it shall be considered, that the Case of a Minister is such,
that tho Laymen are secured by the Great Charter from being punished for
Contempt of the King's Commands, otherwise then with the saving of their
Contenement and Freehold, yet that he holding Virtute Officii is liable by the
Kings Ecclesiastical Laws, even for those things that in the Layety are no
offenses to be deprived of the Freehold, that the Law supposed him as Parson
or Vicar to possess, and that he by the Artifice of the said Bonds, has had
the benefit of his Freehold, in effect during the Patrons le^eplacitum: and
further, that every New Political Conjuncture threatens him with New
Subscriptions from the Magistrate, and New Nic-names from the Mobile, and that
on any change of Religion, he is sure to be put in the forlorn hope, and that
he tho continually thinking of Divinity, which is his profession, has not yet
that freedom to speak all his Sentiments of the controverted part of it, which
a Layman enjoys, and that he is still exposed by constant thinking to prey on
the Membranes of his own Brain to find Notions for senseless people, methinks
after he has all his life before, been constrained to take these bitter Pills
as they are in themselves, none should repine at their being gilded for him in
his declining age: and if among Ten thousand of these, twenty six shall in
their old Age have the Revenue of Bishops, and five hundred of Prebends after
so many shall have drawn Blanks in the Lottery of Preferment, those few that
shall draw those Prizes, need not be envyed for what they have acquired by the
Theological Profession.

It was both with Justice and Prudence by our Laws cautioned that so great a
part of the Clerical Maintenance should arise from Tithes, for by that means
our Clergy are engaged to make the interest of their Country and its
improvement their own; and had they not had so much of their maintenance
sounded on Tithes, but on Money out of the Exchequer, as they had before this
time lost excessively by Religion, so Religion would have lost their Calling:
for that the price of Silver falling by the plenty of it, and the plenty or
increase of our people making all the Products of our Country dearer, it has
been advantageous to our Clergy to receive their Tithes in kind, as it has
been to Colleges to receive a Quota of their Rent in Corn.

But that still the maintenance of the inferior Clergy, was too mean, will
appear even by the late Enemies of our Hierarchy being Judges, for Mr. Nigh in
that Book of his, called Beams of former Light, having spoke of the Ministers
Calling, being once a gainful one, says p. 123. It is utterly otherwise now,
not but that there is a very liberal Maintenance appertaining to Ministers and
greater by the bounty of the Honorable Parliament, then the Preaching Ministry
have formerly enjoyed.

The gradual increase of our People and Trade, has proportionably increased
the Clerical Revenue which on the beginning of the Reformation was presently
sunk, so that Latimer in his Sermon before Edward the 6 th said, We of the
Clergy have had too much, but that is taken away, and now we have too little;
and what Jewel in his Sermon notified to Queen Elizabeth of that kind, I have
mentioned, and so languid was the State of the maintenance of the Inferior
Clergy in her time, that She by one of her Printed Ecclesiastical Injunctions,
Anno 1599. did under great Penalties, forbid all Priests and Deacons to Marry
any Woman without the Advice and Allowance first had by the Bishop of the
Diocese and two Justices of Peace, which I suppose was cautioned by the Queen,
that the many Ministers who had not competent Livings to maintain themselves,
might not marrying Wives without Dowries, by new Births, increase the number of
Paupers in Parishes.

It is observable, that in the late times the Jesuits did publish many
Pamphlets in Print against Tithes, and did animate the people to make
Tumultuary Addresses to the Usurpers to abolish that maintenance of the
Ministers, wherein as their Politics were so unjust to our Monarch, that had
they succeeded, they would have barricaded the way for his return in the minds
of too many of the People for fear that the payment of Tithes should return
too, so likewise were they so ridiculous by cutting off all hopes of the return
of Popery here in any Conjuncture of time, that less then an Army of
Bellarmines would never have persuaded the common People to hear with patience
any talk of Holy Church's re-establishment here.

Tho, as I have shown, that Tithes by reason of the equality in the Imposition
of them, and the diuturnity of time that has habituated People to the payment
thereof, are a gentle part of the Yoke of our Ecclesiastical Government, yet if
the payment of them or any other Tax, whether of Excise, Customs, or
Chimny-money were for many years discontinued, there would be no probability of
bringing either the old Stagers or new Comers in the World to consent or
hearken to their being re-established.

The Critical Observers of the Jewish State, after Ten Tribes had made a Schism
from the other two, judge that there were two Conjunctures of time, wherein
their piecing together was fesable, and that the great true Cause in Nature
that hindered the Reunion of the Tribes, was the aversion in the Ten Tribes to
make three chargeable Journeys yearly to Jerusalem, and to pay a double Tenth
yearly out of their Estates (besides Offerings and other Casualties to the
Priests and Levites) from which trouble and charge they had been relaxed by
Jeroboam, and by his Model of Idolatry: and therefore the People having most
inclination to that Religion that was cheapest, and knowing that if they
returned to their old Religion, they must likewise return to their old Payments
to the Priests and Levites, did venture to adhere to the cheaper Golden Calf:
and had the Jesuits here effected from the Usurpt Powers the Abolition of the
Clergies Tithes, which would have made the Return of the Church of England so
difficult, I may well argue that it would have made the Return of the Papal
Religion, and its chargeable Idolatry impossible, whose Yoke of Payments
neither we nor our Forefathers were able to fear.

But when senseless ^anaticks came with those Petitions against Tithes, the
more sagacious of the Usurpers knew that the hand of Joab was in them, and they
knew that hardly any Observation was more trite then that Popery gained ground,
chiefly in the poorer parts of the Kingdom, where the despicable maintenance
made the Ministry so too, and where too the Pope would no more hunt for
Converts then among the poor Norwegians, but that it was of use to him to have
the number of his Subjects increased in any poor places in a rich Kingdom,
where he tho a spiritual King might yet call his Subjects to Fight.

Sir Benjamin Rudyard takes notice of Popery's being an intruder among the poor
Benefices of the North, in the Speech before Cited, and there says, p. 1. That
to plant good Ministers in good Livings, is the strongest and surest means to
establish true Religion, and will prevail more against Papistry then the making
of new Laws, and executing the old, and there p. 3. relates what King James had
done for the supporting of the Protestant Religion in Scotland, where (says
he) within the space of one year, he caused to be Planted Churches throughout
that Kingdom, the High-Lands and the Borders worth 30 l. a year a piece, with a
House and some glebe-Land belonging to them, which 30 l. a year considering the
cheapness of that Country is worth double as much as any where within an 100
Miles of London. And p. 7. he mentions some Passages of Bishop Jewels Sermon
before Queen Elizabeth, where the Bishop having in general reflected on those
that then caused the diminution of the maintenance of Ministers, he further
says, howsoever they seem to rejoice at the prosperity of Sion, and to seek
the safety and preservation of the Lords Anointed, yet needs must it be that by
these means Foreign Power, of which this Realm by the mercy of God is happily
delivered, shall again be brought in upon us. Such things shall be done to us
as we before suffered in the times of Popery, etc.

'Twas there before mentioned how that Man of God with a flame of Zeal,
reflected in these words on the Queen her self, Our posterities shall rue that
ever such Fathers went before them, and Chronicles shall report this Contempt
of learning among the Plagues and Murrains and other Punishments of God; they
shall leave it written in what time, and under whose reign this was done.

If the good Bishop had considered the vastness of Queen Elizabeth's Expenses
before mentioned, in desending the Protestant Cause, contra gentes, he would
have given her day to have built and endowed some Churches; and to those
expenses before mentioned, it comes into my memory here to add what I then
forgot, which is related in the Travels of Mr. Fines Moryson, who was Secretary
then to the Chief Governor of Ireland in her Reign, viz. That she expended in 4
years time on that Kingdom, a Million and one Hundred Ninety Eight Thousand
Pound Sterling; which Sum so laid out then on Ireland, will seem the more
considerable, when by a late Report of the Counsel of Trade in that Kingdom
drawn by Sir W. P. The current Cash of that Kingdom is made to be but Three
Hundred and Fifty Thousand Pound Sterling.

But this by the way, and to resume my discourse of our Clergies neither
getting nor losing by Religion; I shall say that as the acceptable free
restoration of the Church as well as the Crown to its Lands, showed that there
was no fear of its injuring the Balance of the Kingdom, or hurting Religion by
its weight, so has the following acquiescence of all dis-interested men in the
same, evinced that weight to be no gravamen.

In a Pamphlet called a Letter from a Person of Quality to his Friend in the
Country, Printed in the Year 1675, generally supposed to be writ by the Earl of
Shaftsbury, and which asserts the Justice of the Declaration of Indulgence, the
Author in p. 5. speaking of the Church of England, becoming the head of the
Protestants at home and abroad, says, For that place is due to the Church of
England being in favor and of nearest approach to the most powerful Prince of
that Religion, and so always had it in their hands to be the Intercessors and
Procurers of the greatest good and protection that Party throughout all
Christendom can receive. And thus the Archbishop of Canterbury might become not
only alterius orbis, but alterius Religionis Papa, and all this Addition of
Honor and Power attained without the least loss or diminution of the Church:
it not being intended that one Dignity or Preferment should be given to any,
but those that were strictly conformable.

The natural inclination in all ingenious Men not to cast an evil Eye on the
Church Revenue, appears in Mr. Marvel 's Second Part of the Rehearsal
transposed, p. 146. where he says, I am so far from thinking enviously of the
Revenue of the Church of England, etc. That I think in my Conscience it is all
but too little, and wish with all my heart that there could be some way found
out to augment it.

And our ingenious and great Lord Chancellor Bacon, in his certain
Considerations touching the pacification of the Church of England, has with
great equity decreed our Parliaments to be in some sort indebted to the Church.

Moreover that Gentlemanly way of writing used by our great Divines, in a late
Conjuncture against Popery, and so suitable to the refinement of Wit and Reason
in the Age, and wherein without the Pedantry of unnecessary Words or
Quotations, or raising a dust out of the Learned Rubbish of the Schoolmen, they
generally with a manly Style and clear reason and skill at that weapon got the
Sword out of their Enemies hand by the Argumentum ad hominem, and showed us
that Popery and Implicit Faith were not Calculated for the Meridian of this
Age, has (I think) made all ingenious Men Conformists in this opinion, that if
their Genius had been cramped with the res angust a domi, their thoughts had
not in their Books appeared so great, and therefore I hope that all the well
writ works of their hands, and seasonable discourses against Popery at that
time when it was ready to curse us, and to rise up against our Religion, will
make all thinking Protestants to say Amen to that Prayer of Moses, Bless O Lord
Levi 's substance, accept the work of his hands: smite through the Loins of
them that hate him, that they rise not again.

It will I doubt not appear to rational and thinking men, that our little
interloping Churches or Congregations that set up with their precarious Power,
and small stock of Learning or Revenue, will no more be able to break the great
Compacted Body of the Papal Church, that has the Monopoly of the
Religion-Trade in so many parts of the World, then a few interloping
Merchantmen to break the Opulent Dutch East India Company, who have engrossed
so much of the Spices of the World, that sometimes they cause several Ships
loadings of them to be at once consumed, as knowing what quantity, and no more
will be useful to the World. And somewhat like that thing too, the Polity of
the Anglican Church in Harry the 8 th's time performed while it drove a
Religion-Trade with Rome, and yet consumed a great quantity of its superfluous
Merchandise, and the same thing has been done by our National Church, as to
remaining parts of the Romish Superstition in succeeding times, and indeed
Superstition which is a kind of Nimiety of Religion, is so incident to Humane
Nature, and is so destructive to the Polity of Churches, and the substantial
Commerce of Nations, that it is worthy the Power and Care of Nations to consume
it.

And considering that the Church of Rome has still valued it self for being
terribilis sicut castrorum acies ordinata, it is a vain thing to contend with
such a Regular Church Militant, without our having of general Officers, and as
exact a Conduct, or to think to have such Officers without Honorable
Maintenance from the Public: For none does go a Warfare at any time at his own
charge.

When I think how in the Primitive times, while a Cloud of Persecution was
always over the head of the Christians, that yet they strained themselves so
much in Contributions for the Pastorage of their Souls, that all the Pastors
then were so far from losing by Religion, that some were tempted to that Office
for filthy Lucre (as we may see out of Peter Ep. 1. Ch 5. Verse. 2.) tho yet too
so little comparatively was to be gained by all thereby, that others probably
undertook that Office by constraint, as the same place intimates, and that
therein the Apostolic Prudence was conspicuous in ordering it upon the whole
matter, that the generality of Pastors then should not get or lose by Religion,
I may reasonably conclude that we who live in the flourishing and prosperous
State of Christianity, ought to provide that the meanest Pastor of Souls in
England, may live competently and decently by that Office: and for my part I
shall never give my voice for any ones serving in Parliament, that will not be
willing to move for the discharge of the Debt to the Clergy before mentioned,
as soon as the State of the Kingdom will bear it.

Sir Benjamin Rudyard in his aforesaid Speech p. 3. mentioning the danger we
are in of being upbraided by the Papists, for being willing to serve God with
somewhat that would cost us nothing, has a saying that I have often heard
Cited in discourse as another; namely, He that thinks to save any thing by
Religion, but his Soul, will be a loser in the end.

And this Notion of his of not saving by Religion, does fortify my affirmation
of the public inconvenience accruing by the getting by it, as to which I have
so opened the present State of the Clergies maintenance in England, as to
represent them rather losers then gainers.

When it is considered how many there are in England of the Layety, who gape for
gain by Religion, and are ready to devour one another for it, as well as
Religion by it, I am sure none can with reason think the Quota of the Clergy's
Maintenance, should be such as in the time of the prosperity of the State to
render them losers.

How scandalous and how ridiculous, nay, how ridiculous by Poverty it self,
many of our Lay-Popish and Protestant Religion-Traders have been, I have
already evinced; and do suppose that nothing can blacken that Trade in the
fancies of the People, more then the discovery of the Traders, who must needs
appear more odious then they who are the Mercenary Brokers, for the debasing of
Humane Nature by Lust, since the Hypocritical Religion-Traders do for Rewards
prostitute the Honor of their Creator, and as much as they can make the Divine
Nature subservient to the diabolical Art of their Hypocrisy.

Before the late Market for Converts in France, I have not heard or read of any
Nation in the World, wherein great Parcels of the Layety have gained Money by
Religion, but only in England.

I believe that in Amsterdam (whereas Des Carts says in one of his Epistles,
Nemo non mercaturam exercet) there is not one Religion-Trader, tho yet all
Religions are there tolerated. Nor yet is any Layman of that Trade in Paris
who is of any other.

And in the Policy of the Turkish Empire, it is provided for as a Fundamental,
that nothing shall be there acquired by Religion; insomuch that all that
Emperor's Subjects as well as himself being by their Law enjoined to be able to
practice some Manual Trade, when any are called out to discharge the Office of
Priests, or Celebraters of the Public Religious Worship there, such exact Care
is taken, that they shall get by the exercise of that Office, just so much and
no more, as they did by their Manual Trade: for which purpose, an Excellent
Person who was the King's Ambassador at Constantinople, related to me, That he
complaining to the Vizier of some injury done by a Turkish Priest to one of his
Servants, the Vizier deprived him of that Holy Employment, and that the Priest
being afterward sent to Petition to be restored to his place, he answered, that
he would not, being as well content to work on in the Mechanic Trade, to the
exercise whereof he was returned since his said deprivation.

But this Trade and sort of Traders that has so long pestered our Kingdom, is
now about to expire and dye a natural death, and which it could not before be
brought to do by a violent. And as the Trade of sturdy Beggars, the which is as
much a Trade and as much conducted by Laws among themselves, as is any
incorporate one that has the stamp of the Great Seal, could by no Legislation
be extinguished, but would soon be so by peoples voluntary forbearing to be
their Contributers, thus too will this sturdy Religion-Trade have its Period.
Our Fifth Monarchy-men who thought to inherit the earth without giving sixteen
years Purchase for it, and who pretended to follow the Lamb wheresoever he went
but really out of dreams of a golden Fleece, are by all exploded. The condition
of Britannia languens, and that too very much occasioned by the former
insolence of the Papists, being understood at Rome, will make the old Gentleman
there think it is vain for him to hope to be possessed of the Abbey Lands without
giving for them many Millions of Pounds Sterling, and the Papists here will I
believe so soon penetrate into the present State of our Poverty, that they will
find no way effectual for the delivering them from the vexatious Prosecutions
of Protestant Informers, but the Removal of that decay of Trade, and general
dearth of many that has necessitated so many to be Informers, and who cause
them to spend upon under Sheriffs more Money then they save by not being high
Sheriffs, and which decay of Trade has sunk a 4th part of the value of their
Lands, and which can never be cured but by the dissolution of the Religionary
one; and finding the Credit of the Jesuits Society cracked, as I have before
expressed, will find that their Iourneymen Calumniators (as Mr. Sergeant calls
them in a Paper of his I have seen) must necessarily break too, and it being
found that not only our Enthusiasts are forced by necessity of Nature to desist
from expecting any gain by Religion, but all Protestants whatsoever, the Popish
Traders therein will be the more content to give over one of their Trades, and
the fare of them will be like that of the Associated Jesuits, to march out of
their Spiritual Corporations insensibly, like the captious Scribes and Pharisees
in the Gospel, of whom it is there said, Being convicted in their own
Consciences, they went out one by one beginning at the eldest even to the last,
etc.

Tho as I said no man in Holland does get or lose by Religion, yet since the
Reformation there was a Controvery of Religion, I mean the Armimini^n one which
made an extraordinary fermentation in their State, and which Controversy tho
Knaves there frighted Fools with, as if it were stirred by the Remonstrants,
with an intent to bring in Popery; yet the knowing few easily understood that
neither side of the Question could produce that effect, and they likewise
understood that the profession of the belief of the several opposite Points of
that Controversy among the opposite Parties there, served only as Ribbands of
several colors, to distinguish Parties that are against each other in Arms.

And yet that very great Controversy in Religion, which divided Holland and
distracted our Kingdom in the time of the Royal Martyr, and the substance of
which perplexed the Trihaeresia of the Jews, the Saduces, Essenes and Pharisees,
and likewise three sorts of Christians, the Pelogians, Calvinists and
Arminians, and that of old divided the Sects of the Philosophers, and has many
years raged among the Turks, and likewise among the Jesuits and Dominicans,
after its having for so many thousand years troubled so many Millions of
Mankind, seems lately to be retired to its Eternal Rest, and the sullen World
seems resolved to hear and read no more of it, and none I believe will get or
lose any secular profit by his Sentiments in that Controversy; and it is
probable that the Controvertible part of Popery may thus go silently out of the
Company of People in this Kingdom, and without so much as troubling us by
taking a formal leave, give rest to it self and us, and that none will in this
our World get or lose by that part of Popery that can properly claim to be
called a Religion.

I have usually in this Discourse called it an Hypothesis or Supposition, which
I chose rather to do then to call the entire Body of it a Religion, which I
know that it is not and cannot be, and that Popery and the former Scotch
Presbytery, and Socinianism are not in the gross called Religions otherwise
then (...).

I will not quarrel with Papists for calling some Points before mentioned,
wherein Disputants will be still playing with the Dye of Controversy, by the
Name of Religion, and I will give tho not grant them my Consent for applying
that Name, to the believing that the Pope is the Principium Vnitatis, and there
are not many Propositions in the Chronologia haeresium, sectarum and
schismatum, and in the Haeresiographis that many have Published, that I would
think a man to have laesa principia that did call Tenets of Religion; and there
are in Popery many things enjoined, that tho I look on as needless impositions
and new inventions, for the diverting the Melancholy, I shall not gainsay any
one that shall call Religion and represent them as of Apostolical Practice, tho
the birth of many of them was revera but of yesterday.

And thus let the mixing of Water with Wine in the Eucha^ist, and the fasting
on Friday, Pilgrimages to the Sepulchers of Martyrs, the Priests using a low
voice in Consecration, and let the Canonization of Saints, the institution of
Saturday Mass in honor of the Virgin Mary, the invention of the Red Hatts and
Scarlet Cloaks worn by Cardinals, the Institution of the year of Jubily, the
Popes every year Consecrating a Rose of Gold, the sound of the Bell at the hour
of Mid day, the Rosary of the Virgin Mary, and likewise the Baptization of
Bells, be all baptized with the name of Religion, and many Notions and
Practices likewise more peculiar to Popery.

And tho the denomination of things is from the better part, as Mines are said
to be of Lead, or Silver, etc. from the quantity of the Metal there most
valuable, and so I can be content to call a Complication of Tenets of which
some are erroneous by the name of a Religion, yet in any Systeme of Religion or
Confession, that may happen to appear in the World more pure and exact then the
Augustane, or the Helvetian, or the Saxonic, the Gallic, or English, or Belgic,
or Bohemian, and more accommodate to the true sense of the Councils and
Fathers, and the best Expositors then the former, and containing more
satisfactory explanations about the propagation and entrance of Original Sin,
the Nature, Order and Offices of Angels, and of the Consistency both of Gods
immutable Decrces, with the Contingency of second Causes, and of the Efficacy
of God's Grace, with the freedom of Man's Will, and of the Time, Place and
Antecedents of the last Judgment, one single Notion relating but to a
Commandment of the second Table, incorporated with such a Confession of Faith,
would make the applying the Name of Religion to the whole to be very ridiculous
and nauseous, and make it more fit in the gross to be called a Confession of
Faction, or of Conspiracy against Mankind; and any one will think so if that
one Article should be thus inserted, And we further think it commendable at
some Seasons of the year, to kill the next man we shall meet. And yet as
harshly as this sounds, there is that in Popery and likewise in the Doctrine of
the Resistance of Princes contrary to the Municipal Laws, that does hear worse,
and that is tho not ajustification of the killing the next man to be met with,
the effect of which would yet make men excite their natural Courage and
fortify it with skill, and be provided with good Arms, whereby to be always
ready to defend their Country (just as the Spartan Law of punishing no man for
Theft that was not taken in the Fact, made men more vigilant in the Custody of
their Goods) namely, the killing Multitudes of the best men that can be culled
and singled out of the faex of Mankind, and such of whom the World is not
worthy, in so much that we are told by Alsted in his Chronologia testium
veritatis, that ab Anno 1540, usque ad Annum 1580, Novies centena millia
Christianorum in B^lgio, Gallia, Anglia, Italia and Hispania, Religionis Causa
trucidata sunt: atque inter eos fuerunt, 235 Barons, 148 Comites, 39
Principes, and the killing of Ten thousand Subjects next met, would not be so
destructive to Kingdoms as the killing of one King, for according to the
computation and the Style of the Scripture, he is worth Ten Thousand of us.

My Lord Archbishop Laud in his Famous Speech in the Star Chamber p. 32, 33,
etc. Answers some Men's Charge of Innovation against our Liturgy, as to the
Prayers set forth for the 5th of November, and ordered (they say) to be read by
Act of Parliament where one passage was, Cut off those workers of Iniquity,
whose Religion is Rebellion; and in the Book Printed 1635. it is thus altered,
Cut off those workers who turn Religion into Rebellion.

His Grace in the p. 36. there weighs the Consequences of avowing that the
Popish Religion is Rebellion: and in the next p. says, That if you make their
Religion to be Rebellion, then you make their Religion and their Rebellion to
be all one.

But in my poor opinion several of the great Points of their Religion so
called, as even transubstantiation it self and many others, are not to be
termed Rebellion, but other points before mentioned can properly be termed
nothing else, and when all those Tenets are so complicated by them, that they
do all conjoyntly integrate their Religion, then is there pretended Religion,
when really believed, and practiced, a real Rebellion.

The best advice therefore that I can give to a Papist is that of the old
Philosopher (...), simplifica te ipsum, and that of a Jewish Rabbi, Comede
dactylos, and projice for as ^uritiem. The World is a weary of seeing any men
join what God and Nature have parted: and of their projecting a Communion
between Christ and Belial, and making Christ the Minister of Sin, as the
Scripture expression is.

A great Master of Mechanics and of all sorts of refined Learning some years
since brought to light the Invention of the double bottomed Vessel, and a rude
Description of it, being sent me for News into the Country, I easily guessed
that such a Ship bearing much more Sail then other Ships, must needs go a great
deal faster before the Wind; but I was not informed of the Provision that the
excellent Artist had made against the danger of Divulsion; it being obvious
that in some Tempests it is as much as one entire body can do to preserve it
self against the ^ury of the Sea.

This has been the condition of Popery with its double bottom of Principles,
namely, to bear a great wide spreading Sail, and it has heretofore in a quiet
World sailed apace before the Wind and in fair weather, but the Tempestuous
Debates its Principles have raised here and abroad in the Sea of the People,
have made this old double bottomed Ship of St. Peter in such danger of
Divulsion that especially with such Paul's Mariners as it employs, it can
hardly escape.

I doubt not but the Papists as well as others of Mankind, have a Right and
Title to the free and undisturbed worshipping of God and the Confession of the
Principles of Religion, purchased for them by the Blood of Christ: for Religion
being Men's Privilege as well as Duty (just as the Romans did account that they
endowed any place with a Privilege when they gave them their Laws) they may
thank their great Redeemer for being restored to it. By the virtue of his
Blood, the Papists stand seized of a good and indefeisable estate of Christian
Liberty, and they are bought with a Price, and are therefore not to be the
Servants of Men, and one is their Master even Christ, who is the Lord that
bought them* and they are therefore to stand fast in the liberty wherewith
Christ has made them free.

Socinus says, he went on his Knees to God to find out the meaning of the 58th
V. of the 8 th of St. John. And should I chance to over hear any one Member of
Mankind at his Private Devotions, and importuning Heaven to illuminate his mind
with the knowledge of some point in Religion, that he conceived necessary to
his Salvation, and acknowledging it to the praise of the Divine Goodness, that
excited him to the use of all means whereby to discover it, that he had so far
through the Efficacy of assisting Grace practiced the Truths, his understanding
was possessed with as to satisfy his mind that he was a serious Supplicant for
its being the depositary of more, I should be so far from wishing this man
delivered over to Satan, from differing for me in any controverted Point of
Religion, that I should think that if the truth he was in quest of; imported
his Salvation, God would send an Angel to explain it to him.

But as to one part of the double bottom of Popery, tho we should grant it
laden with fundamental truths, yet it is notorious that the other is overladen
with Fundamental Errors, and such as are apt to undermine the Foundations of
States and Kingdoms, and there is no need of an extraordinary Messenger from
Heaven to tell one embarked therein, that the Pope is not to absolve Subjects
from the obedience of their Princes, nor to cause an eternal fermentation and
inqui^tude in the World, through his Kingdom, (that should not be of it at all)
yet being unbutted and unbounded by him in all the parts of it.

I will likewise tell any Soeinian that his great Master Socinus made such a
double bottom of his Systeme of Notions, that it has forfeited its right to
the Name of Religion by one Tenet complicated therewith, and that he ought to
throw that off and simplificare se ipsum. Let any one if he pleases call the
Socinians denying of the Trinity in Unity, and Original Sin, and the Baptism of
Infants, or the Divine Prescience, and many other of their Notions by the Name
of Religion; but there is own of their Tenets that their Master needed no long
wrestling with Heaven as a Supplicant to find out the truth of, and which
Notion when really believed is as pernicious to Crowned Heads and their
Subjects, as the lawfulness of any ones sometime killing the next man he meets,
and that is, that my Prince and I may not defend our lives against the next
Invader who comes to take them away; for as to that great Question, An bellum
offensivum vel defensivum fit licitum, the Socinians answer is negatur, which
any one may see who pleases to consult the Themata F. Socini de officio
Christi p. 7. Inter breves tractatus F. Socini: and likewise his Epistle to
Christopher Morstias, p. 498. among his Epistles.

And thus let the well-willers to Presbytery, call that erroneous opinion of
their Church Government being founded on that Divine Right, and the immediate
Command of Christ and his Apostles a Tenet of Religion, but to confront the
Laws of Kingdoms in the settling it, and to eradicate any part of those, and
especially to root the inheritable Monarchs Power in popular Election or
Approbation, and to make him but the Peoples Attorney, and his Authority as
revocable by them as a Letter of Attorney, is abusively called Religion, and is
only properly to be termed Sedition, or Rebellion.

I have been so copious in insisting on the necessary separation of all Tenets
that are denominable as Religious, from those that are really Irreligious and
Seditious under the gross name of the Religion in any Party, as a thing
perfectly just in it self, and necessary for the quiet of the World, and do
hope that the Age that is so much addicted here to the improvement and
polishing of our Language, will incline it to do it self that right as not to
give false Names to Things, and Names of a contrary signification.

We know that the Standard of England in the Mint refers both to weight and
fineness; and tho a piece of Money may have the Royal Stamp on it, engraven
with all possible curiosity, yet if it be not standard, it is so far from being
allowed the Name of any Species of the Kings Coin, that it is instantly to be
broken in pieces; and as this is but just so is it but necessary for the quiet
of the People, who else detecting it would suspect the whole credit of the
Mint, as well as of that Species of Money, and would either not take it or else
with a Clamor raise the price of their Commodities for it.

And thus it is too a thing unreasonable and troublesome to the World, for Men
to Coin false words or false denominations for any Tenet in Religion
intrinsecally defective, what curious stamp of the artifice of any Party soever
it may bear: its reprobate Silver is not to be called Religion, and it makes
Religion it self liable to suspicion among the inquisitive, it will trouble
every hand it passes to and from, and in giving a value to it, the People will
raise the price of their tolerating it, and the World will never be quiet till
its allay from the true Silver be separated by melting it down, and it takes
the name of Religion only when it deserves it.

What is more ordinary then for Clamor to raise this question, Will you punish
any man for his Religion? and will you have any man lose by his Religion? and I
see no end in the disputes of the question but by this Answer, and by this it
must find a Period, viz. I punish no man for his Religion, for that Tenet that
I quarrel with him about, is not and indeed cannot be Religion. It is pure and
rank Sedition and Rebellion; and if any Papist or Presbyterian shall write or
speak to make the Kings Power a bubble blown up by the breath of the People and
so dissolvable, I shall esteem him fit to be proceeded against by the new
Statute of the 13 th of this Kings Reign against Sedition, and as a Subverter
of the Fundamental Laws, and do suppose 'twill be ridiculous for any one to
plead his Religion in bar of that Indictment, and he does moreover deserve to
be punished as a Cheater for abusing the World and himself and Religion too, by
calling such a particular Tenet Religion, or a Complication of many Tenets by
that Name, where the virtue of them all is not strong enough to correct the
Poison of one.

The Scripture does punish those with a denunciation of a Woe who call evil
good, and good evil, that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; and
in this particular Point of the calling any of the Idolatries or Impostures of
the Heathens or others, by the name of Religion, I remember not any instance in
holy Writ, tho yet in other Cases it is not infrequent for the inspired Pen man
to speak cum vulgo.

I observe that in the New Testament the name of Religion is several times
applied to the Jewish after the World was freed from the Obligation of it: but
one of the holy Penmen speaking in one Chapter of false Apostles, uses the
Style of hating the Deeds of the Nicolaitans, and of holding the Doctrine of
the Nicolaitans, and of holding the Doctrines of Balam: And another of the
Amanuenses of the Holy Ghost speaks of Doctrines of Devils.

If any man shall offer to my consideration a Scheme of Doctrines that relate
to Theology, and I find it is too subtle for my understanding to penetrate, I
shall yet be so evil as to allow the Propounder to call it a Religion: and thus
if Papists or Protestants would agree to call Dr. Gibbon's Scheme, a Religion
or demonstration of it, I would not oppose theit calling it any such thing; and
the rather since it enjoins not to me any thing that would break my own or the
Worlds quiet; but when Popery does enjoin so many Tenets to be believed that
are incredible to a rational Man, and some things that are clearly impossible
to a Moral Man, I will call Popery in the gross any thing rather then Religion,
just as Tully says of those Lawgivers who did perniciosa and injusta a
populis praescribere, that they did quidvis potius far quam leges.

I find not that since the year 1605. Popery has so discriminated it self by
any alteration for the beter, as to overthrow the weight of King James's saying
then to both his Houses of Parliament, viz. That as it is not impossible but
many honest men seduced with some E^rors in Popery, may yet remain good and
faithful Subjects, so on the other hand, none that know and believe the grounds
and School conclusions of their Doctrine, can ever prove good Christians or
faithful Subjects.

There is one Tenet in the Doctrine of Popery that your Lordship showed me once
discust in Print by a Canonist, and by whom I was directed to trace it, both to
the Gloss and Text in the Canon Law, that I having discoursed of, to a Pious
and Learned Neighbor of mine, who is a Roman Catholic, he obliged me to write
to your Lordship, that you would please to let any of your Amanuenses
transcribe, and to send hither to me the Resolution of that Lawyer, and
determination of the Pope in his Law about it, and has declared to me, that he
will join issue with me in the Plea about Religion, in that being a Tenet or
Principle approved by the Church of Rome; and your habitual inclination to
afford any one, tho a stranger to you, lumen de lumine, will (I doubt not) make
it easy to you to gratify my request in his behalf.

He grants to me that if that Tenet can be shown to be one approved by the
Church of Rome, that he believes there will be no occasion for disputants any
more to attaque the Roman Catholic Religion, and that as an Independent Author
in the late times writing a Pamphlet against Presbytery, had this Title for it,
An end of one Controversy, it might be supposed that a Sheet of Paper that
without strained Inferences could fasten that Tenet on the Doctrine of Popery,
would with better success make an end of that Controversy.

My Lord this Point discussed in Print, that I refer to, is as I find it in the
Notes^ I took thereof in your Lordships Study, in Gundissalvus his Tractatus de
Haereticis, Question. 24. before which the Summarium is thus, 1. Civitas in qua
aliqui insunt haeretici an tota possit igne exuri, aut alias destrui. 2.
Civitas quando dicatur haeresim committere, ut universa destrui possit. 3.
Vniversitate punita de haeresi an singuli qu^que puniti videantur, ita ut
amplius puniri non possint.


The Gentleman being of a nice tenderness of Conscience, and having a quick
sense of any thing that looks like gross impiety, was at the very nameing of
the first and second Question, surprised with a kind of trembling, and was
somewhat more discomposed, when I told him that upon consideration of the whole
matter, it appeared even from the most moderate of the Canonists that a whole
City might lawfully be destroyed with Fire, if the Majority of it were
Heretics, and that there were the Judgment of the Church in the Case; and like
a Man of a large and candid Soul, he said, that he was sorry that Humane Nature
could in any men so far degenerate, as to deliberate about such their
destroying a whole City by Fire, but would reserve his judgment on the Point
till he saw it before him in the Quotations out of the Canon Law, as well as
Canonists. What the Event of his Judgment will be I know not; and I confess I
have been very sparing of my time in discoursing with Roman Catholics, about
any Point of the Doctrine of their Church, since I read it in Cardinal Tolets
Inst. sacerdotum lib. 4. cap. 3. and 7. p. 612. and in our Countryman Holcot a
Famous Schoolman in lib. 1. Sententiarum Quest. 1. ad sextum principale in
replica. That if he hears his Prelate Preaching an erroneous Proposition which
he does not know to be so, and believes him, he does not sin, but is bound to
err because he is bound to believe him, and meretur volendo credere errorem.

And he who believes he shall merit by going out of his way, I am sure
deserves, that I should not much trouble my self to go out of mine, to put him
in the right.

But this is not the temper of this Worthy Gentleman, whom I have reason to
esteem a lover of truth quatenus truth, and for its own sake, and one who does
not account falsehood charming, or rebelling against the Light meritorious: and
indeed I have observed it in some others, as well as him, that after they have
deserted the Church of England, their inquisitiveness in Religion has not been
at its Journeys end, but has still continued in its way, and that so far, that
Holy Church and they have often been apt secretly to be weary of one another.

The Rational Religion they were first educated in, has had the allurements of
the Natale solum, that they could never wholly overpower.

I have known three Earls, one whereof was of the Kingdom of Ireland, and the
other two of England, and all of them were men of great Wit and Parts, and such
who being brought up in the Religion of the Church of England, went off from it
to the Church of Rome: but receded not from the candor of their tempers, nor
from the Society of their old Friends, nor from the frank readiness to
discourse with them, about the controverted Points of both Churches, and
neither of them perverted their Wives or Children to Popery, and the eldest
Sons of them all, are eminent Sons of the Church of England, and do make
considerable figures in the State.

One of those three Earls is yet living, and in him lives the great example of
an English Nobleman, adorning Nobility by his intellectual and Moral
Endowments, and by a Majesty mixed with incomparable sweetness in his familiar
Converse, and by a consummate Loyalty to his Prince that Envy it self never
spotted, and by such an exact Observation of his Faith, given to any of
Mankind, that he would no more violate it with an Heretic, then with a
Patriarch or Apostle, and by having been never suspected from using any
Iesuite-Confessors to learn how to evade from solid Honor by subtle
distinctions, or once to allow the least Chicanery in God's Great Court of
Conscience.

And if we cast our thoughts on France, we shall there find that the great and
the brave Turen after he had so unfortunately thrown himself at the Popes Feet,
had there his Arms as ready to embrace his Protestant Friends as ever.

I have heard of two Crowned Heads of the Church of Rome, who were very unkind
to their Protestant Subjects after stipulations to the contrary: the one was
Ferdinand of Bohemia, who when Cardinal Cleselius Bishop of Vienna told him,
that if he made War on the Bohemians the destruction of that flourishing
Kingdom would certainly follow, answered, We would rather have the Kingdom
destroyed then damned; the other was Queen Mary of England, who as the ( Acts
and Monuments tells us) being intent on the Restoring the Abby-Lands, and
discoursing with Four of her Privy-Counsellors about the same, said, perhaps
you may object to me again, that the State of my Kingdom, the Dignity thereof
and my Crown Imperial, cannot be honorably maintained without the Possessions
aforesaid; yet notwithstanding I set more by the Salvation of my Soul, then by
Ten Kingdoms: and the Reign of each of these was besmeared with Blood: but had
they been born and bred Lambs, I believe that no Transmutation of the Blood of
Tygres into them would have made them such.

The Famous Julian of whom 'twas said, Nunc Apostolicus, Nunc Vilis Apostata
factus, had learned too much Christianity, when he was a Reader, to be a raging
Blood-sucker; and if when Emperor he had had e're a Namesake that collected the
Madrigals or Hymns against him, he would perhaps have done him no harm.

The low birth and the Poverty and Mercenary disposition of Judas, tempted him
to betray his Master with a kiss, but he was so far wrought on by the good
Company he had kept, that he afterward killed none else but himself: and they
are such perverted Protestants generally that are of the same rate with Judas
for Birth and Poverty, and paultry Avarice, that I should desire to stand out
of the way from and to avoid the Vermin of such Renegadoes; and they are only
such Popish Princes as Ferdinand and Mary, that in their Education were never
imbued with better Principles then the bloody ones of Popery, that I should
fear as Monsters, and account any Kingdom but a Den, if I lived therein with
them: and when ever I happen to dispute about that Notion in vogue that Virtue
it self in a Popish Successor will be a Nuisance, and make him a bloody Bigot, I
answer with a distinction and grant it is likely to be so in one who passed
from the Breast, in Infancy to suck in Sanguinary Principles, but where in any
Successor, the Tenets of Popery when he is on the Borders of old Age, are
Successors to Principles of a Noble and Rational Religion, that he has grown up
into youth and manhood with, I shall account my fears very wild and irrational
if my hopes do not grow up with them as to my promising my self, that he will
at least answer Bocalines Character of the best Reformer of the World, namely,
one that leaves it as he finds it, and do suppose the practicableness of what
is Savage in Nature, being reclaimed in one Animal toward another it was
educated with, will be allowed from the frequent and trivial spectacle of the
Lion and the Lamb that were bred up together, and who without the help of
Miracle and Prophecy were taught by Nature to lie down together, and shall
account the same persons injurious to the World, who fishing in troubled waters
of the State, say, the worse the better, and of such a Prince educated in
Protestancy and then perhaps turning Papist, the better the worse, and
especially when the Laws have espoused us to his Line, for better for worse.

Our acute and profound Mr. Chillingworth in Mature years went over to the
Church of Rome, and in his course there made a short turn, and the Natale solum
of the Church of England charmed him soon back again, and he by the culture of
his reason made the Soil a hundred fold amends for his temporary deserting it.
But Princes and Potentates are under higher temptations then his low Station
placed him in not to be seen to retreat, especially after their having once
done it before, and may suppose that other Princes will look on them as more
slippery and unsafe to be dealt with, if the same Principles once congealed or
hardened in them, and afterward dissolved should be congealed again, just as
the Earth is more slippery and unsafe to be walked on in a Frost after a Thaw.

We are told by the Conformist in the Friendly Debate, in p. 112. That he has
heard some of the Nonconformist Divines acknowledge, that they did not scruple
what the Conformists do: but thought it unhandsome for them to do it, etc. And
the meaning was, in plain English, that they were ashamed to confess their
error.

But if some of those Divines whose low Education conducted them perhaps from
being Servitors in the University to domineer in their Cures, and who through
the Track of their Lives might be traced by the slime of their Pedantry, and
whose Trade was (or should have been) the Study of Divinity (the Precepts of
which and their fragments collected out of Augustinus and Aquinas as well as
the example of the former, obliged them to retract those Errors publicly, that
they had so uttered) I say that if they were yet so Picquez d' Honneur, that
they would not let their fallibility appear in Villages, and even the falsity
of those Principles of theirs, by which as many Hundreds of Thousands here were
slain as were bare hundreds murdered in the inglorious Reign of Queen Mary,
they have true Cause to think it dishonorable for them to restrain their
Compassion from any high born Prince, the brightness of whose great Martial
Achievements has dazel'd the Universe, and will continue to do it when he is
in the shades below, and one who may say as the Pope did to the Iansenists that
he had never studied Divinity, and they are very unfit to Cashiere him from the
Church Militant, if he does not in the view of Mankind appear to make a Retreat
at the Call of their Trumpet, which has been known to give so uncertain a
sound; and such may be ashamed to despair of his finding out any false Notions,
he may have received in Religion, and to conclude that he has not privately
discovered them because he does not openly recant them, and to expect that
after perhaps he has erred in the Tenet of Confession, he should yet presently
make the World his Confessor about it, and grant him nothing of the Guard of
Honor in the Case, but Monopolize the temptations from honor to their sinful
obscure selves.

But as no man can take the measures of another Sins without taking those of
his temptations, so none but a Prince can know the temptations of a Prince. Dic
mihi si fueris tu Leo, etc.

The like Pedantry therefore in the great St. Ierom was inexcusable as to that
sharp saying of his, Miror si aliquis Rex salvabitur: and that Satirical fancy
of his has since met with its Match by some that have sent St. Ierom to the
Devil as fantastically; for so I find it said in Dr. Donnes (...), After so
many Ages of a Devout and Religious Celebrating the Memory of St. Jerome,
Causaeus has spoken so dangerously, that (Ratio. 5.) Campian says, he
pronounces him to be as deep in Hell as the Devil.

Moreover I think it great injustice to any Prince who has changed his Religion
of Protestancy for Popery, that Protestants should at the same time be jealous
of his retaining no tincture of his former Principles, that the Bigoted and
Jesuited Papists are jealous of his scarce retaining a tincture of his new
ones, and by jealousy too, as cruel as the Grave, as appeared by the fate of
Harry the 4 th, who because he did not and indeed could not divest himself of
that humanity toward his Protestant Subjects that was riveted in his nature,
after he was absolved by the Chair of Infalibility, and reconciled to the very
Scorners Chair of the Jesuits, yer merely because he had not a window to his
breast through which every capricious Priest might look in at, and might
thereby put in what Principles he pleased, they were resolved to cut one there;
and after John Chastel had begun to practice his incision, an execrable Apology
for it was Published, in which Apology Printed in Latin at Lions Anno 1611. the
Assertion or Head of Chapter 3d, Part 2d is, Chastel had no purpose to kill a
King, and of Chapter 4th there, Henry of Burbon cannot be called a King by
reason of his pretended Conversion: and of Chapter 8th there, Neither can he be
King tho absolved by the Pope, and of Chapter 9th, Neither can he be called a
King by the Right of Succession, and of Chapter 11th, Heretics and especially
relapsed ones are Ju^e Divino and Humano to be put to death, and of Chapter
12th, Heretics and especially relapsed ones may be killed by private Persons,
if it cannot be done otherwise.

The Assassination of Harry the 3 d of France bears with it a Memento mori to
any Roman Catholic Prince, who will not be through pa^ed in obeying the
Precepts of Bigoted Priests against Heretics, and to this effect runs the
Clamor of the Actions of such Bigots, either you must go our pace to Heaven
and Travel by our Mapp, see with our Eyes, and let us ride you when we will,
and make you ride over your Heretical Subjects, or we will precipitate you to
the Devil.

I mentioned it before out of D' Ossat that it was known at Rome, that Queen
Anne the Wife to King James, had some inclination to the Roman Catholic
Religion, and no doubt but she was perverted to it in some measure by some of
the Romish Priests who were then as since insolently over officious to tempt
Princes to change their Faith: and tho none of our Histories mentions any thing
of her being a Papist or inclining to be so, yet D' Ossat (as I said) relates
how Villeroy supposed her to have turned Papist: but our Historians unanimously
mention one thing, that she was designed as well as the King and Prince and
others to be blown up by the Gun-Powder-Treason, a thing that may give one who
turns Son of the Church of Rome cause to say, Mallem esse Herodis porcum quam
filium.

No doubt but the mind of any Popish Prince coming out of the cool and sweet
Air of a benign and rational Religion, to that of such a torrid Zone and
Shambles of man's flesh as the Doctrine of Popery presents, will be oftener in
his thoughts traveling back to that Religion then the prying World can know.

But the Gentleman my friend is not any way tempted in point of honor to delay
his Return to the Church of England; and he lately mentioning to me his wishes
of the speedy Arrival of your Lordships Papers, told me, that possibly he and I
should be both gainers thereby, and that I should gain the Victory and he the
Truth, and that he would never account those Priests of Rome to be the
Missionaries of Christ, who if their Doctrine be refused, shall instead of
shaking off the dust of their feet in any house, reduce it to Ashes; and
further affirmed that it were less absurd and extravagant to wish there were no
Religion at all in the World, whether revealed or natural, then that any such
Hypothesis or Doctrine that Authorized a Practice of that nature, should be
universally received in it as its Religion.

For tho natural Religion acquaints me with the Divine Power, and gives me
hopes of my Creators not rendering me miserable by that Power, and the rather
when I have seen that many of the Contemners of Heavens Thunder lived
prosperously on Earth, yet if a Model of Religion pretended to be the only
revealed one shall controuling all the Dictates of natural Religion enjoin the
firing of whole Cities, and mankinds confused outraging one another, I must
abandon my further hopes of Bliss from such a Being as was it self miserable,
for so that would be whose nature was still in a fermentation of Anger and
Passion, and reared up Men as the Workmanship of its hands, only to dash those
curious but brittle Vessels against one another, and that even for such a Being
'twere more eligible to be, then to be always so miserable, as well as 'twould
prove so for my self too, then to be always in Torment by Anger.

But we know that as God is the God of Order and not of Confusion, so he is
likewise an overflowing Fountain of Goodness, and so infinitely benign, that if
his Nature were rightly represented to an ingenious Atheist, if he did not at
last believe he would ardently wish there were a God: and I think if there be
any number of that degenerate sort of Mankind called Atheists, (as was said)
that such degeneracy must needs be chiefly caused by the mis-representations of
the Divine Being.

I have before mentioned how Tully in his de Natura Deorum shows great Wit in
his Anger against the Epicureans, for their representing the Deity as
unconcerned for Mankind; and against the rendering God careless of the welfare
of his Creature man he there exclaims, Deinde si maxim talis est Deus ut nulla
gratia, nulla hominum charitate teneatur, valeat.

How passionately then would he have upbraided any Mushroom Sect of
Philosophers, if such had sprung up in the World (as in his time and before
there never did) that had represented the Nature of the Deity as solicitous and
careful only of procuring the misery of Mankind and disorder of the World, and
enjoining men to spit fire at one another, exposing them to the sury of Wild
Beasts if they lived in Deserts, and of wilder Creatures, that is, themselves,
if they lived in Cities.

There was an Ingenious and Learned and Pious Divine, I mean Cressy who in our
days forsook the Communion of the Church of England, and turned Roman
Catholic, and went beyond Sea, and returned to England in the Conjuncture of
the petulant Insolence, and was so far infected therewith, and likewise with
the Chagrin incident to sickness, that he writ very peevishly against our
Church, and one of our great Church Men; and his Writings were justly censured
by the Earl of Clarendon: but according to my former Observation, so much of
the Character of the rationality of the Protestant Religion that he was long
bred up in remained in him indelibile, that I believe had he been made an
Inquisitor of Heretical Pravity, he would neither have took away a drop of
Blood from any Protestant, nor a hair from his head; and in his Reply to that
Noble Lord, he is so candid as speaking of the Position charged on Roman
Catholics, that no Salvation is to be had out of that Church, to affirm that
all Catholics grant that this is not necessarily to be understood of an actual
external Communion, and that many Christians of virtuous devout life's, and
having had a constant preparation of mind to prefer truth whenever
effectually discovered to them before all temporal advantages, they dying in
this disposition tho not externally joined to the Church, will be esteemed by
our merciful Lord as true Members of his Mystical Body the Church.

No Papist but one bred a Protestant, could have had thoughts so large
concerning the extent of the invisible Church, or fancy that what is before
mentioned, is granted by all Catholics, and should I hear any Priest in a
Friars Cowle grant what is abovesaid, I should fancy that he remained an
invisible Protestant, and that he continued so exuberantly good in his natural
disposition as not to be able to frame an Idea in his mind of the damning of
Men's Souls, and making Coals of their Bodies and Bonefires of their Cities, for
mistaken Sentiments in Religion: and had Mr. Cressy lived till this time, it is
possible your Lordship by your Notification of that fiery Tenet of the Papal
Church aforesaid, might have been an instrument of his visible Return to our
Church; for his labored heating himself with Passion upon the mention of the
Practice of that thing in his Church History, shows sufficiently how he would
have abhorred any Church that abhorred not that Tenet.

The Place I refer to in his Church History is in the 14th Book, 4th Chapter,
where he does strenuously endeavor to prove that Monk Austin was unjustly
Accused of having killed 1200 British Monks: and having said there. 9th, yet
of late this poisonous humor of Calumniating God's Saints is become the
Principal Character of the New Reformed Gospel, he goes on thus, I will add one
example more of a Calumniator, to wit, Mr. William Prynn, a late stigmatized
Presbyterian, etc. But alas what repentance can be expected in such a person
(speaking of Prynn) who is inveteratus malorum dierum, when we see in his
decrepit Age his rancorous Tongue against innocent Catholics, yet more
violently set on Fire of Hell so far as to solicit a general Messacre of them,
by publishing himself and tempting others to damn their Souls also by
publishing through the whole Kingdom, that in the last Fatal Calamity by Fire
happening to London they were the only Incendiaries. This he did tho himself at
the same time confessed that not the least proof could be produced against
them, but said he it concerns us that this Report should be believed.
Complaints of this most execrable Attentat were made, and several Oaths to
Confirm this were offered, but in vain. But however surely there is a Reward
for the innocent oppressed, and whatsoever Mr. Prynn may think, doubtless there
is a God that judges the World. Let him therefore remember what the Spirit of
God says, quid detur tibi, aut quid apponatur tibi ad linguam dolosam sagittae
potentis acutae, cum carbonibus desolatoriis, is what must be given to thee,
and what must be assigned to thee for thy Portion, O deceitful Tongue, sharp
Darts cast by an Almighty Arm with devouring Coals of ^uniper.

And it follows. 10. With as good reason therefore St. Austin may be Accused of
the slaughter of those British Monks as St. Columban, a holy Irish Monk, etc.
might be charged with the most horrible death of Queen Brunecheld, etc.

This good man certainly apprehended no reason of an additional Commandment,
Thou shall not fire thy Neighbors house, and had he been convinced that the
Pope in his decrepit Age had made a Commandment for the firing of it, and whole
Cities, and had so pronounced e Cathedra, would probably have imputed the
lingua dolosa, and the ca^bones desolatorii to his Doctrine, and the smoke from
that fiery Doctrine would have had the effect of opening his Eyes.

But as for Mr. Cressy's Idea of the Massacring any Incendiaries tho they had
been too^^ in flagranti, if he had staid in his old Church, I mean that of
England, he would have found any such thing sufficiently stigmatized by its
Doctrine, which makes the King to bear the Sword, and that not in vain, and
allows not the Rabble to be a Terror to Evil Doers, nor Hell to break loose for
the support of Heaven, and which inculcates Obedience to the Law of the Land
for Conscience sake, and even that Law permits none to Assemble in Arms against
a declared Enemy, but by the Kings particular Commission; and he must therefore
go to China or to Rome, that will have a Street or a Town, or the Vniversitas
or Community therein punished, for the pretended or real faults of particular
persons.

Moreover the English Genius has not in Story that I know of, been tainted
with Infamy for penetrating any thing of that horrid Nature, except in the old
days of Popery in relation to the Jews: and the Lay-Rabble was then put upon it
by the Rabble of Friars and Monks, who owing Money to the Jews were that way
willing to confute their Creditors.

And since the time that that Great and High Judge of Reason as well as Equity,
and to whom the Custody of the King's Conscience was Committed, and who has
held the Scale of Equity with as steady an hand and tender heart, and as
discerning and watchful an Eye as any of his Predecessors, did place the
dreadful Guilt of the Firing of London, where he did at the Condemnation of the
Lord Stofford, and probably had satisfied his Judgment for the doing of it by
Observations or Examinations of Passages that occured elsewhere, rather then at
that Trial (for there the Evidence did not rise clear and high enough, for the
occasioning that part of his Sentence) and since the time that the People of
England by their Representatives threw the Guilt of that Fire on the Papists,
and the Magistrates of our Metropolis inscribed it on the Monument, the
populace have been as calm and temperate in their judging of it, and as
perfectly free from resentments of Revenge against all the Papists in general,
or any one Papist in particular, as if none but that poor angry Antiquary Mr.
Prynn had censured them for it, and whose Thunder the World being so long used
to, did so much despise that his popularity could scarce have obtained an
outcry for the killing of a single Mad Dog.

I must confess tho by the reiterated Confession, and by the Execution of
Hubert a Papist, it appeared that he did set Fire to the House in London from
whence its rage began, and tho his Confessing of Peidelow to be one of his
Accomplices in the Fact, exempts it from being doubted that Papists burned
London, and tho after I had heard of that judgment of the Lord Chancellor, and
of the House of Commons, and of the Magistrates aforesaid, and was shown that
Papal Tenet by your Lordship, I doubted not of the Justice of attributing in my
th^^ghts one part of the Guilt of the Fire to some Jesuited Papists, and that
it might be said with the same propriety of Speech that London was Fired by the
Papists, as 'twas by Sir Walter Raleigh, that Harry the 4 th of France, was
killed by the Papists; yet I never thought any considerable number of the
Gentry among our Lay-Papists would have practiced any thing of that kind, tho
the Pope himself should have Commanded it.

There was a Book containing Observations on our late Affairs of Church and
State, Printed in the Year 1680, called the Arts and Pernicious Designs of
Rome, wherein is showed what are the Aims of the Jesuits and Friars, etc. by a
person of their own Communion, who turned Romanist about thirty years since:
and throughout that Book as he in general fortifies my observation of a
Protestant when turned Papist, not being able to abandon all Candor his mind
was first nourished in, so he does it particularly, p. 25. where having in
Proposition 4th, spoke of the Mischiefs we have received from some Popish
Orders and particularly that of the Jesuits, he says as follows in
Proposition 41, viz. Amongst which the late sad disaster happening to the City
of London, ( not to mention diverse others of like nature happening in diverse
other places since) if it were a Practice of any Humane Contrivance, and not a
mere judgment of God from Heaven upon us, cannot reasonably be thought to have
been the Project or Practice of any other Men then these, and to have come
originally from Rome, and the Consistory there: who beside the bad Principles
already mentioned, which legitimate such doings at all times, that they judge
it convenient for their ends, were (without doubt) willing to signalize that
year (1666) with some remarkable mischief done to Protestants in check to the
fancies of some in that Party, who have had the confidence to affirm, and as it
were to predict, that in this year Rome and (their pretended Antichrist) the
Pope should be utterly destroyed.

That it appeared a Practice of Humane Contrivance by the very Confession of
the Incendiary is plain, and that it was by the People in the City then
suspected so, I have said, but so far were our plain English natures from
charging it on any Lay- English Papist, that Mr. Marvel in his Growth of
Popery, Printed Anno 1677, having said, That we may reckon the Reigns of our
late English Princes, by a Succession of the Popish Treasons against them,
adds, And if under his Majesty we have yet seen no more visible effects of the
same Spirit, then the Firing of London, ( acted by Hubert, hired by Peidelow
two French Men) which remains a Controversy, it is not to be attributed to the
good Nature or better Principles of that Sect, but to the wisdom of his
Holiness, who observes that we are not of late so dangerous Protestants as to
deserve any special Mark of his Indignation.

I presume not to charge or discharge any sort of men about this Fact further
then the Law has done, whether Papists or Priests, or Fifth Monarchy-men, (for
of a Conspiracy to Fire the City on the day it was fired on, several of that
latter Sect had been before Convicted, and deservedly Executed for it, as we
must either Grant or Arraign the Justice of the Nation, and therefore Mr.
Cressy had reason to blame Mr. Prynn in some measure for concluding that the
Papists were the only Incendiaries of the City, when Mr. Prynn could not have
forgot what had happened to those Conspirators, and that the very Principles of
many of that wild Sect, are for the legitimating the most desperate Outrages
and Rebellions imaginable,) but out of Justice to Humane Nature, will never
render any man ill upon ill Proofs, and such as are contrary to the Nature of
things, as for example, one Argument which is so prevalent with many for their
concluding that London was designedly burnt by many Popish Persons, namely,
because it was apparently true and not denyable, that the Flames did break out
in several places of the City at the tops of several houses, which were at a
considerable distance from the Fire, does not in the least move me so to
conclude; for it is obvious in Nature, that as the heat of an ordinary Fire will
put combustible light matter that is at a small distance from it into a flame,
a heat proportionably greater, must do the same thing at a greater distance:
and this appeared in Fact conspicuous to Thousands, while the Fire then broke
out from the Timber-work in the Tower of the Old Exchange, when the great
Conflagration was a quarter of a Mile distant from it.

Nor yet would I venture in discourse with any Papist about the aforesaid
Tenet, to call it either Tenet or Principle chargeable on the Church of Rome as
approved by it, if it were only deducible in the way of Inferences from other
Tenets; as for example, If one should say the Papists hold that it is lawful to
burn the persons of Heretics, and much more therefore to burn their Houses,
and to burn the Nest as well as to kill the Bird, and that the Goods of
Heretics are ipso iure confiscate, and therefore their Houses; and accordingly
I told my Roman Catholic friend that I would never raise this Principle of
Fire against his Church by Collision of Arguments, but by the help of your
Lordships Quotations referring to the Canon Law as well as Canonists, show him
the Pope claiming the Power, in terminis terminantibus, to fire whole Cities as
aforesaid, and that long before his Power received so much accession of
Territory (as I may call it) of Prerogative by those great Students of
Crown-Divinity, and Assertors of his Fifth Monarchy, the Jesuits.

I do intend to entertain only this my particular friend at this Season, with
the Passages I shall receive from you concerning this Tenet, because it is in me
an habitual temper, not salem nitro superaddere, or to afflict any afflicted
Lay-Papists who may retain some unsound Notions of Religion, and yet be sound
Members of the State, and I shall not desire either by words or writing to
imitate the ungenerous Practice of the Sons of Jacob toward the Sichemites, in
attacking them when they were sore. And moreover reason is thrown away on men
in Passion, and during the Paroxysme of Passion in either any Papists or
Dissenters, there is no frighting them from an absurdity by Arguments, for
there can be nothing more absurd then their very Passion, and while that lasts
they are as insensible of the wounds that are made in their Principles by
objections, as some in a Battle are of wounds they receive there.

But I am not without hopes of a more pacific Conjuncture that may come wherein
our Vn-Iesuited Lay-Papists may discriminate their Principles and Notions, from
the troublesome ones of others of them, that vex the knowing part of Mankind
with their Implicit Faith, like Flies blind in one Season of the year getting
into Men's Eyes, and when all empty Religion-Traders will no more like the
Merchants of Tire pass for Princes of the Earth, after they had with a bulk of
words so long enslaved the World and its Princes, and themselves too, and made
Religion but the word (as I may say) to discriminate Parties in War, and to
know who and who are of a side, and that by the Mutual Consent of reasonable
men of all Parties the word Religion, will not be put on what is really
Irreligion, and that a handful of men will think it in vain to strive to keep
up the acception or signification of any word or words, when the currency of
the age and that justly too, has damned the former sense thereof, and that all
men must speak in the Sense of the Rational Age or not speak intelligibly; and
as he who seems to be Religious and bridles not his tongue, his Religion is
vain, it will be in vain too for him to think to have ought called Religion
against the sense of the World, and as the License was vain and ridiculous
granted to a Book of Physic wherein the Licencer said, Nihil reperio in hoc
libello fidei Catholicae contrarium quo minus typis mandetur, so likewise will
the Vogue of granting any Liberty to any thing of Catholic Faith that has
Treason and Sedition in it, be as worthy of Laughter: and then will the
Publishing of this Tenet be prevalent probably with Papists, and prove like a
word in season, and tend to the abolishing the abuse of the word Religion, when
they shall be argued with in the cool of the day, (as our first Parents where
after the fall) and their Fiery Principles be then exposed, and then may each
of them whose Religion so called excited their angry Prophets to desire the
destruction of Heretical Cities, as the Choler of Jonah at last animated him
tho not to destroy, yet to wish the Destruction of Niniveh, be as he was
seasonably expostulated with, do thou well to be angry? and do thou well to
be angry with others, who will not call thy firing their houses Religion, when
thou see the World begin to laugh at the impertinence of the calling it so?

The Author I cited before of the great Question to be considered, begins his
discourse with a Patriotly kind of Sagacity thus, viz. That this Nation and the
Nation of Scotland and Ireland concerned with it, are at present in such a
posture, and under such Circumstances, as give just reason both of fear and
care more then ordinary both to Rulers and People, is so without doubt, that it
needs no Proof, and that we are in a dangerous Fever, in regard both to our
Civil and Religious Interest, all in their wits must know: which Disease,
albeit it be now in the opinion of most come to a Crisis, yet few can
determine, whether it will end in a natural cool, or prove a distemper yet more
dangerous and deadly.

But when I consider the great number of those in the Kingdom who are at their
ease therein, either by substantial Fortunes or Professions or Trades, and who
would account it both trouble and shame to get by Religion, as an adventitious
Trade, as much as a great first-rate Practitioner in Law, who had a Receipt for
the Curing the Toothache or Gout would to get Fees thereby, and to have a
Mingle of Clients and Patients together, and which sort of Mankind that by the
solid weight of their Fortunes or Industry are come to their Center of Rest,
must necessarily hate all Projectors of Earthquakes in Church and State, and
being well on their terra firma will never care to walk on the high Rope with
the Poise of a drawn Sword in their hands, and who will never venture their
heads by wearing any discriminating Ribbands in their Hats, nor give their
heads for the washing or the rebaptising themselves with little Names of the
distinctions of Parties, and who generously valuing themselves on unmercenary
Loyalty and unbribed Orthodoxy, will neither rob Caesar or God of the things
that are theirs, and not expect that their Prince should impoverish himself by
paying Tribute to them and taking them off by Gifts, more then the Patriots in
Queen Elizabeth's days did, and when I consider that the more thinking and
knowing part among these and whose ease is only infringed by seeing so many
objects that are uneasy, must needs think and know that solid Trade and
Industry can never thrive, nor the Kingdom by it, till the false Trade of
Religion shall be exterminated, I do fancy to my self that we shall shortly by
the strength of this sound part of the Nation, be able to weather the Crisis or
decretory days of our feavourish distemper, and that our disease will end in a
natural cool, and that as some fermentation may be said to be perfective as
well as destructive, (and indeed life it self is but a Continuation of the
vigorous fermentation of the Blood which is so long maintained as the Mass of
Blood is kept hot and Circulating through the Veins and Arteries) so we shall
find this fermentation that has been in the Kingdom prove perfective to it, and
a continuer of the life of it. For as one very useful property of fermentation
is, that while it separates all heterogeneous parts, it leaves the basis as it
were or main Ingredient of the Mass clear and pure, and discards from it
recrements or superfluities, and another noble property thereof is, that it
exalts the Body fermented to what perfection it is capable of, these effects do
I expect of our Political Fermentation (that hard word that is generally used
in expressing the present distracted State of the Kingdom) and that it will
naturally cause in the Body of the People that superfluity of folly as well as
naughtiness to be thrown off, which will leave the substantial part of the
Nation more clear and pure, and will end in England's Ballancing it self first
and then the World, all our useless Religion-Traders having been swept away as
the dust of our Balance.

I grant that the Animosities among many Protestants of narrow Souls, and
Principles may last too long on the account of Religion, and a great many
deluders will make a great many deluded desperately obstinate against their
Ecclesiastical Rulers: but the People of England are too many to be crowded
into the Prisons of such narrow Principles, and this great and active thing
called Nature, that is always busy and which sometimes does its business even
by men's Idleness (and the necessary effect thereof, their Poverty) will by the
general necessitous condition of Luxuriants and Religion-Traders force them to
be industrious, and that industry will bring us to the State of a Britannia
florens, and too of a Britannia triumphans, and rescue a populous Kingdom from
the decay of its Trade, that has happened by our having been embarrass'd with
a Holy Kirk or Holy Church Militant against the State, and that affirmation
which appeared so senseless in the Theology of a Popish Priest, namely, that
Respublica est in Ecclesia, instead of the Church being in the Commonwealth,
will equally appear so in the Writings of Mr. Car^wright (for that he there
affirmed) and to be in any man's writings as absurdly said as it is in the
Lexicon Geographicum in Folio, Cantabrigia est quoddam oppidum in quo est
Academia.

If any Dissenter should now trouble the Press with ingenious Books to perplex
the Layety about the lawfulness of the ordination by Bishops, he would want
ingenious Readers; for it is now as much out of fashion for People to concern
themselves about knowing the demonstrative certainty of the true ordination of
their Pastors, almost as 'twas among the Jews of old to question who were the
true Sons of Levi by natural Generation, a thing that none but the Mother knew.

Our English World is likely to the end of time, to be too busy to mind nice
Questions of the uncertain Genealogies of Churches, and each Protestant now
will admit of the Credo Ecclesiam Catholicam without quarrelling about the
Latinity of the expression; and as in the History of the Council of Trent
(where the Thread of the Controversy about proponentibus legatis runs through
the whole Council) when it was told the Pope that Vargas granted that if the
thing designed were only that the Legates shall propose, no man would have
complained, but the Ablative, proponentibus legatis did deprive the Bishops of
Power to propose, and therefore 'twas fit to change it into to another kind of
Speech, the Pope replied, That 'twas now no time to think of cujus generis and
cujus casus, so in our Realm all Policy it self whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical, will now be accounted but Pedantry, that by any previous
questions puts off the debate of Capital Ships and their Maintenance and
Equipage; and the consideration of the necessity of great Supplies for that
purpose, will carry the Vote with a Nemine Contradicente among the People
diffusive here, that they will give no more Supplies to Religion-Traders, and
that in order to the Nations being able as a Britannia florens in point of
Trade to keep great Fleets at Sea, it is necessary that men's expectation should
be bankrupt of gain by Castles in the Air, or in fine, that the very
Corporation of the Trade of all Beggars should be broken which has so much
diminished our other Trade.

The great Statesman of this latter Age, Mazarine projecting the growing Power
and Glory of France, did not long before he dyed, wisely lay the Foundation of
it by the extirpating out of the Metropolis and other Cities of that Kingdom,
those public Nusances there called Beggars, and since all Religion-Traders are
in truth and reallity of the Trade of Beggars, and the Multitude of them at
present diminishes the shame of that very Trade, the destruction of it will
probably by all be judged as the first thing necessary for the advancement of
other Commerce. And as the wisest course I ever heard of, taken for breaking
the Trade of Beggars in the Streets was that by the Justices of Middlesex in
their Printed Papers, sent to the Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, and
Constables of the respective Parishes in the Suburbs, whereby all Persons are
desired and required by their Order to forbear to relieve any Beggars at their
doors, or in any other kind about the Streets, so in like manner will nature
probably by the real Poverty of People cause them to forbear to give relief to
these Religious Mendicants, and will thereby break their Trade.

And moreover tho there has in all Ages been another sort of Traders, and who
too were but splendid Beggars, and by their importunity in Courts, and with
artifice representing the Sores and Maims of their Estates have moved the Royal
Commiseration to exhaust its Revenue on them, yet the vast public charge
likely to be impendent over us as well as our Neighbors will show those
First-rate Mendicants the vanity of the Science of begging, a Science that
Agrippa does very well Animadvert upon, in his Book de Vanitate Scientiarum.

And there being no way for the Heirs and Children of our many Luxuriants, to
get from under the loads of debts and Encumbrances bequeathed them, but by
industry and frugality, I account that they will be necessitated to mend the
Genius of the Age, and so to contribute to the advancement of Trade.

When the Author of Britannia languens does (I fear) too truly tell us, p. 139.
That our late wealthy Yeomanry are impoverished or so much reduced in their
Stocks, that a man shall hardly find three in a County able to Rent 3 or 400 l.
per Annum, and that our Poor are increased to near ten times their late number
within these last twenty years, and that their maintenance does cost the
Nation 400000 l. per Annum constant Tax, and had before in p. 138 showed, That
the Trades of Tillage, Grazing, Dairy, Clothing, Fulling, that formerly
enriched the Occupiers of them, have in these latter years been the usual
Shipwracks of Men's Stocks and Estates in most parts of England, and in p. 27.
That we have in a manner lost the Eastland and Northern Trades, and in p. 240
shows, That the cheapness of Interest does not proceed from the plenty of Money
but scarceness of security, and there observes, That Personal Security for Money
being in a manner lost, and that there is not one Land security in twenty that
is good, and in p. 291. I hear of no new improving Manufactures in England but
that of Periwigs, we may well account that the Ebb of our Trade is at the very
lowest point, and that under so good a Prince in so good and populous a Land,
nature will hasten its improvement.

Tho the understandings of the English have in all Arts and Sciences appeared
as sharp as those of any Nation, and particularly in the Science of the
Politics, yet so it has happened that since the Reformation our Statesmen have
been so put to it by the efforts of Popery and other Religion-Trades to stand
continually upon their Guard, and have been so worn out by continual duty, that
they have not had time to make Platforms of improvement of Political
Discipline, or to acquaint the World with their Memoires as many of the
Statesmen of France have done, and the great Ship of the Nation in its Trading
Voyages (as I may say) under Sail, and making a great figure in the Sea of
time, and having experienced Pilots at the Helm of State, has yet been so
clogged in its motion by the little fantastic Remora of a pretended Religion
sticking to its side in several Conjunctures, that our making no more way in
the World has appeared a Jest to Critical Spectators, and no doubt but pending
the Authority of a Religion-Trade, as paramount over others in this or any
Country, its fate will be like Reubens, never to excel. Not only our Statesmen
but our Princes in former times tho their abilities were very great and
adequate to support the weight of the Government had it been greater, were yet
exposed to perpetual toil, by ballancing the Religionary Contest, viz. of the
Parties of Papists and Puritans; which minds me how it has been wondered at,
that a strong Horse should not draw a one wheeled Coach with a great deal of
ease, considering that he only bears up part of the weight, and keeps it
upright to a Balance by thills on either side of him, and that by experience
it is found that this Horse becomes weary sooner then expectation: and the
reason of it is conceived to be, that tho he bears not so much burden nor
draws so much draught as a Coach or other Carriage with two or more Wheels, yet
he is so bruised and banged on either side with the unusual motion of the
thills to keep the one Wheeled Coach upright, that he is thereby much sooner
spent and wearied then by ordinary drawing or bearing he would have been: and
thus neither better nor worse, has been the fate of our Monarchs and their
Ministers, to be continually throughout the Journey of their Lives hit on this
and 'tother side, and bruised with the Thills of Popery and Presbytery, while
they were keeping up Religion to a Balance; but I believe 'twill appear a
shame to us that they should be thus the Ludibria of Fortune any longer.

The Author of the present State of England, Part. 2. says, That the yearly
Charge of his Majesty's Navy in times of Peace continuing in Harbor, is so well
regulated that it amounts to scarce 70000 l.

Had he heard my Lord Keeper Bridgeman's Speech to the Parliament, Anno 1670.
he would there have been informed, That His Majesty finds that by his Accounts
from the year 1660 to the late War, the ordinary Charge of the Fleet,
Communibus annis, came to 500000 l. a year, and that it cannot be supported
with less.

His Lordship in that Speech mentioning to what proportion our Neighbors had
augmented their Fleets, and how it imported His Majesty to keep pace with them,
if not to outgo them in number and strength of Shipping, minds me of the Force
of that saying of Cicero to Atticus, L. 10. Ep. 7. Qui mare tenet, eum necesse
est rerum potiri, and the truth of it is much more applicable to the State of
the World now, then that in his time: and we shall always be but damnati ad
insulam, if we do not by a vigorous industry so supply our selves as to be able
to supply our Princes, and so as to enable them to make the Naval Strength of
England, as proportionable to that of other Nations, as it can be made.

As the ordinary charge of the Fleet for several years, came to the great above
mentioned Sum, so I believe that the ordinary Naval Charge never since amounted
to less then 200,000 l. per Year, beside the vast Charge in building new Ships
and rebuilding old, and the Charge of Summer and Winter Guards, and of Convoys
and of Ships against Algeers: and His Majesty's most exact care of the defense
of the Walls of the Kingdom has been such, while he beheld the emulous
endeavors of Nations to excel in Naval Power, that he has enriched his Realm
since the Year 69, with a more valuable Fleet then it had before: and the great
Cordial that Nature allows us against Wars, and Rumors of Naval Wars, when we
are dejected with the shame of our Civil Wars having occasioned the
Neighboring World to augment its Naval Force, and consequently too our own
vast perpetual Charge in the augmenting ours, is that by the necessary increase
of our industry we are capable of defraying it, and herein Providence is but
just in treating us in the Confinement to our Island, as the Dutch do Idlers
sent to their Workhouses, where care is taken that if they do not the Work
appointed them, the Sea will come in upon them: and it is well for us that
accordingly as is shown in the 8th Chapter of Sir W. P's Political Arithmetic,
there are spare hands enough among the King of England' s Subjects to earn Two
Millions per Annum, more then they now do, and there are employments ready,
proper and sufficient for that purpose.

His expression of the spare hands of the English minds me, how we who did
before our Commotion only pay to our Kings, the 6 th part of the spareable part
of our Estates, (for that was what Mr. Vaughan afterward Lord Chief Justice
declared in the House of Commons, to be the proportion that men were to be
taxed in the old gentle way of Assessments, called Subsidies) were forced upon
those manifold payments to the Usurpers, that amounted to one entire Subsidy in
each Week of the Year, when as what we paid before exceeded not usually one
Subsidy or 15 th in two or three years space.

And afterward when instead of the demanding of Five Members from the
Parliament, above 400 were forcibly secluded from it, most Exorbitant Taxes
were Levied in the Name of a House of Commons, in which instead of 508 Members
as the legal Complement of its number, and of 78 Knights of Shires for England,
and 12 for Wales, there were no Knights of the Shire at all sitting in that
House for these 26 English and 11 Welsh Counties following, viz. Bedfordshire,
Cornwall, Cambridgeshire, Derbyshire, Devonshire, Dorsetshire, Essex,
Glocestershire, Hartfordshire, Herefordshire, Lincolnshire, Lancashire,
Middlesex, Monmouthshire, Norfolk, Northumberland, Oxfordshire, Surry,
Shropshire, Southampton, Suffolk, Somersetshire, Sussex, Westmerland,
Warwickshire, Yorkshire, Anglesey, Brecknock, Cardiganshire, Carmarthinshire,
Carnarvanshire, Denbighshire, Flintshire, Glamorganshire, Pembrokshire,
Montgomeryshire, Radnorshire, and but one Knight of the Shire in each of the 9
following Counties, Berkshire, Cheshire, Huntingtonshire, Kent, Leicestershire,
Northamptonshire, Staffordshire, Wiltshire Worcestershire, and only the full
number of Knights of the Shire in Buckinghamshire, Nottinghamshire,
Rutlandshire, Merionethshire.

And York, Westminster, Bristol, Canterbury, Chester, Exeter, Oxford, Lincoln,
Worcester, Chichester, Carlisle, Rochester, Wells, Coventry, had no Citizens in
the House, and London had only 1 instead of 4, and Gloucester and Salisbury
alone of all the Cities in England, had their full Number, and by a parcel of
about 89 permitted to sit, was the whole Clergy as well as Layety of England
Taxed.

Nor is it to be forgot that after the great Usurper by his own Authority, only
laid a Tax of 60,000 l. per Month on us, he afterward found a giving Parliament
that Calculating the Charge of the Nation, judged it in the whole to amount to
1300,000 l. per Annum, whereof 200,000 l. for the Protectors support, 400,000
l. for the maintenance of the Navy and Ports, and 700,000 l. for the Army, as
we are told out of the History of the Iron Age printed in the year 1656: and
that they who grudged the best of Kings the ordinary yearly Revenue of less
then half a Million, were brought to settle more then double that Sum on the
worst of Usurpers, viz. 1,300,000 l. per Annum, and that by their helping him
into the Power to break the Balance of Christendom as he did, they have
entailed on us and our Heirs, a necessity of laboring hard for ever, to
expiate the Guilt and Folly of their idle Politics.

The Plenty and Pride and Idleness here that occasioned our Civil Wars, and the
Tessera of one of the Roman Emperors, Militemus, and the various discriminating
words and signs of Religion, have brought us to the Tessera of another of them
which will stick by us, namely Laboremus.

But as it is to be seen in Scobels Collection of Acts, Anno 1656. cap. 6. in
the humble Petition and advice of Cromwell's Parliament, the 7th Paragraph,
which Enacts the Revenue, mentions nothing in particular of the 1,300, 000 l.
yearly, to be settled for the Protectors support, but provides that as a
constant yearly Revenue for the support of the Government, and the safety and
defense of these Nations by Sea and Land, 1000000 l. be settled for the Navy
and Army, and 300,000 l. in general for the support of the Government.

I should not dilate on the Subject of those past Calamitous Times of our
Country, but that so great a Number of those who experimented them, and were
Actors or Sufferers therein is now dead, that this Age wants the Poize or
Ballast of their experiences to keep it steady and secure, from being overset
by Waves of Sedition, or Winds of Doctrine. There are several Latin Sayings
about War, of which the Pedantly Citation is nauseous, as was particularly
Sorbiers valuing himself on the Motto of Pax bello Potior: but there is another
saying familiar to Grammar Schools, whence the most Oracular Men in Cabinets of
State may, and indeed ought to take their Measures and Estimates of the
probable Continuance of the public Peace in any Country, and that is from the
Consideration of the Numbers of the Inhabitants that never felt the misery of
War, and that saying is, Dulce bellum inexpertis, a saying that was thought to
give an Ornament to the Monumental Inscription of our Harry the 3 d, among the
Westminster Monuments, the Epitaph of which Prince whose Reign moved so much in
the bloody Track of War being there thus, Tertius Henricus jacet his pietatis
amicus.
Ecclesiam stravit istam quam post renovavit.
Reddat ei munus qui Regnat Trinus and unus.
Tertius Henricus est Templi conditor hujus, 1273:
Dulce bellum inexpertis.


And long before that obtained as a Latin Adage, it was one in Greek, viz.
(...): and it is well said in Vegetius De Re militari, lib. 3. cap. 14. Nec
confidas satis si tyro praelium cupit. Inexpertis enim dulcis est pugna.

And in Pindar it is said, (...), i. e. dulce bellum inexpertis, ast expertus
quispiam horret, si accesserit cordi supra modum.

the sense of this weighty Adage Horace, applies to the Contracting Friendship
with Great Men, Dulcis inexpertis cultura potentis amici,
Expertus metuit.


And no doubt but the reason that induced the Romans to place their Tyrones in
the Van of the Battle, was that their not knowing all the uncertainties and
horrors of War, would contribute to their eagerness in the onset. Partly to
this purpose Mr. Hobs in his Behemoth or History of our Civil Wars observes
well, That there were at first in the Parliaments Army a great many London
Apprentices, who for want of experience in the War, would have been fearful
enough of death and wounds approaching visibly in glistering Swords, but for
want of judgment scarce thought of such death as comes invisibly in a Bullet,
and therefore were very hardly to be driven out of the Field.

And now therefore should any Great Person descend to ask my poor Opinion of
the proportion of the danger we are in of a Relapse into the Plague of War, I
would give it by bringing the Doctrine of Dulce bellum, etc. into use and
application thus, namely, I would Calculate the number of the inexperts now
here living, and who were not living in the time of the last War, a thing not
hard to do sufficiently for my purpose: and thus I essayed to do it the last
year when I fancied to employ my thoughts on that Subject, diverting my self
with these Queries. 1. What part of the People of England now living, are
inexperts, i. e. who are now alive that were born since the year in which our
Wars ended, or were then Children, viz. Of such years as not to have
experienced, or been sensible of the miseries and inconvenience of the War? 2.
What numbers of those who lived in 1641, about which time the War may be
supposed to have begun, are now dead? 3. What proportion of those now living,
who lived in that time of the War, did gain by the War; for it may be said that
perhaps War may be sweet to such surviving experts. 4. The War of Ireland
ending about the year 1653, how many may the number of such inexperts there be
supposed to be? 5. The People of Scotland being now above a Million (as are the
People of Ireland) and the Scotch War ending at Worcester Fight, September the
3 d, 1651. How many are now living in Scotland that lived there that day, and
what may be the number of the inexperts there?

In order to the satisfying my self in these Queries, tho I know that many do
make the Civil Wars of England to end with the surrender of Oxford in
Mid-summer 1646, yet because several Acts of War in England were committed long
after 1646, viz. in Lancashire, Kent, at Colchester, Worcester, I supposed not
the English War to end till 1651, about the same time with that of Scotland,
both Kingdoms as they are but one Island, so intermixing and bringing mutual
Calamities on one another: and besides, a few years at that distance of time
would not much alter the State of this Case: so then as to the first and last
Queries, I thus concluded that the People of this Island in the year 1651, were
and always are about one half of them under the age of 16, (before which time
as they are reckoned unfit for War, so may they likewise be thought inexperts
as to the miseries thereof) and the other half above that age; and that of this
latter half more then one other Moiety are dead in these 28 or 29 years, which
have passed from 51 to near 80. For if we reckon only Arithmetically without
any Consideration of Geomerrical proportion in the Case, (which with reason
enough the Observator on the Bills of Mortality takes in) yet 28 (the number of
years in 51, in which the said half are supposed dead) and 27 (for the years of
the other half surviving) and fifteen (for the Age of the Inexperts from 1651)
makes 72, the full Age of Man: so that the surviving Experts are not a fourth
of the whole. And again at least one half of this fourth, either through
forgetfulness by Age or Dotage, or for want of understanding all their whole
life time, may be very well counted among the Inexperts also. And thus the
Inexperts will be above seven eighth parts of the whole People.

And if in answer to the third Query, we shall add the Number of the Gainers by
the War, (which perhaps some will estimate but small) and of those who lost by
the Peace and Settlement on the Kings Restoration, with the Heirs, Executors
and Principal Legatees of both, (and to these three last sorts, the War was so
very sweet, that they may very well be reckoned for the Equivalent of three or
four, or perhaps many times more the number of the other common Inexperts) we
may on the whole matter judging modestly, conclude the Inexperts of all the
former sorts, not to be less then (9/10) nine Tenths of the whole People: and
to these also they who have spent their Estates, and cannot well live in Peace
may be properly added.

I satisfied my self as to the fourth Query, concerning Ireland, that it may
bear at least the same proportion, with what was asserted in relation to Great
Britain: and tho the War in the former lasted some years longer, yet there are
other Considerations obvious enough, that would more then balance that.

As for the Query about how many are now dead who were living in 41, the
Principles I have variously discoursed of out of the Observations on the Bills
of Mortality, may easily satisfy Curiosity therein.

I account that of the Lords Temporal in the Kings Long Parliament, that sat
the 8 th of May, 1661. there were dead 77 at the Dissolution of that
Parliament, in January the 25 th, 1678. And of the 26 Bishops that sat on the
8th of May in that Parliament, only 2 were alive in the 25 th of January, 1678.
And of the House of Commons which sat in the 8th of May 1661. And consisted of
about 520 odd Members there died during their sitting, viz. in 17 Years and 8
Months 307 Members, viz. in each year about 1/17 th part, which is one in about
30 of the whole of that House every year.

And these things considered, we may well conclude that of the Parliament that
sat on the 3 d of November, 1640, there are few living, and I think that of
that turbulent House of Commons, scarce 16 are now living, and that of the
Assembly of Divines that met the first of July, 1643. all the Divines except 2
are dead. The Sculls of many of those hot Spurrs of Church and State, that
troubled us so much on the Stage of the World, have perhaps since diverted us
in the Scene in Hamlet, and no doubt but of the poor handful of surviving
Experts of them, the most considerate are not now considering how by any
Projects to put the World either in Tune or out of it, but are tuning their
fancies to the still Music of the Grave.

We see that many of the Sons of the Divines of that Assembly, and of other
Presbyterians, are true Sons of the Church of England, and are of the Clergy in
it.

But tho I am no Concurrer with their Estimates, that make the number of those
who gained by the War to be small, for as the Judicious Author of the Regal
Apology, Printed in the Year 1648, (and by the Oxford Antiquities said to be,
Dr. Bate the late Eminent Physician) in p. 49 estimates, That the Revenues of
King, Queen, Bishops, Deans and Chapters, and Delinquents in the hands of those
Usurpers were almost one Moiety of the Kingdom, besides many rich Offices, etc
and as to the multiplicity of Offices then, a very ingenious Pamphlet written
in those days, called the City Alarm, with a Treatise of the Excise, mentions
in p. 33. That 'twas easy to demonstrate that more then 200,000 l. per Annum,
was then consumed by superfluous Officers: (which by the way sufficiently shows
the ill Managery of the public Treasure in those days) and tho I have put the
rate of the Heirs of such above that of common Inexperts, yet I am not without
hopes that possibly some what like a sort of Experience, that many of those
Heirs have from the latest Histories and Traditional Accounts had of the breath
of the People having blown away that mighty Balance of Land out of the hands
of the unjust Poss^ssors, and all their Models of Government built thereon, and
of many of their Ancestors who had by their Swords acquired ample shares of the
Spoils of the Crown, and Church, and Cavaliers Estates, growing ashamed of
their unjust Victories, and the Yoke they have brought upon themselves and the
Kingdom, and afraid of their Estates and Liberties, not being ensureable under
a fluctuating Military Oligarchy, thought it the best of their Game to aspire
with their All to the feet of their Lawful Sovereign, and to be his Restorers
without Capitulation, may incline a considerable part of such, and who are not
desperate in their Fortunes, and have perhaps inherited the Blessiing of their
Ancestors penitence, by their Peaceable Morals to make such an exception in
this case, as may confirm the Rule and make them according to the expression
before used, become sound parts of the State.

Another momentous thing cannot but be obvious to the thoughts of the
Considerate among them, and all Orders or Parties of men here, that if the
devesting the unjust Proprietors of about half the Land of England, by the
necessary Course of the Law at the Kings Restoration, did in making so many
persons and their dependants Paupers, and useless in the improvement of the
Land, and many to be Nusances in it, as troublesome Sollicitors and Barrettors,
and many likewise to withdraw to our Foreign Plantations, and to our insula
Sanctorum called Ireland, unavoidably make the price of our Land sink to the
proportion it has since done, that if any Sons of Belial and disloyal persons,
should be ever able by a new Commotion to introduce the old Confusions among
us, and dispossess the Proprietors of about half our Land as formerly, that
England it self would turn Ireland, and our Land perhaps be valuable but at ten
years purchase.

And tho the Experts now in being among us are comparatively few, yet is the
work of the Loyal part of them so easy to demonstrate to their Vicinage, every
where the dreadful inconvenience of essaying to mend the World by War, that one
Harvy could not more easily among the judicious, propagate a general Notion of
the Circulation of the Blood, then may a thousand of these show to Millions of
others, the impious folly of Blood guiltiness again incircling our Land, and
especially when all our Blood and our Treasure is necessary to be preserved for
the Defense of the Realm, in a Conjuncture that has put Christendom in
procinctu: and therefore it is but according to the Course of Nature, that in
such a season the generality of Peoples minds here should manifest such an
Abhorrence of both the Irish and English in 41, and that the Religion-Trade
which had us at its feet, being now at ours, if it should again struggle to get
uppermost as formerly, is to expect from so many to find the salute of the
rising blow.

And as I love to think of these things without asperity, or offering the least
Violence to the Sacredness of the great Established Amnesty, so do I observe
the same inclination to be very prevalent among the weightier persons of the
several Parties.

The smalness of the Number of Persons now living that wanted that Amnesty,
makes men generally concur in not esteeming it, ta^ti to wish it broken; but
tho most of our former Empirical State-Physicians are covered with Earth, their
Errors are not, and People seem generally sensible that both the present, and
in likelihood the future State of England will not allow of Political
Physicians, trying more Experiments on us, and particularly the former churlish
ones that succeeded ill, and especially in a Conjuncture when nature is by
necessity leading us to a Convalescence.

As in Boccalines Politic Touchstone, Where the Monarchy of Spain is
represented, throwing her Physician out of the Window, and Apollo desiring to
know the Cause of it, she told him how about 40 years ago, she asking Counsel
of her Physician, he prescribed her a tedious and chargeable Purge of diverse
Oils of Holy Leagues, of Insurrections of People, of Rebellions, of Cauteries
and other very painful Medicines that had wasted and weakened her spirits, and
that he prescribing just such another Purge as before, was therefore thrown out
at Window, so would such Purges and such Purgers as we were troubled with forty
years ago, be here deservedly dealt with now.

How ridiculous will any Demagogue now appear, that should in an English
Parliament harangue it against supplying the King, in such a manner as Sir John
Elliot and Mr. Pym did 4to Caroli, who then (as Rushworth's Collections tells
us) moved in the House of Commons not to yield the King Tunnage and Poundage,
till they had first settled Religion, touching the Points of Ariminianism.

They might as well have moved that the King might have no Money, till they had
found out the Longitude, and likewise discovered the Quadrature of the Circle,
and they by that motion would have ensured to him the name of Pochi-Dinari,
that my Lord Herbert in his Harry the 8 th says, was given to Maximilian the
Emperor, for his famed want of Money.

But that wantonness of Popularity, did show the worse in those two great
Demagogues of their Age, for the ingratitude it carried with it, they moving so
in the House of Commons as they did so soon after the great Royal Concessions
as to the Petition of Right, and might well excuse the Great Earl of
Strafford's then quitting their Company.

But I shall here observe to your Lordship, that after the discovery of the
Gunpowder Treason, viz. 3 Iacobi, the Parliament gave him three Subsidies, and
six Fifteenths and Tenths of the Layety, and four Subsidies of the Clergy, all
which by estimation amounted to 453000 l. and it was but just in them then so
to supply the Crown after the detection of that Conspiracy, because it appeared
by several Examinations, That if it had taken effect, an Association of
Foreign Roman Catholic Princes by a Solemn Oath like that of the Holy League
in France, was desigued to have assured the business afterward: and it was but
natural for the Parliament believing the same, to enable their Prince with a
Counter mine of Gold, to blow up the Associated Purses of those Foreign
Princes; and no doubt but by the very Noise of that liberal Supply being heard
abroad in the World, that Association was Thunderstruck, as any one else must
be in a Conjuncture when the Nations abroad shall see our Prince provided with
effects, as King James was as aforesaid, a Conjuncture I despair not of seeing,
nor of its influencing the World with Terror as did the very sound of the
supplying the King by the last Pole-Act, to enable him for a War with France,
and which was the Cause that the Panic Fear in some of our rustical Plebs of
the French landing in the Isle of Purbec, and when some of the poor adjacent
Mobile, in the air of their fancies heard the noise of adventare Gallos, as
Alexander ab Alexandro, genialium dierum, l. 3. c. 14. says, Gallis etiam
Senonibus ad urbem properantibus in nova via ubi alloqu^tionis postea templum
fuit, vocem auditam quae Gallos adventare diceret, inter exempl^ relatum est,
was not more opprobrious then that fear of the French that marched off an Army
and Royal Fleet so abruptly out of Scicily, when they heard a voice of
Adventare Anglos (which evaporating of the French Forces from thence, as it was
a sufficient indication that there was no perfect love between our Kings great
Minister of that time, and the French Ministers, for perfect love casts out
fear, and had there been any perfect good understanding between him and them,
the noised Adventare Anglos would not have exorcised them out of the body of
that Kingdom) so it perhaps proved an occasion of the perfect French Hatred
against his Lordship, that he so satisfactorily acquainted our English World
with in one of his solid and sinnewy Printed Vindications) and I do believe
that the future Warlike State of Christendom, will necessarily prompt all that
affect to be Patriots, instead of studying to make men unwilling to promote
public supplies, to bend their brains in the way of Calculation to show what
the Kingdom is able to contribute to its defense, and how to do it with
equality in Taxes and Levyes, and that he will appear the most popular man who
shall show our Representatives, how and in what proportion the Rateable parts
of Men's Estates may be rated, a thing that I hear Sir W. P. in his Manuscript
called, Verbum sapienti, has essayed to do, and given his Sentiment, that
supposing a Million should ever be raised in England, there should be Levied on
the m. ll. Lands 216 viz. 1/30 of the Rent. Cattle 54 viz. 1/600 Personal
Estate 60 viz. 1/60 Housing 45 viz. 12 d a Chimney in London, 10 d without the
Liberties: 6d in Cities and Towns, and 4 d elsewhere.

People -- 625 at 2s. 1d per Head, or rather a Poll of 6d and 19d Excise, which
is not full 1/38 part of the mean expense, and he does there Chap. 9.. 7. with
great Judgment insinuate, That the overfavourable taxing personal faculties and
Estates makes Plebeians richer and surlier, and that the effect of which may be
feared as a tendency to Democracy.

How favorably such Estates were Taxed when Subsidies were in use, I have
showed, and how very little they came to in the Execution of the last Poll Bill
is fresh in Memory, and yet in the Dutch Republic, when the States raise an
extraordinary Tax sometimes of the 1000 dth, sometimes of the 500 dth,
sometimes of the 200 th part of every Man's Estate richer or poorer, and men are
Taxed therein according to Common Fame and Report by their Magistrates of their
several Cities and Towns, and the Party grieved at his Assessment declaring on
his Oath that his Estate is not worth so much will be always relieved, it is
very rarely seen that any man makes himself poorer then common Report speaks
him, by means whereof that Tax is very considerable: and therefore for us to
debase our Government by the making of that Tax so low, when they advance
theirs, by cheerfully making it so high, will to the Loyal Lovers of our
Monarchy naturally in time seem un^easonable.

I believe then that he will be the most Celebrated Parliament Man, that can in
any Mony-Bills direct the making the Levy generally proportionable, (according
to that saying in pari jugo facilis est tractus) and can in the Debate of any
Book of Rates, provide against the danger of a clogging of Trade, which he who
takes wrong measures in burthening, does (as one says) put a pound Weight at
the end of a Pole, which is heavier then twenty times so much placed at the
hand, and does thereby work down Land Revenues, more then the Sums actually
paid, etc. and can demonstrate what burden the People can well bear, and that
Parliamentary Imposts may be put on them in the way that men use to lade the
Camel when he lies down, so as he may cheerfully rise up with his burden, and
how that which is the second Principal Conclusion in Sir W. P' s Political
Arithmetic, viz. That some kind of Taxes and public Levies, may rather
increase then diminish the Commonwealth, may be rendered applicable to us,
(and in his explicating which Conclusion he does not as a Propounder, but as
one having Authority, namely, that of Reason, Instance in three various Taxes
for England, Scotland and Ireland, that would increase the wealth of the same)
and how, to provide for Equality in Taxes, Men's Estates may be as accurately
weighed as they were of old by the Roman Prudence, which for that purpose
instituted the Office of Censors (and when in the Censes the Civil Law ordered
the Censors Estimates to be registered, and both the bona Mobilia and Immobilia
to be registered, and even the Sums of Money at Interest to be registered and the
names of the Debtors, and this upon Oath, and in the registration of Lands
their true value was set down and how they were fertile or barren, and every
Tax was Collected where the Estimate was made) and that the Quota of Taxes
might not be sunk by Peoples being returned as real or feigned Paupers, the
whole City was ratably Taxed to make up the Capitation or Pole Money for
Paupers, and that the People might be exactly numbered, and all this to be done
every five years, the time when new Censors entered into their Office, and to
which the word lustration refers, and how to Copy out the Politics of the House
of Commons in Queen Elizabeth's time, when the securing the Protestant Interest
at home and abroad, made them so inclinable to look on the giving her Money to
be the great quid agendum, and on which they thought depended both the Law and
the Prophets in the English Tongue, and when as we are told it in townsend's
Collections very great masterly skill was shown in Debates as to the
proportioning the Taxes, and particularly by those great Masters, Sir Walter
Raleigh, Secretary Cecil, Mr. Francis Bacon, and when Cecil accurately
Calculated in the house how much a Levy came to wherein the Respective Quota's
laid on Land and Goods were mentioned by him, and more skill was really shown
in Proportions and Estimates of the Public Money to be raised then has by some
Parliaments in this Age, been endeavored after or perhaps so much as pretended
to.

The long Parliament of 1640. seem to me in their Taxes in London, and the
Associated Counties to have provided only that their concern in the Kingdom
might vivere in diem, but has occasioned the disproportionate and immoderate
weight of the Taxes in some places of those Counties to be perpetual. And the
prodigious Taxes laid on the Inhabitants of London, during the War after 41 did
not end with it, insomuch that Lilly the Astrologer in his vile Book of
Monarchy, or no Monarchy in England, Printed in the Year 1651. says in p. 92.
My proportion in the Ship Money was 22 s. and no more, but now my Annual
Payments to the Soldiery are very near or more than 20 l, my Estate being no
way greater than formerly.

In the Parliament in Anno Domini 1605. and Anno Reg. Iac. 3. there was passed
an Act for the granting 3 entire Subsidies and six fifteenths and tenths
granted by the Temporalty to his Majesty, with the Reasons why granted, and the
great advantages his Majesty has been to the Kingdom. And in the Act it is
inter alia said, A first and principal Reason is that late and monstrous
Attemps of that cursed Crew of desperate Papists, to have destroyed your
Excellent Majesty, the Queen and your Royal Progeny, together with the Reverend
Prelates, Nobility and Commons of this Land; assembled in Parliament, to the
great Confusion and Subversion of this Kingdom. The barbarous Malice in some
unnatural Subjects, we have thought fit to check and encounter with the certain
demonstration of the universal and undoubted love of your Loyal and Faithful
Subjects, not only for the present to breed in your Majesty a more confident
assurance of our uttermost Aids, in proceeding with a Princely Resolution to
repress them and to furnish your Majesty against Hostile Attempts both by Sea
and Land, but also for the future times, to give their Patrons and Partakers to
understand that your Majesty can never want in this Kingdom means of defense of
your Rights, Revenge of your Wrongs, and support of your Estate.

They had immediately before said, We do further think fit to add and express
these reasons special and extraordinary, which have moved us hereunto, lest the
same our doing may be brought into precedent to the prejudice of the State of
our Country, and our Posterity.

As hidebound as King James found Parliaments afterward (for as I said) he in
his Speech in Parliament Anno 1620 mentioned, That in all his Reign he had but
4 Subsidies and six Fifteenths, yet their Belief of that Popish Gunpowder Plot
fired the Zeal of their Supplies, and (as I may say too) made their Money burn
in their Pockets, and pass with speed into the Exchequer, and with a Salvo to
the Caution about not drawing that Act into a President, etc. Had I been in the
Parliament that sat after the Discovery of the last Popish Plot, I should have
moved that the belief of that Plot might have shown it self by works of supply
to the King, especially considering that the Protestant Interest was then
abroad, inter sacrum and saxum, and do hope that the belief thereof will so
show it self in any Parliament his Majesty shall call, that we shall that way
Expostulate with the quare fremuerunt Gentes, abroad against the Protestant
Religion. And such a golden Age do I expect for the Crown from future
Parliaments, that I believe that nothing of Prerogative that safeguards the
Kingdom, will be asked as the price of any Supplies, and that as I thought it
very absurd in a Country Fellow, when he called for a quantity of an Opiate
Medicine his Doctor had prescribed, to ask angrily, shall I have no more for my
Money? when as if he had had more it would have poisoned him, it will generally
appear as absurd on any Supplies to swallow up so much of the executive part of
the Regal Power, as would prove in effect destructive to the Body Politic.

We shall have so much occasion to come for shelter under the Branches of Regal
Power, that we shall not be tempted by any leisure to lay its roots bare. And
considering that even in Republics both Ancient and Modern, there has been a
Parenthesis of Dictatorian or Monarchic Power in times of War, and that all the
times that all the living now in Christendom are to be fencing with all the way
in their March to the Grave, may perhaps be times of War, I may well account
that the Sir Politics will every where appear ridiculous, who shall trouble the
World with Models of Republics, Agrarian Laws, and Rotations, and spending
time in the contrivance of Ballotting Boxes, and raise a dust in men's eyes with
the Balance of Land at home, when we shall be forced still to look out sharp
to keep the balance of Power exact in the whole World abroad, and shall think
time better employed in notions of the building great Capital Ships to defend
our Interest, in and by the Ocean, then in furnishing such little wooden ware
for a Fantastic Oceana, and shall essay from an Oceana or Vtopia to introduce
an Establishment of one Assembly only to propose, and another only to Enact
such things as the other shall propose, a thing that an English House of
Commons would naturally as much loath as to be tied from eating any meat, but
what a House of Lords should chew for them; and yet is this divided or
double-bottom Supreme Power of the two Assemblies by our Airy Dreamers made
essential for the preventing the Divulsion of their Government. I lately
mentioned the proponentibus legatis to be the thread of Controversy that ran
through the whole Council of Trent, and he who reads all Father Paul's History
of it, will find that question to animate the whole, and to be there, tota in
toto and as it were all in every part of it. The chiefest of the Cardinals were
the Popes Legates in that Council, and they were by their Interest tied
sufficiently to propound nothing but what should promote the Papal Power, but
in Book 6th it is said, That the Pope had advice from his Nuntio in Spain, that
the most Catholic King was much displeased with the Style of Proponentibus
legatis, allowed in the first Session, and that the Pope excused it as
introduced without his privity, but that however he would not quit it nor have
it permitted that every turbulent person there might propound what he pleased.
And there in Book 7th it is said, That the Pope on further application from the
Ambassadors of Princes that that Clause might be damned, as contrary to the
liberty of Ambassadors and Bishops in propounding what they thought profitable,
those for their States and these for their Churches, the Pope gave them good
words about it but did nothing, and Book 10th, The Spanish Ambassador desiring
the Retractation of that Clause, and that otherwise the Council could not be
called free, and that its freedom was to be dated only from the time of such
Retractation, and that the Emperor insisted on its abrogation, and that by
reason of that Clause no German had yet come to that Council, yet nothing was
effected for its revoking, and still the Proponentibus legatis stood as a Rock,
and all their Addresses dashed themselves in pieces, producing nothing but the
froath of excusatory words from the Pope about it: and in fine all that could
be gained was, in the end of the Council, after that Clause had had its full
effect, and done all its Execution against the freedom of the Council, and
particularly of the Ambassadors and Bishops there, and was like a Post-horse
ridd to his Stage, and had brought all the Cloak-bags with the Holy Ghost from
Rome, to turn it to grass with a Formal Declaration or Protestation contrary to
Fact, that the meaning of the Synod was not by that Clause to change in any
part the usual manner of handling matters in general Councils, etc. A crying
Con licensa to the Bishops and Ambassadors after the cutting of the Throats of
their Liberties. And now can any Opiniatre yet further think that a
Representative of English Commoners will ever think those Republican Projectors
of liberty, who do bare faced cut them off from the freedom of their share in
Enacting any thing but what another House shall propound, and that nothing
shall have the Sanction of Law, but what enters the Stage with a proponentibus
Patriciis, or by the Proposition of any other House, the Style of one of
Cromwels two Houses, and who do set up for Inventors in Politics by reviving
the exploded Constitution of the Athenians among whom Anacharsis observed, Wise
men did consult and Fools determine.

But the days are passed and gone, that gave People of subtle and uneasy
Brains the leisure of digging in Politics further than the Center, which
whoever does, digs not downward but upwards, and that Center I account the
ancient lex terrae to be, and he who has got beyond that does digging upwards
destroy the real Foundations of Churches and States, while he is laying
imaginary ones.

But since according to the saying in hieme nil movendum, men of Sense who love
to be tampering with Physic in other seasons, will in that be averse from
stirring the humors and trying Conclusions on themselves and in the churlish
State of the World abroad that is in prospect, all State Empirics that would
any where advise a change of Fundamental Governments, will find an unruly
Patient of the World, and all our sober Political Virtuosi will be necessarily
inclined to study how to maintain and support our old Government, instead of
projecting any new one. And in order to the support of our old one, I dare say
that there will be no more suspension of Royal Aids on the account of the
Arminian Controversy, or the freedom of our Wills, while we are busied in
preparing to defend the freedom of our Estates and Bodies from Forraigners, and
securing both Prince and Peoples not being predestined to ruin by them.

The Extinguishing the maintenance of the Clergy will not pass for a new
Evangelical Light, but the exactest provision for the Enabling Crowned Heads to
support their Civil Government and their Clergy, and with the observance of
equality and proportion in the same respecting the State of their Kingdoms,
will be worthy the thoughts of the most illuminated Doctors: for as among the
Divines it is on all hands agreed, that from the 40th Chap. of the Prophecy of
Ezekiel to the end of that Book, the thing chiefly designed in the Portraiture
of the great Vision of the Prophet is to represent the figure of Church and
State under the Gospel, so there is great proportion kept in the same, and not
only the curious coloring but the exactness of draught and design required in
a great Historical Painting; and no wonder if the same appeared so expressed on
the Table of the Prophets imagination, when God himself was pleased there to
paint it partly after the exactness and proportion of the Jewish Economy, and
with many Additions of Curiosity, and to which tho a litteral interpretation is
not applicable, and on which tho no expectance of the Erection of another
material Temple at Jerusalem or in Judea is to be founded, or of 12000 Reeds of
Land for the Temple and Priests, yet may it thence be naturally inferred that
the preserving of orderly proportion in the Revenue of the Prince and Priest,
and with respect to number Weight and Measure in the Future times of the
Gospel, was then the care and design of Providence. The 45th Chapter that does
so nicely assign the Portion, for the Prince and Priest, ordains or rather
predicts a Royal Patrimony for the Prince in the way of a balance of Land, as
it is said in the 8th Verse, In the Land shall be his Possession in Israel, and
my Princes shall no more oppress my People, and the rest of the Land shall they
give to the House of Israel according to their Tribes.

The consideration of this may probably reform the men of curious imagination
who are still making the Metal of Government more fine than the Standard, and
thinking to leave out there the necessary Mixture of the baser allay that the
frail State of humanity requires to make it current, and without which it would
be too brittle for use, and projecting how to make the Government of Church and
State with ease to live upon nothing, or on Taxes in a confused and blundering
manner laid, when the thought of an inspired Prophet in this Vision relating to
the time of the Gospel the which is called by the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, the time of Reformation applied all the exactness of Mathematics to
the supporting both the Crown, and use of the Keys by an ample and certain
Revenue. And as the great Tax of Augustus on the Roman World or (...) by way of
Capitation or Pole near the time of our Saviors Birth, served to confirm the
Christian Religion in the accomplishment of the Prediction of Christ's being
born in Bethlem, and to cause Joseph and Mary's going thither, a resembling
effect in the Confirmation of the most rational kind of the Christian Religion,
I mean the Protestant, do I expect from our Future Legal and Equal Taxes; and
as I mentioned my Lord Bacon's saying of the Parliaments being yet in debt to
the Church since Harry the 8ths time, so it may perhaps as justly be said that
they are in debt to the Crown for the safety of the Protestant Religion since
Queen Elizabeth's, who as I have been informed from some well Versed in our
Exchequer Records) alienated more of the Patrimony of the Crown then any
English Prince ever did, and that in order to her raising those great Sums
before mentioned, which were necessary for the securing the Protestant
Religion, and rivetting it in fast to our Laws and Government, and I am the
more apt to credit such my Information because I see not by what other way she
could raise those vast Sums, but by such alienation of the Crown Lands, her
ordinary expenses, probably coming near such her receipts, which one may partly
guess by what Sir Robert Cotton in his abstract of the Records of the Tower
touching the Kings Revenue affirms, ( Ex Computo Dom. Burleigh The saurar.)
that Anno 12, her Revenue besides the Wards, and Duchy of Lancaster was 188197
l. 4 s. and the Payments and Assignmets were 110612 l. 13 s. of which the
Household was 30000 l. Privy Purse 2000 l. Admiralty 30000 l. and Sir Robert
Cotton in that Book mentions that she did pawn her Jewels in the Tower, and
often morgage her Land: which no doubt she was constrained to do for the great
end aforesaid, her ordinary Revenue and extraordinary Supplies of Subsidies not
being adequate to the great Sums that her Measures of State and Religion caused
her to expend. And to how low an Ebb the Crown Lands were fallen in the late
Kings time, from what they were in the 12th year of her Reign (and when they
were perhaps about 200,000 l. per Annum) appears in a Book of Mr. Christopher
Verion an Exchequer man dedicated to Sir John Culpeper under Treasurer of his
Majesty's Exchequer, where it is said that the Revenues of the Kings Lands now
in charge before his Majesty's Auditors, amounted in the whole to 100,000l. per
Annum, and consisted then for the most part of Fee-Farms and certain Rents.

I have before mentioned that she laid the Foundation of the Protestant
Religion, being here semper eadem: and as in the Metropolis of Holland the
Foundation of a House ordinarily costs as much as the superstructure, thus
expenceful to the Crown did the Foundation of Protestancy by her prove: and she
needed not the Precaution in these words of St. Luke, For which of you
intending to build a Tower, sits not down first and counts the cost whether he
has sufficient to finish it, lest happily after he has laid the Foundation,
and is not able to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock him, saying,
This man began to build and was not able to finish. She laid the Foundation of
our English Gospel so deep in the Law of the Land, that (God be thanked) the
Romanists have not been able to mock it further then by calling it a
Parliament-Religion, and by my consent let them that way still mock on, and I
shall mock at them who think that any Religion but protestancy here will ever
have a Parliamentary Sanction; and if Popery had not been a Parliamentary
Religion here in the Marian days, her Reign had not (as I may say) been
infamous by the occasion of any Noble Army of Martyrs, nor the Eclipse, of
Justice and Mercy, and the English good nature in her vile Quinquennium been
made an Epoche of Horror in the English Story, as great Eclipses of old in
Chronology, like notches in the Line of Time for Men's Memories to fasten on,
served as dates of Epoches to measure it by; and setting aside some just ground
of fear of Poperies being here permitted by Heaven to be an Epidemical opinion
of Religion, as a just Punishment of such defection from Morality, I think the
fear of the Kingdoms being Shipwrack't on it, and sustaining thereby such
persecution as was in Bohemia, would be as much to be mocked as Shakespears
Shipwreck in Bohemia, and the fear of the Writ De haretico comburendo
grillading any more Christians be as ridiculous as Lithgows mentioning in his
Travels, that in a hot Country he saw Geese roasted in and by the Sun.

But My Lord (raillery apart) the Protestant Religion that before Queen
Elizabeth's Reign was only like a Picture hanging on the Wall, and easy to be
removed without Fatal Prejudice to the Kingdom, has since been so incorporated
into our Laws, and the heart of our Politics, that like the old Fresco
Painting appearing on Walls and there wrought deeply in, it cannot be removed
but with the Wall it self: and whatever Popish Bishops or Judges any Prince of
that persuasion may possibly hereafter appoint, they must till some of our Acts
of Parliament can be Repealed, which declare Popery to be against God's Law,
give Judgment, that it is so; accordingly as it is rationally resolved in
Vaughan's Reports in the Case of Thomas Hill verse. Thomas Good, where it is
occasionally said, That if a Marriage be declared by Act of Parliament to be
against God's Law, we must admit it to be so, for by a Law, that is, by an Act
of Parliament it is so declared.

There is nothing I am more ashamed of in many Protestants who pass for
first-rate ones, and carry not only swollen Sails of Profession of it but Flaggs
as Demagogues, then to see them as I said value themselves on their excessive
Fears of Papists and Popery. I would wish that such intimidated Protestants (if
really they suffer that Passion, and are afraid of the Fire of those Faggots,
that they are more distant in nature from, then from the heat of Mount Aetna,
and talk after the Rate of the Martyr in his Letter to Cranmer, that they must
prepare to hold out to the Fire Inclusive) would not by their pitiful ill
boding fears stain the Noble Prophecies of some English Martyrs, when the Fire
was kindled about them at the Stake. The Acts and Monuments will tell them how
at the Martyrdom of Ridley and Latimer, That when a Faggot was kindled with
fire and laid down at Ridleys Feet, Latimer spoke to him in these words, Be of
good comfort Mr. Ridley, and play the man; We shall this day light such a
Candle in England, as I trust shall never be put out. But what is somewhat more
extraordinary and which I remember not to have heard any one observe out of the
Acts and Monuments, is in the Relation of the Trial of Roger Holland a
Merchant-Taylor of London, how Bishop Bonner heard him say after the Sentence
of Condemnation was read, God has heard the Prayer of his Servants which has
been powered forth with Tears for his afflicted Saints, whom you daily
persecute. But this I dare be bold in God to speak, which by his Spirit I am
moved to say, that God will shorten your hand of Cruelty, etc. For after this
day in this place shall there not be any by you put to the Trial of Fire and
Faggot: and Mr. Fox says, That after that day there never was one that
suffered in Smithfield for the Testimony of the Gospel.

And the Prophetic Impetus of George Sophocard a Scotch Minister was very
remarkable (as Buchanan in his 15th Book of his History relates it) and when
the Cardinal in Scotland and his Train of Priests were Spectators of the
Tragedy of the Martyr, he fixed his eye on the Cardinal and said, That the
Cardinal who there gazeth on me with so much Pomp and Pride, within a few days
shall fall there with more Ignominy then he now sits with State, and so it fell
out that the Cardinals Carcass was shortly dragged with infamy by that very
place.

It is somewhat natural for dying men, and perhaps for all unfortunate men to
offer at Prophecy. They who have good Cards dealt them in one Game, trouble not
themselves to Prophecy that they shall have either good or bad ones in the
next; and few who have sound minds in sound bodies and with sound Estates, can
tune their thoughts to Divination. But as I would not rashly embrace, so
neither would I trample on the Predictions of Pious men in their last Agonies,
and particularly of what they who are Gods Witnesses or Martyrs Predict about
the Cause of Religion: for it is the Lot of Witnesses in any Cause, to be
frequently entrusted with the Secrets of it. But however the most raised
Intenseness of Humane Nature near its period in any men may tempt them to
believe that the things they wish to the World will have their certain Birth in
it, yet whether God does then inspire them with the knowledge of Futurity I know
not: but know that the very Prediction of Future things from dying men of
valued Fame, is according to natural Causes, an Engine in the hand of Fate to
bring the things predicted to an accomplishment. For it being sound that
Sagacious men on the Confines of Eternity have foretold any alterations in the
World, such as wish the same will think them first possible, and then by
degrees likely, and then by the next thought certain to come to pass, and that
therefore they are safe by Heavens Office of Ensurance that their Embarquing in
Designs to bring those things into practice will be prosperous. However when we
see those Martyrs both living in Story, and their Predictions in Nature, and
when our Martyrology has represented to us with what an Heroic Bravery their
Souls flew up to Heaven from the Flames, like the Eagles cut loose and Towering
aloft from the Funeral Piles of the Roman Emperors as they were going to be
made Divi, can we be dispirited by dull fears and suppositions of Protestancy,
and our Laws loosing their Vigor, and be Proditors of the honor of out dying
Martyrs? I do rather both hope and believe that as dead men's Sculls do serve to
strengthen the heads and feet of the Epileptick living, that the ashes of those
Marian Martyrs will confirm the faltring paces of our weaker Protestants from
staggering into an excess of the fears of Popery.

And as in the Hospitals of the mad it is often seen that an Hypochondriac
Person whom irrational fears and fancied dangers brought thither, is by a real
danger, imminent on his Family or Estate, frightning him into his Senses led
out from thence; such a Restoration of People to their Wits, do I expect from
the present and probable Future State of Christendom, and that it will
necessarily rescue us from unnecessary fears as likewise from all Curiosities,
that would imply our ingratitude to Heaven while we would illegally mend our
own Country after the example of other parts of the World that is almost the
only quiet part in it: and Propounders will I believe every day grow more out
of request who would make Earthquakes by telling us of the danger of falling
Skies. It may perhaps be rationally estimated that the greatest part of mad men
becomes such by extravagant Suppositions, and that the Quid si Coelum ruat is
the Foundation of most Bedlams, and likewise the subversion of most States by
Intestine War, making them appear as much the Ludibrium of Fortune, as was the
Story'd Fate of the two Brothers killing one another on occasion, tho not of
falling Skies, yet of their imaginations traveling thither, and ones
Supposition of his having Pasture Ground as spacious as the Firmament, and the
others of his having as many Sheep as there were Stars there, and his demanding
their being pastured there, and fatally resenting its being denied him.

What a grave piece of madness is it in the common Writers of Politics to make
it a kind of Proverbial saying, as I find it used by Reinkingh in his Tractatus
de Regimine seculari and ecclesiastico as well as by other dull Learned Writers
of Politics, namely, that a Prince may be resisted Si navem Reip. in qua ipse
cum subditis navigat, perforare velit. It Is a degree of madness to suppose it;
and the like I thought of a Supposition in a Pamphlet printed not long after
our 41 Commotion, and called Observations on some of his Majesty's late Answers
and Expresses, where in p. 4. it is gravely said, That if a Generalissimo should
turn his Cannons upon his own Soldiers, they might disobey him, etc. or thus
supposing with Gerson, That if the Pope goes to strike and box any one, or with
Alacius de Privileg. l. 1. c. 8. that if the Emperor does so, that it is lawful
in such Case to lay violent hands on either of them, and thence gravely to
conclude that the Party so uncivilly and outragiously treated becomes thereby
the Deputy and Lieutenant to nature, which is a common and equal Sovereign to
them all, as one Persons words of inference in this Case are from those Authors.

Bodin does therefore very wisely in his De Rep. check the affected wisdom in a
Venetian Edict against two Banditi who were Father and Son, and offering the
Son his Liberty and Estate if he would bring in his Fathers head: and being
angry with the supposition of such a things being done faith, That 'twere
better that the whole City of Venice had been swallowed up by the Sea then that
it should have rewarded so detestable a Villainy.

But it is a madness for any to trouble the World by putting wanton impossible
Cases, and extending the Gold of Reason to such a thinness that will make it
lose its weight and value.

To an over subtle Case put, that blundering Answer of a Lawyer was good
enough, Non est ejusmodi casus dabilis. Mr. Hobs in his Behemoth does to the
Question, What if my Prince should command me with my own hands to execute my
Father, in case he should be condemned by the Law, answer well enough, this is
a Case that need not be put. We never have read or heard of any King or Tyrant,
so inhumane as to command it.

But I will suppose better things of the Future State of England, then to
believe it will ever suffer such real madness and real dangers, as formerly
from Suppositions and Fictions, not of Law but of Injury, and when some
injurious Demagogues did often acquire both Popular Air and bread by their but
seeming to suppose what they seduced the people really to do, and to be really
thereby impoverished.

When I think how some men by false Alarmes of suppositions, would for the
lengthening their Interests, lengthen the fears of any persons, and among
Mortal men make the dangers of Plots immortal, I call to mind that it is not
very long ago that a Forraigner who was Physician to King Charles the First, I
mean Sir Theodore Mayerne occasioned an Universal Outcry of the Disease of the
Spleen here, and was observed in many Cases where the Disease proceeded from
the fowlness of the Stomach or other Causes, yet to attribute it to that part
of the Body which tho all Animals have yet most if not all may live without, I
mean the Spleen, but however he got his Living thereby and so plentifully, that
it may be said, that he (as it were) made the Spleen, and the Spleen made him.
And thus does a Spleen of some Popish Sham-Plots, and the continuance of the
fears and danger from a true one, make some persons perhaps who made the former
and the continuance of the fear of the latter: and such State Empyricks would
be as much impoverished by the utter abolishing of the same, as some of our
great Merchants who Trade in Companies and with Convoys, would be if there were
no Argeer; but as the swelling of the Spleen proves the emaciating of the other
parts of the Body, so has the swollen Spleen of the Popish-Plot, particularly
not more enriched some Merchants that Traded therein, than it has impoverished
the Kingdom in general, and I do believe that a Tax of a Million of Money
raised in England in the way before mentioned, would not have been universally
so heavy a burden as the Popish-Plot in its Effects and Consequences has been.

But what by the bravery of the English Genius to which (as was said) the
continuance of any sort of fear is unnatural, and despair which generally grows
from Sloth and Cowardice appearing so dull a thing (humane Nature being apt
easier to descend into it, than to ascend by presumption) and what by Peoples
being Convinced of the smallness of the Papists numbers here comparatively, and
of the ridiculousness of the rumored greatness thereof in particular places,
as for example, of there being 60,000 Papists in St. Martins Parish, where
there dying ordinarily about 2000 in a Year, there cannot be judged to live
60000 Souls of Men, Women, and Children, according to the Rule of 1 in 30 dying
each year, and what by the late great divulsion of the double bottom of the
Pope and the Jesuits appearing by his Decree of March the 2 d before
mentioned, (which makes all thinking People as much to expect its Shipwreck as
do the throngs of the Plebs resorting to the shore in Tempests expect the Ruin
of Navigating Vessels, and to look on Papisme as saying in effect to Iesutisme,
nec tecum, nec sine te) and what by the Notion so much in Vogue and so likely
to be more, that it is as improper to call some of the Tenets of Popery by the
Name of Religion, as 'twould be professedly to mis-call any thing obvious, as
for example, to call Music the Art of Rhetoric, or Grammar Logic, or to call
Astronomy or Dyalling, by Surveying or Gawging, and that it is only that that is
Religion indeed, that is to be honored (according to that expression in the
Scripture, honor Widows that are Widows indeed) and what by the urging Fate of
Christendom now so loudly as with the voice of Thunder repeating it to us, that
this Nation must either now be quiet, or that the World abroad can never be so,
and that the hand of this Realm must be steady, if ever it will keep the
Balance of Christendom so, and what by the Nations having outlived all the
Malignant Symptoms of the Plague of its Fears, I think on the whole matter, we
may without any thing of the Fire of Prophecy, and only from the Light of
Reason presage that the excessive fear of Popery as well as its danger will
here be exterminated.

I doubt not but the former as well as later experiences of the Papists here
concerning the Inconveniences of their Artifice of making or increasing
Dissensions in the Kingdom (the dividing of which by them as well as other
Religion-Traders has prejudiced it more than the so much talked of Division of
the Fleet) will in the present Conjuncture of Affairs incline the sober Party
of them to join with the Body of the People of England, in being sharp
Abhorrers of the Principles of the Jesuits: for they can hardly go any where
now in the Land without seeing a Cain's Mark set on those who cause divisions,
or still drive the old Trade that the Bohemian Nobleman Andreas ab Habering
field in his Detection of the Popish Practices mentions, that Sir Toby Mathews,
Maxwel and Read those Jesuited Political Interlopers did in the Reign of the
Royal Martyr, namely, to mis-represent the Court and the Puritans to one
another, and to endeavor to persuade male-contented People, that that Pious
Prince designed their Slavery, a thing so false that he was Revera their
Martyr, as he with great Justice said of himself on the Scaffold, and which
great name he might challenge even on the account of Natural Justice, if there
had been nothing relating to revealed Religion in the case to entitle him to
it: for St. John the Baptist was a Martyr, and yet died for no Article of the
Christian Faith.

It may be justly said that our Monarch fell a Martyr for the People, by not
violating the lex terrae, that he was by his Oath bound to maintain, and by his
therefore not owning the Jurisdiction of the Vile Court over him; and moreover
the Law of Nature obliging him indispensably to do nothing that by his
exemplary abdicating any Right Inherent in the Crown would have incapacitated
him and his Successors from protecting their Liege-People in their Inheritance
of the Laws, and it being a thing certain that the Law of Nature is as much the
Law of God, as is the Law positive or his written Word (and indeed as Gataker
says well in his Book of Lots, The Law of Nature written in Man's heart, is the
very same so far forth as it is yet undefaced with the Law of God, revealed in
the Word) it may be with reason averred, that any Member of Mankind whether
Prince or Subject who is put to death by any Court of Justice, or Armed Force,
or by the hands of Russians or Bravos, on the account of his discharging his
Obligations to the Law of Nature, may enter his just Claim to the Name of
Martyrdom. I have therefore supposing that Godfrey lost his life by vile hands
for discharging with Courage the Duty to his Prince, that the Law of Nature and
of the Land required from him, have given the Name of Martyrdom to his Fate,
and I should ascribe the same Name to any one that should suffer the same Fate
by the hands of any Ruffians that called themselves Protestants, for his
asserting the Religion by Law Established, and discountenancing the Doctrine of
Resistance, and the Principles that subvert the Right of the Inheritable
English Monarchy, and doing what he was by the Law of Nature and the Land
obliged to, for the asserting the one and discountenancing the other. Thus
therefore do I judge that Name due to the Dire Fate that the late Archbishop
of St. Andrews sustained from the hands of those execrable Presbyterian Bravos,
who defiled their Land and the light of the Sun there with the open Murder of
that Prelate.

And supposing that the great Harry the 4 th of France, who was so abandoned by
Heaven to little Fears on Earth, as when the Duke of Sully was persuading him
not to recall the Jesuits, to answer him thus, Give me then security for my
Life, did yet receive the doom of the Fearful in this World for his continuing
his Protection to his Protestant Subjects according to the Laws of Nature, and
of his Realm; I shall not deny the right that the Nature of his Fate has to be
Crowned with the Name of Martyrdom. It Is very possible that some wretched
Protestants so called, may to the scandal of the Name of Religion design
Outrages and Sedition, and the late Publications of many Seditious Pamphlets
by them, and the Re-printing of some of the most Rebellious ones that faced the
Light in the times of the Usurpation, (and for example of the Political
Catechism, and of the Rights of the Kingdom, in which latter the Murder of the
King is justified, and the Right of the English Monarchy struck through the 5th
Ribb, by the Authors making it Elective) has given the Government a just Alarm
of the designs of the Publishers of such Pamphlets and of their Abettors, and
they serve among Men of Caurion as a suspicious sign of some mischief intended
by them, as the extraordinary Commotion of the Waters is to Whale-fishers, an
indication of a Whale approaching, and from such as well as from some of the
Emissary Slaves of the Jesuits here, what can any who act with the highest
zeal in their several Capacities to assert the Rights of the Crown and Church
expect but according to the Style of Cicero against Cataline, Nisi ut notent
and designent oculis ad caedem unumquemque nostrum. But as to any who for the
just discharge of their Natural Obligation and Duty, as Magistrates or private
persons shall suffer the worst of Fates, I shall not deny the name of Martyrs,
so neither shall I think him worthy the name of an English man, or a Regarder
of the Divine Natural Law, who does not if a Magistrate by the due Execution of
the Laws, or if a private person and of Signal parts and Learning by his
discourse and writing notify the absurdities and inconveniences of any
Seditious Principles chargeable, on any persuasion of Religion whatsoever,
every Subject being under Moral Obligations duly to represent to the Pater
Patriae, and to his Brethren Subjects the dangers imminent over them by any
destructive Principles or Practices, whatever disguise of Religion the same may
assume; and it is most worthy of the most generous dispositions that can be in
men who own the love of their Country, with Monuments of Praise to honor the
Memories of those Heroic Persons who were so unnaturally dealt with for
asserting the Rights of the God of Nature, and thus fell its Noble Victimes,
and who in the Race of their Lives were Agonists for it, and to resemble the
Justice of the Lacedaemonians among whom those that died for their Country were
proverbially said, (...) and were Crowned with Olive and other Branches, and
with Praises Extolled to the Skies: and to this Custom probably the words of
the Doctor of the Gentiles have a reference, where he says to Timothy, (...),
fight the good Fight of Faith; and St. Paul sutably was but just to himself,
when writing to Timothy, I am ready to be offered up, etc. he added, I have
fought a good fight, etc. And thus too may our Royal Martyr be said, (...), and
considering how great an Agonist and Confessor Queen Elizabeth was, and how
often she was designed for Martyrdom by some of her Romish Antagonists, the
Londoners were but just to her, when adorning their Churches with the figure of
her Monument they placed over her Effigies, the Inscription of, I have fought a
good fight, etc.

And as the old Agonistical Games were among the Graecians and Romans,
instituted in honor of their Gods, and as critical seasons for their showing
their love to their Country by their then making Leagues and agreeing on the
great Concerns of Peace and War, and Men, then in various Contentions of the
Body and Mind showed their utmost Abilities, so does the Divine Natural and
Positive Law oblige all Christians in any Conjuncture or Season of Colluctation
between true and false Religionary Principles, to show their Athletic Habits of
mind in the most consummate manner, and earnestly to contend for the Faith: and
indeed the Christian Religion in the Rule of its Practice, having throughout
the New Testament made Agonisme Essential to its Morals (which one word of
Agonisme is Comprehensive of more vigor than all the Heathen Precepts of
Morality include, or perhaps all the written Practices of Piety and Devotional
Books) let him by my consent be divested of the Name of Christian, who on any
just occasion shows not himself as an Athleta for his Religion and Country in
all lawful ways by entering the Lists with all Principles of Hostility to
either, whatever the Event may be; but still with a fair respect to the persons
of all Contenders; for even that the Agonostic Games required, and
particularly, Ne quis in Colluctatione vel pugilatu antagonistam studio
deditaque opera conficeret: alioqui ne victor Coronaretur: nay so averse were
the Athletick Laws to cruelty, that they obliged all Contenders to endeavor,
Quo mollior leviorque ictus minus laederet, and especially to abhor the Brutish
Art of biting one another, the abhorrence of which I do expect will grow more
and more in fashion between Religionary Antagonists, notwithstanding the many
exorbitant incivilities I find practiced by some such Contenders toward the
persons of each other in the present Conjuncture, wherein I have observed that
too many of the Protestant as well as Popish Antagonists have by cruel mockings
and biting words and Shams, made it their chief business but in one thing to
resemble one of the old Agonistic Games, namely, that of the Wrestlers who
after their having been first anointed with Oil to strengthen themselves, did
then that they might the better lay hold on one another, and might not slip out
of each others hands, Se mutuo pulvere sive arena aspergere, ac propemodum
faedare, a thing too many among us have done outright, and thereby showed
themselves not to be so much as almost Christians, and a ridiculing humor of
throwing dirt that the Colluctations about the Land on the Continent of
Christendom, will I believe ridicule out of our World at least, and unteach us
the turpitude of such Railery, and make the Doctrines of speculative points of
Religion to give us no more disturbance than does or ever did the Doctrine of
Lines and Figures.

And as the more ingenuous and true sober part of the people, is now moved with
pity to Nonconformists, for being led away by the Nose from our Churches by the
Jesuits (a thing that Mr. Nigh himself affirms in his Book called, A Case of
great and present use, whether we may lawfully hear the now Conforming
Ministers, and printed Anno 1677, and the not thinking which lawful he makes a
misperswasion, and says in p. 24, and 25, In most of the misperswasions of
these latter times by which men's minds have been corrupted, I find in
whatsoever otherwise they differ one from another, yet in this they agree that
it is unlawful to hear in public, which I am persuaded is one constant design
of Satan in the variety of ways of Religion, he has set on foot by Jesuits
among us) and does the more pity them for that some well meaning persons among
them who were blindfolded into some of their Nonconformity by Iesuitic
Emissaries, had not heretofore their Eyes opened to see that the same persons
were often Sollicitors with Magistrates, to do their duty and put the Laws in
due Execution against them for their Nonconformity, and that such Emissaries
had thereby an occasion of saying to them according to the Style of the Chief
Priests, after they had blind-folded our Savior, and then smote him, Prophecy
who is he that smote thee? and for that such well meaning persons have been
observed at the same time to importune the Almighty, That he would open the
Eyes of Kings and Princes, so has it likewise general resentments of Scorn and
Anger against the Principles of those bantring Popish Seducers, who as they
have some Emissaries here to kill Souls and others probably ready on occasion,
to kill bodies, have distended the Doctrine of Popery abroad in the World to
such an excess of Cruelty that no man can Calculate the number of Gods it has
made, or of men it has destroyed; and I hope that such Iesuited Emissaries
will in time generally appear not only hateful but ridiculous to our Papists
themselves: for who indeed can choose but laugh at the discussing or
deliberating of the Question in p. 98. Of the Mystery of Iesuitisme, viz.
Whether the Jesuits may kill the Iansenists? So very hateful are their
Principles to some of our ingenuous English Papists, that I have heard a Great
and Noble Person mention it with Contentment, that some of that Order of False
Prophets were since the Popish Plot executed for it, tho yet he doubted of the
Veracity of the Witnesses against them. I very much differed in my Judgment
from that of that Noble Person, and would have no man damnified in the least
for the greatest Crime, but by Witnesses greater than all exception, and do
account it easier to give Heaven an occount of Mercy than Justice: but yet on
the recollecting of my thoughts I have found it so incident to humane nature to
delight by ill Witnesses to punish the avowers of false Religionary Principles,
that I have read it among some Rabbinical Observators of the Customs of the
Jews, that they anciently allowed of false Witnesses against false Prophets,
and of whose being such the Sanhedrim did cognosce, and so they impiously
reputing Christ to be such, did barefaced bring forth false Witnesses against
him, and he could not be allowed to except against their Persons but only
against their sayings as discordant: and to this purpose we find it in the
Gospel of St. Matthew, Chapter 26. Verse. 59, 60. Now the Chief Priests and Elders
and all the Council sought false Witnesses against Jesus to put him to death,
but found none: yea tho many false Witnesses came, yet found they none. At the
last came two false Witnesses, and in St. Mark, Chapter 14. V. 56. and 59. it is
declared how the Testimony of the False Witnesses agreed not together. I have
mentioned this as not in the least intending to reflect on the testimony of any
one Witness ever produced in behalf of the Crown in any Criminal Cause in any
age of time, and do think that according to the saying that defensio non est
deneganda Diabolo, and that as a railing Accusation is not to be brought
against the Devil, so much less ought a false Testimony. And I am moreover in
any Point relating to the safety of Princes Lives, and when there are
exasperated Parties in a Kingdom, criminating and recriminating each other
about the same, inclined to do what is fairly to be done to support the Credit
of Witnesses, considering (as the Observation is) that as he who is bound to
the King, his Bond is good for nothing to any one else, so he that during such
a Conjuncture is a Witness for the King is liable to so many Volleys of Dirt
from some one of the enraged Parties, and to have all the particular excesses
and extravagances of his Life so displayed, as to endanger his Testimonies
usefulness in other cases. But yet if any Magistrate finds the Testimony of
Witnesses he would support to be insupportable, and does not believe them to be
fide digni, he is obliged Morally to avow such his Sentiment thereof, when he
is legally put upon it.

And here I cannot pretermit an occasion of mentioning your Lordships great
Courage and Justice in an Affair that my Correspondent writ to me of, namely,
that when some Witnesses had in the House of Lords been Examined about a Popish
Plot in Ireland, and that the Vote of every one in that House was given for the
reallity of that Plot except your Lordships, you entered your dissent as not
believing any such Plot in Ireland as was by the Witnesses sworn, which was
certainly most worthy of your Lordship to do, if you thought not the Witnesses
worthy of your belief, and your Caution in your so judging, that the Papists in
Ireland designed not such a Plot to be Executed in that Kingdom, was the more
remarkable in regard that 'twas some time since published in a large Pamphlet
of the Growth of Popery, that the Irish Plot was a thing contrived only to
divert and hound us away from the pursuit and Examination of the English one.
And yet the same Witnesses (as I was informed) obtained that belief from a
Loyal and Honorable House of Commons concerning the Irish Plot, that caused
the Vote of its reallity to pass with a Nemine Contradicente there.

What Fautors of false Testimony the Jesuits principles are, I have shown, and
at the same time afforded my Testimony to the Heroic Virtue of many others of
the Church of Rome, and think it great and pedantical kind of Injustice to
charge all Lay-Papists with a readiness to obey their Priests Commands by being
ministerial in Cruelty to Protestants. I remember I have read it in a printed
Speech of Sir Audly Mervin the Speaker of the House of Commons in Ireland, a
Speech glowing with anger enough against the Papists, where yet it is said p.
24. In the Barony of Enishoan there are above two thousand Irish Papists can
bring hundreds of Protestants to witness their Civil demeanor through the whole
course of the distemper in this Kingdom.

And as the bloody Sect of the Zealots grew at last so odious among the Jews,
and another Order of such sicarii among the Turks, so I suppose that of the
Jesuits will naturally do among Christians, and the Jesuits writ de haeretico
Assassinando, grow obsolete, and especially in places where the Scene of Mr.
Coleman's Northern Heresy lies, it being an old observation that Northern
Countries are more hospitable and less cruel, than Southern.

In the very time of the dawn of Learning ushering in that of the Reformation,
it presently grew odious to the first-rate Ingeniosi to draw Heretics blood.
Our Famous Countryman Tunstal Bishop of Durham (who had imbibed so much of the
Mathematical Sciences, that Vossus de Scientiis Mathematicis says p. 40. Ante
annos Centum and quod excurrit, magna cum laud praecipue ob sermonem purum,
and perspicuum de art supputandi egit Cutbertus Tunstallus, and whose Book of
Arithmetic writ with such pure Latinity is commonly extant) was of such a
temper that (as Fuller tells us in his Church History) the Bishopric of Durham
had halcyon days of Peace and Quiet under God and good Cutbert Tunstal the
Bishop thereof.

Sir Thomas Moor of whom it is said, that 'twas writ on his Tomb, that he was
furibus haereticisque molestus, yet in his Vtopia rouls neither of them in
Blood: and in his Chapter there concerning the Religions in Vtopia, he makes
diverse kinds of Religion not only in sundry parts of the Island, but also in
diverse places of every City, some worshipping the Sun and some the Moon, and
some other of the Planets, and the wisest of them worshipping God Almighty, and
some embracing the Faith of Christ at first without the help of a Priesthood,
and minding to choose a Bishop among themselves, without sending out of their
own Country for the Order of Priesthood, and makes them affrighting none to or
from the Christian Religion. And that that Book of his may rather be thought an
Original of his Mind than a mere Copy of his Countenance, we have the Suffrage
of Dr. Danne in his (...), where having said, That Sir Thomas Moor was a man of
the most tender and delicate Conscience that the World has seen since St.
Austin, and citing of his Vtopia. l 2. c. de servis, he says, He was not
likely to write there any thing in jest mischievously interpretable.

And if a man would quote things of Erasmus his great Humanity to all humane
kind, he must quote almost his whole Works. But how far his Genius led him from
any brutal ferity toward Heretics, your Lordship will see by this passage in
his Supput. error. Bedae. Dic ecclesiae, quod si non audierit sit tibi velut
ethnicus and publicanus: quasi hic ulla sit incendii mentio. Rursus Apostolum.
Post unam and alteram correptionem devita. An devitare est in ignem conjicere?
Iterum Auferte malum ex vobis ipsis. Number auferte valet idem quod occidere? He
had said before, Quas autem mihi narrat ecclesiae leges? An leges ecclesiae
sunt quenquam ultricibus tradere flammis. And afterward at episcoporum est quod
quidem in ipsis est docere corrigere, mederi. Qualis autem est and episcopus
qui nihil aliud possit, quam vincire, torquere flammis tradere? Quod si qui
tractant hoc negotium tales essent, qualem se declarat in hoc libello Beda, hoc
est si tantum spirarent odii si tantum haberent impudentiae, tam impotens
calumniandi studium, tam corruptum judicium, ut videatur citius december
propulsurus in haeresim, quam unum revocaturus, nonne belle ageretur cum
delatis? Nisi fallor primum designare cui male vellet, eum curaret clam
rapiendum in carcerem: ibi quaererentur articuli tales quales plurimos objicit
mihi partim falsos, partim depravatos. Disputatio si qua fieret, perageretur in
carcere, si quidhisceret contra mox accersitis tribus dilectis monachis,
pronunciaretur sententia diffinitiva. Quod reliquum est perageret carnifex. Vbi
theologus defert rapit in carcerem, urget accusationem, damnatum tradit judici
profano. Iudex non ex sua cognitione* sed ex theologi praejudicio tradit
flammis.

Our Martyrologist Mr. Fox could not have expressed more anger against a Bishop
Bonner, than Erasmus a Papist has here against Popish Persecuting Prelates.
Had Erasmus then known of one practice enjoined constantly by the Canons to
Popish Bishops at their Condemning of Heretics, to salve the Phoenomena of
their irregularity by intermedling in Causa sanguinis (and about which your
Lordship showed me once some remarkable quotations in a Letter writ to you by
the Lord Bishop of Lincoln, and of which quotations I beg a Copy from you by
the first opportunity) namely, efficaciter and excorde, to intercede with the
secular Judge to whom they deliver the Heretic over, to bring no pain of death
or mutilation of member to him, I believe the great Wit of Erasmus would after
his ingenious account aforesaid of the Tragedy of the Condemned Heretic,
pleasantly entertained himself and Posterity with the wanton cruelty of that
Farce that ensued it, and let us see how the Popish Bishop then using the
Speech familiar to some Tooth drawers just before their operation, I will do
you no harm and put you to little or no pain, did at the same time make use of
the power of the secular Magistrate, but as the Linen Clout or Silk to wrap
and hide the tormenting Pincers of Holy-Church in.

But to return to my observation of all Popish Canonists themselves, not
allowing that wanton mode of the cruel usage and interceding with the
Magistrate, Efficaciter and ex cord, to do the Condemned Heretic no harm, I
think the same quotations mention how the famous Panormitan did brand the
Hypocrisy of that Practice: and the truth is, it is very abominable that
Heretics neither living nor dying, can be free from suffering Shammes by some
Papists.

But again on the other hand it is with Justice to be said, that some Papists
whose names the Age rises up to, for their great advancement of real Learning,
I mean Peiresk, Descartes, Gassendus, Mersennus, had as much tenderness for any
differing in judgment from them as Protestants can have: and that mighty hunter
after knowledge Peiresk was so far from eagerness in pursuing the blood of
Heretics, that being one of the Judges for Capital Causes in France, he would
always come off the Bench when Sentence of death was to be given, though
against the most outrageous Murderer, and he always carried in his mind a
charity large enough to embrace the whole World, and maintained a constant
Correspondence with Salmasius, Causabon and other Protestants, and did put
Grotius on the writing his De jure belli and pacis, that has taught more
Civility to Nations than the Modern Papal Christianity has done, and who has
there so perfectly manumitted Secular Magistrates from being obliged implicitly
to execute the Sentences of Ecclesiastic Judges, that he has there asserted it
l. 2. c. 26.. 4. Quin probabile est etiam Carnifici qui damnatum occisurus est
hoc tenus aut quaestioni and actis inter fuerit aut ex rei confessione cognita
esse debere causae merita ut satis ei constet mortem ab eo commeritam: idque
nonnullis in locis observatur, nec aliud spectat lex Hebraea cum ad lapidandum
eum qui damnatus est testes vult prodire populo. Deuteronomy. 17.

By the 7th Verse of that Chapter the hands of the Witnesses were to be first
on him to put him to death, which Law no doubt had the effect of a Caveat with
men against their ambitus of the standing Office of Witnesses by tacking
thereunto the standing Office of Executioners.

Moreover both common observation and Cursory looking into Books, and indeed
common sense will teach us that the Papal Principles do not oblige men at once
to fence against Heretics lives, and against impossibilities, nor to endanger
themselves by fighting with the Wind-mills in Heretics Brains.

That great Cardinal D' Ossat whom I have so often here cited, and who was so
renowned for his probity as well as comprehensive knowledge of matters of State,
does in the 86th Letter that is to Villeroy in the Year 1597. give him an
account of his discourse with the Pope on the occasion of his Holiness angrily
resenting Harry the 4ths observing the Edict of pacification, and that D' Ossat
thereupon said, That it was necessary for the Peace of France that the Edict
should be observed: that for want of such an Edict France had not been quiet
for 35 years. That the Date of the Edict, 1577. showed 'twas not the present
King, but the late King 12 years before his death that made it, that the late
King and King Charles his Predecessor and Brother, did not make such Edicts of
Pacification with their good liking and frankly, but were constrained to it by
necessity, even for the good of the Catholic Religion, and the Realm after
having found that many Wars made by Heretics served for nothing but in many
places to abolish the Catholic Religion, and in a manner all Ecclesiastical
Discipline, Justice and order, etc. And that besides that necessity has no Law
in whatever Subject and Matter it be, Jesus Christ has taught us in his Gospel
to tolerate the Chaff in our Fields, when there was danger of plucking up with
it and spoiling the good Corn: that other Catholic Princes used so to do, whom
none spoke ill of for it. That the Duke of Savoy as great a Zealot as he makes
himself for the Catholic Religion does tolerate Heretics in their Religion, in
the three Valleys of Italy, of which he is Lord. That the King of Poland did as
much not only in the Kingdom of Sweden but of Poland: that all the Princes of
the House of Austria, and who are Celebrated for being Pillars of the Catholic
Church, did as much not only in the Towns of the Empire, but also in their own
proper Estates, as in Austria it self from whence they take their Name, in
Hungary, Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia, Lusatia, Stiria, Carinthia, and Croatia.
That Charles the 5th Father of the King of Spain was he that taught the King of
France and other Princes to yield to such a necessity by making the Interim
(that every one knows) even after his having Conquered the Protestants of
Germany. That his Son the King of Spain at this day who is reputed to be
Archi-Catholic, and to uphold the Catholic Religion as Atlas does the Heavens,
does yet tolerate in his Kingdoms of Valencia and Granada the Moors with their
Mahumetanisme, and has caused to be offered to the Heretics of Zealand and
Holland, and other Heretics in the Low Countries, the free exercise of their
pretended Religion, if they will for the future acknowledge and obey him, etc.
And concludes his discourse to the Pope saying, That the Kings ablest
Counselors were of opinion that if his Holiness saw things so near as the King
did, and that the Pope was to Command France in the State the Realm was at
present, his Holiness would not in this point do less than the King did. To all
which D' Ossat says, The Pope made no reply.

And I think it may with parity of reason be affirmed, that if the Pope himself
were to Command England in the State it is in at present, he would be no hammer
of Heretics so as to knock any one of them on the head.

I know that after the date of that Letter, viz. Anno 1597. of D' Ossat's last
mentioned, the various Revolutions in Christendom made the Scene of the
toleration of Heterodoxy in those Countries to be altered with a Vengeance; for
six years after the death of D' Ossat, viz. in the Year 1610. King Phillip the
3d of Spain made an Edict for the exterminating the Moors with their
Mahumetatisme out of his Realms, and which was executed with great Cruelty; and
the Union of Vtrecht entered by the Provinces in 1579, and the blow given to
the Spanish Monarchy by Queen Elizabeth in 1588, and the Patronage the United
Provinces had from her and the kindness they found from Harry the 4th of
France, made his Conditional offers of favor to the Dutch Heretics not
thank-worthy, but even at this very day, tho in the Low Countries both of the
United and Spanish Provinces there is a certain reciprocal liberty for the
Papists in the Dominions of the States, and for the Protestants in the
Dominions of the Spaniard, yet is the liberty not equal: for in the United
Provinces the States allow the Papists a certain number of Priests to officiate
among them in sacris, which is done by an express Concession. But in the
Spanish Dominions there is no such Concession, and the Ministers who there
privately officiate among Protestants do it at their peril.

And in the Year 1599. Ferdinand of Austria expelled the Lutherans out out of
his Provinces: and in Austria, Bohemia, Moravia, and all the heritable Lands of
the House of Austria, Franconia, Bavaria, and the upper Palatinate, no
Protestants are permitted to have the public Exercise of their Religion: and
the Effects of the Emperor's Persecuting the Protestants of Hungary the World
knows and feels, and have with horror gazed on the Protestants of Transylvania
putting themselves under the Protection of the Turk, that they might enjoy
their Profession of Christianity. And how the Bohemians were treated by a
Jesuited Emperor twenty years after 1579 I have spoken, when I gave an account
of the Jesuits Emblem painted on the Arms of Austria, viz. I have practiced.

That the Duke of Savoy practiced nothing of Cruelty to his Heretical Subjects
in the Valleys about the time 1597, those poor Protestants may under God thank
their old friend Harry the 4th, who in the year 1600 took almost his whole
Country, after his having been before in a Contest with him by way of demand
for the Marquisat of Salusses, and his having applied to the Pope to interpose
therein, the Emperor having likewise demanded that Marquisat in Right of the
Empire; and while that Duke was in fear of being fleeced by the Pope and
Emperor, and Harry the 4th, it is no wonder if he suffered his Heretical
Subjects to graze or sleep in whole Skins in the Neighboring Valleys of
Piemont; but in the year 1655 there ran in those Valleys such a torrent of
Protestant blood as did bear away all the dire Examples of Cruelty before it
that History could show, as appears out of Sir Samuel Morelands History of the
Churches in those Valleys, and Book 4th, and Chap. 4. where in his Audience
Speech as Envoy to the Duke of Savoy in the behalf of the Protestants in those
Valleys, on that sad occasion, he says, Si reviviscant omnes omnium temporum
and aetatum Nerones (quod sine ulla celsitudinis vestrae offensione dictum
velim, quemadmodum and nulla ejus culpa quicquam factum esse credi^us) puderet
prefecto eos: ut qui nihil non mite ac humanum (ad haec facin^ra si spectas)
excogitasse se reperirent, interim exhorrescunt Angeli, Mortales obstupescunt,
Ipsum coelum morientium clamoribus attonitum esse videtur, ipsaque terra
diffuso tot hominum innocuorum cruore erubescere.

And as for the Kingdom of Poland, the fear of the Turkish Power then gave the
Prince there no leisure to attend squabbles about Heresy and Heretics: and as
for the interest he had in Sweden, which too in the year 1599, had a Popish
King (as Sandys says in his Europae Speculum that year writ) yet were the
Papists there then (as he says) few, and consequently the Heretics too many to
be persecuted.

The very Interim spoke of by D' Ossat, or Formula inter-Religionis as 'twas
called, was a double bottom of Popery and Protestancy, and nothing was expected
to be its Fate but Divulsion. Alsted in his Chronology mentions its Date with
the words of Infaelix partus, and the Protestants in Constance rather than they
would embark in that double bottom, threw themselves overboard into the Sea of
the Power of Ferdinand King of the Romans and Brother of Charles, who soon used
them not as their Protector, but their Conqueror: and it is notorious that the
Interim was professedly designed to continue only till the Council of Trents
determinations were ended, and it is likewise as notorious that that Council was
called designedly and revera for the exterminium of Heretics; and its being
called ad restituendos collapsos eclesiae mores, was but umbrage and shamme.
And what Quarter Heretics were to expect from the Tridentine Spirit, Father
Paul has told us in his History, p. 693, and that as to the year 1563. Advice
came to Rome that the King of France had made a Peace with the Hugonots, the
particular Conditions being not known of yet: And the Pope thinking it
proceeded from some Prelates, who tho they did not openly declare themselves to
be Protestants, yet did follow that Party, he resolved to discover them, and
was wont to say he was wronged more by the Masqued Heretics then by the
barefaced. Whereupon the last of March he gave order that the Cardinals who
governed the Inquisition should proceed against them. The Cardinal of Pisa
answering that there was need of proper and special Authority, the Pope
ordained that a new Bull should be made which was dated the 7th of April, and
contained in Substance that the Pope being Vicar of Christ, to whom he has
recommended the feeding of his Sheep, and to reduce those that wander, and to
bridle with temporal Penalties those who cannot be gained by Admonitions, he
has not since the beginning of his Assumption omitted to execute this Charge,
notwithstanding some Bishops are not only fallen into Heretical Errors but do
also favor other Heretics opposing the faith. For Provision wherein he
commands the general Inquisitors of Rome to whom he has formerly commended
this business to proceed against such, tho Bishops and Cardinals inhabiting in
places where the Lutheran Sect is Potent, with Power to cite them to Rome by
Edict, or to the Confines of the Church to appear personally, or if they will
not appear, to proceed to Sentence, which he will pronounce in private
Consistory. The Cardinals in Conformity to the Popes Commands cited by Edict to
appear personally at Rome, to purge themselves from imputation of Heresy, and
of being favorers of Heretics, the Cardinal of Chastillon, the Archbishop of
Aix, the Bishop of Chartres, and other Bishops in France.

His Holiness it seems thought that Cardinal and the Archbishop and the
Bishops to be Protestants in Masquerade, and has given an example to some
Furiosi among Protestants thus to miscal some of the better sort of them.

In fine that which I aim at by referring to these Historical Passages is this,
to show that some of the very Grandees of the Church of Rome hold Principles in
Religion that allow indulgence to the persons of Heretics. I have instanced how
D' Ossat in the Popes presence was a Confessor for moderation in this kind, and
spoke like a skillful Divine when he said, That Christ has taught us in his
Gospel to tolerate the Chaff in our Fields, when there was danger of plucking
up with it, and spoiling the good Corn: and Theophylact on that place tells us,
that by Tares are meant Heretics.

Nor can it be unknown to men of great thought among the Papists, that the
sanguinary usage of Heretics, has much increased their number, not perhaps
will it be denied by the Critical Judges of things in the Papal World, what was
by one of our beaus esprits and great Statesmen, I mean the Lord Viscount
Falkland observed in Print, That the Massacre in France made more Protestants
in one night than all Calvin's Works have done since their first publication.

According to that Observation, That nothing surfeits sooner than man's flesh,
it is but natural to suppose that the Papal World must be surfeited with it at
last. And indeed the experience Popish Politicians have had of their success by
dividing us formerly (as was said) would tempt them to omit other courses and
to persist still in that if it were not now generally seen through.

It Is in viridi observantia how our Famous great Usurper Cromwell who founded
his Dominion in pretended Grace or Religion, and was afraid of Thunder from
every Cloud of Enthusiasme he saw over his head, and was awed likewise by the
Serene and Rational Religion of the Church of England, had no other Game to
play in order to the dividing the several Religionary Parties but by in some
manner tolerating all according to the Mode of Iulians Politics.

The Papists were the first who miscalled any of our English Princes by the
name of Julian, and that they did in the Case of King James as appears in his
Learned Apology for the Oath of Allegiance printed Anno 1609. where being much
concerned for his being so termed (and that too by no meaner a man then
Bellarmine) he does with great strength there largely prove that that name was
congruous (as his words are) in no point save one, that is, that Julian was an
Emperor and I a King: and indeed it is a very impotent humor of Calumny in any
Protestant to call any one an Apostate or especially the Apostate, merely for
the alteration of his Judgment in some controvertible points of Faith between
Papists and Protestants, and which are denominable by the name of Religion; and
it is a great folly to cherish immoderate fears that any English Prince who
possibly may happen in such Controvertible Points to change his persuasions in
Religion, will if a Papist attempt a la Julian to plant Divisions among his
Subjects by the Instrument of Religion, for that their being kept undivided and
all of a piece will be essential to the life of the Kingdom as the State of
Christendom is likely to continue; nor is it probable that any such Prince can
ever think in the single course of his life to make this Nation all of a piece
or united under the persuasion of Popery. For if any one would suppose it
possible that in the Reigns of three or four Successive Princes of that
persuasion, the nature of things might be so far forced as that Millions of men
might by artifice be made to abandon a Rational Religion, and one that is
framed to support the Government, for one that is not so, such one Prince must
be supposed to have acquired the gift of long life that Ante-diluvian
Patriarchs had, and to extend the Span of his life to that of three or four
Princes. It is a known Rule relating to Mathematics, That there is no
reconciling time and force, and he who would have one man do as much as four,
must allow him to be as long a doing it as four one after another.

But the surviving Experts have seen too much of the effects of the shaking all
Civil and Ecclesiastical Polity by a Protestant Usurper, ever to wish for
another in any Case, and to have the balance of Christendom again broken, and
the Kingdom be again divided to preserve his Families interest and to keep that
entire, which is notorious to have happened under the aforesaid Usurper both of
Religion and the Kingdom: and the name of Julian is most properly applicable to
him or any Protestant Usurper, and who will be necessitated to follow him in
his Track of Politics: and the notion of which Ammianus Marcellinus lib. 22.
set us right in, where he shows that Julian, that he might weaken the Power of
the Christian Religion which he feared, knew no way so easy as to endeavor to
do it by it self, and therefore recalled the Bishops banished by Constantius,
and gave them and the People leave to be Christians tho himself was a Heathen,
Nullas infestas hominibus bestias ut sunt sibi ferales plerique Christianorum
expertus, i. e. because he had never found Beasts so cruel to one another as he
had most Christians, and therefore as he traveled through Palaestine, cried
out, O Marcomanni, O Quadi, O Sarmatae, tandem alios vobis inquietiores inveni.

Thus did the Usurper promote the Animosities among Religionary Parties, and
was enforced thereby to weaken the Kingdom to strengthen himself: some
indulgence he showed to Congregations where Divines of the Church of England
worship God in the way of its Church, yet permitting none to have Benefices but
such as were of the Presbyterian persuasion generally, and among such and the
Independants he distributed his Donatives of preferment in the Universities,
and he took care that no form of Church Discipline or particular Church might
preponderate by his being a Member therein. He made some Laymen and some
Divines differing in Judgment about Presbytery and Independency to be Tryers of
Ministers fitness for Livings, and Commissioned many ignorant Laymen in the
several Counties to be Judges of the sufficiency of Ministers, for their
continuing in Livings. The press was open to all unlearned Wranglers about
Religion. Many of his Military Preferments he placed on Anabaptists, and did
suffer many of the Fifth-Monarthy Religionaries to disturb the Apocolypse and
the World thereby, gave freedom to Muggleton the Impostor to set up for a
Prophet, and one of the two Witnesses, and was a particular Patron to Manasseth
ben Israel, and in treaty with him here to introduce the Jews, and tolerated
Biddels Congregated Church of Socinians, further likewise so far giving an
occasion to Mr. Marvels Writing a Book then of the Growth of Popery, that Mr.
Pryn in his Book called, A true and perfect Narrative of what was done, etc.
Printed in the Year 1659. says in p. 57th, That Sir Kenelm Digby was his
particular Favorite, and lodged by him at White Hall, that Maurice Conry
Provincial of the Franciscans in England, and other Priests had his Protections
under Hand and Seal, and that he suspended Penal Laws and Executions against
Popish Priests and Jesuits, tho sometimes taken in their Pontificalibus at
Mass, and were soon after released, and that he endeavored to stop the Bill
against Papists the very Morning he was to pass it, by his White Hall-
Instruments, who moved its suspension for a time, as not suting with the then
present Foreign Correspondencies, against whom it was carried by 88 Votes,
that it should be sent up with the rest then passed, and that he writ to
Mazarine to excuse his passing that Bill as being carried on by a violent
Presbyterian Party much against his Will, and that yet it should not hurt them
tho passed, etc.

And I suppose an Author more profound in his Observations than Mr. Pryn, does
in a Loyal Pamphlet Printed in the Year 1656. Called a Letter from a true and
lawful Member of Parliament, etc (and generally conceived to be writ by the
late Lord Hollis) there in p. 58. and the following ones charge Cromwell home
for the swarming of the Jesuits then in England, and transforming themselves
into several shapes among the divided Sects here, and says, What liberty the
Priests and Jesuits take, how far they prevail on the People, what Countenance
they receive from this Government is apparent enough by not proceeding against
them in Justice, as if no Laws were in force for their punishment. Your private
Negotiations with the Pope and your promises that as soon as you can ^stablish
your own greatness, you will protect the Catholics and the insinuations that
you will countenance them much further, are sufficiently known and understood:
and of their dependence upon and devotion to you, there needs no Evidence
beyond the Book lately written by Mr. White a Romish Priest, and dedicated to
your Favorite Sir Kenelm Digby, Entitled, the Grounds of Obedience and
Government, in which he justifies all the Grounds and Maxims in your
Declaration, and determines positively that you ought to be so far from
performing any promise or observing any Oath that you have taken if you know
that it is for the good of the People that you break it, albeit they foreseeing
all that you now see, did therefore bind you by Oath not to do it, and that you
offend both against your Oath and Fidelity to the People if you maintain those
limitations you (...) sworn to, and sure what you do must be supported by such
Casuists. And afterward speaks how Cromwell in distrust of the whole English
Nation was Treating to bring over a Body of Swiss to serve him as the
Ianisaries do the Turk.

The Declaration here referred to was Cromwels Declaration of October 31, Anno
1655, and which was supposed to have been worded by his Lord Keeper Fiennes,
wherein all the measures of Justice toward the Cavaliers, and particularly the
Public Faith of the Parliament, for the punctual and exact performance of
Articles with them after the vast gain that had accrued to the Parliament by
their Compositions, and an Act of Grace and Oblivion afterward granted to the
Royal Party, are avowedly broken: and in p. 36. of that Declaration, it is said,
If the Supreme Magistrate were tied up to the ordinary Rules and had not
liberty to proceed upon the illustrations of reason, against those who are
continually suspected, there would be wanting in such a State, the means of
Common Safety, etc. and before in p. 12, and 13. the Jesuits are outdone as
to the keeping of no faith with Heretics, by the asserting in effect in
general, that nulla fides est servanda, and the humor of Pope Paul the 4th is
Repeated, who as the Author of the History of the Council of Trent tells us,
declared it in the Consistory, That 'twas Heresy to say the Pope can bind
himself.

And we are assured out of Mr. Peter Walsh his History and Vindication of the
Irish Remonstrance, that Edmund Reilly the titular Popish Primate of Ireland,
who at a public Dinner boasted that he never had been friend or well wisher to
the King and his two Brothers and the Duke of Ormond, did yet write Precepts
under his Seal to all the Province of Armagh to pray for the Health,
Establishment, and Prosperity of Cromwell Protector and his Government.

More need not be said of the danger of Popery and Arbitrary Power to the
Nation, if God and man had not hindered Lamberts Usurpation over it. I have
mentioned how some of the Plot-Winesses have deposed somewhat thereof: and some
of his Countrymen have in discourse affirmed his having been there a Fautor of
Papists: and my self observing it to a worthy Gentleman of Yorkshire, that one
of the Popish Lords in the Tower did in February 1662, pass a Grant from the
Crown of several Manors in Yorkshire forfeited by the Attainder of John
Lambert, he averred to me that Lamberts Son enjoys that Estate at this day. It
had been just for the Almighty to have punished the extravagance of the Fears
and Jealousies that Reigned in the time of the Royal Martyr about his not being
a Protestant (a Character of Religion he had constantly owned in the view of
the World, both by his public Devotions and Alliances, and particularly that
with Holland which chiefly his Zeal for that Religion made him to ensure by the
Marriage of his Daughter with the Prince of Orange, in the time that the War
between the Crown of Spain and the States was depending) by permitting a
private Gentleman whose name perhaps had not come to public knowledge but for
the figure he made in illegal Arms, so far to march with his Religion
undiscerned through the Quarters of all the gathered Churches and the Classical
ones too, that he deceived in that point so many that called themselves the
very Elect, and who were as well versed in the business of all Religions as
Jews are in Coins and in the way of adulterating them, and who after that
Religion had always been the Staple Commodity of England as much as Wool, did
almost nothing else but Weave and Dye and Tenter the same with all subtilty of
Art possible to them: and as the Israelites marched out of Egypt without the
farewell of a Dogs barking at them, we were then near the point of being driven
back to Egypt, to Civil and Spiritual Slavery without the least ^arm given us
by any of our best and deep mouthed Dogs against Popery. But the extreme danger
to Protestancy from that intended Usurpation has been long since over; nor do
I expect that any fatality of that kind can ever happen to it from any Prince
of the Right Line, how much a Papist soever he may be, that is to say, from one
who was swathed with the Laws in his Cradle, and will be Circumscribed with
them in his Crown.

According to that great severe truth I observed before of the fate of the ten
Tribes, after they had made a defection from the Line of David, that they were
punished with a Succession of 10 Kings, and not one 'good one in the whole
Pack, and their falling at last as a Prey to Forraigners, it was the Lot of
England justly to suffer what has been here described, from various Governments
and Governors for its defection from the Royal Line, and the experience of our
disastrous past Calamities must needs convince all men of serious thought and
sense, that we can have no Usurper how true a Religion soever he may own, but
will be false to the Interest of the Nation, and that particularly by diving
it, and thereby as much depretiating it in the view of all Christendom, as a
great Diamond would be if cut in two: for tho Diamonds or Pearls be equal and
like in their Figures, Waters, Colors, and Evenness, yet if they differ in
their Weights and Magnitudes, those are the Roots of their Prices, and a
Diamond of Decuple weight is of Centuple value.

I therefore think the Kings Loyal long Parliament did consult the public
Security when in the great Act of the Test they enjoined the taking the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy, and thereby the laying on the takers an Obligation
to the Kings Heirs and Successors, that was to outlast the Life of the King,
and without any distinction of the Religion true or pretended of such Heirs and
Successors.

Of the Obligation to the Kings Heirs and Successors arising from those Oaths,
Mr. Pryn in his Concordia Discors, Printed in the Year 1659. has writ
usefully: but because since the time of the late fermentation, many Pamphlets
have been writ pro and c^n of the Political part of the Question relating to a
Popish Successor, and none that I have heard of has professedly writ of the
Casuistical Part thereof, and particularly with relation to those Oaths, and
because I have heard that in some discourse about the same in some good Company
where the Obligation by those Oaths to the Kings Heirs in point of Conscience
has been asserted, some good men have been blundered but of their apprehending
the same, by mistaking the saying in the Civil-Law, that nemo est haeres
viventis, and likewise some things obvious in the Common Law, and I did fear
that it might thence grow a common and vulgar error that there is no such
Obligation resulting from those Oaths, and that as a Supine neglect of the use
of means to find the true sense of the same, would be very culpable, so that a
serious and dispassionate representing the same would to all men that regard
the weight of an Oath, be very acceptable, I have with as much recollection of
th^ught as I could fai^ly and impartially writ my opinion thereof
Casuistically, and shall very shortly send it your Lordship for your perusal.

And indeed as I should not think I dealt heartily with any person of the
Popish persuasion if I should be severe to him, before I had a Moral Certainty
of his having imbibed any of the Principles imputable to Popery, that may be
called unmoral or inhumane, so it would especially seem to me somewhat like the
drawing on a naked man, for a Protestant at this time to write for the
devesting any Popish Prince of his legal Property, when few or no Writers of
the Church of Rome either do, or dare, for fear of offending the Pope, draw
their pens for the preservation of such his property, without respect to any
Religionary Tenets he may hold.

What the Pope did to obstruct King James's Succession, I have mentioned, and
what favor any Protestant Prince can hope for from the Holy See, may appear
out of D' Ossat's Letter to Villeroy in the Year 1598. Book 4th, where having
spoke of the Artifices used to the Pope to make him believe, that if Harry the
4th recovered the Marquisate of Salusium, it would be Commanded by Hugonots, he
thereupon advises the King to declare the Contrary to the Pope and adds, I
would not interpose to write this to you, if I did not know that the Pope and
all this Court hold that to maintain the Catholic Religion in a Country, and to
preserve it from Heresy, his Holiness may and ought to deprive the true Lord
and Possessor of it, and give it away to any other who has no property
therein, and who shall be more able and willing there to preserve the Catholic
Faith.

I met with some passages lately in a Pamphlet, that concerned the Succession,
where the Author having liberally descanted on the words Heirs and Successors,
in the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, says, as I will not take up Arms
without the Kings Commission, nor enter into any Association to commence in his
life time against his Consent, etc. so any one by whom or for whom any
resignation of his Majesty's Power shall be extorted shall not reign over me:
and there was another very course expression there applied to a very fine
Person, and one so every way truly great that every Age does not produce viz.
That the House of Commons conned little thanks to George Earl of Hallifax, etc.
but according to the license of Speech used by that Author, I shall venture to
declare that where ever I have a Suffrage in the Choice of a Parliament Man, if
any Candidate shall tell me that he served in the place before and was for an
Exclusion Bill, rather then the Kings Offers, and without advising with his
Country would have any one of the Royal Line Secluded from his Title to the
Throne, on the account of any Religionary Tenet (for our English Antiquities
afford Footsteps of Parliament Men on some weighty matters, consulting their
Towns or Counties that chose them) such a one if I can help it, shall never
represent me: and moreover he who does not with acknowledgments of Honor and
Gratitude to the Earl of Hallifax, mention that Bill that he brought into the
House of Lords, in order to the extermination of Popery, that I spoke of
before, and with it lodged in our Statute Book, that man if I can help it shall
never represent me.

I am not so rash in my efforts against Future time as perhaps that Author was,
and can cite a great Name for the reasonableness of Representatives advising
with those they represent in matters of great moment to the State, and to this
purpose the Lord Viscount Fal^land Secretary of State, in a Printed Draught of
a Speech concerning Episcopacy, etc. says p. 4. Mr. Speaker, Tho we are
trusted by those that sent us in Cases wherein their opinions were unknown, yet
truly if I knew the opinion of the Major part of my Town, I doubt whether
'twere the intention of those that trusted me that I should follow my own
opinion against theirs, and thereupon his Lordship advised the House of Commons
not to do any thing against Episcopacy, and at least to stay till the next
Session, and consult more particularly with their Electors about it. And if
according to the example of that great man any of our Contenders against Popery
had thought fit to consult with those they represented, about the meeting those
Royal and Frank offers with hearty embraces, they would perhaps have found the
generality of those they represented, zealous for their so doing: and if they
that perhaps with a well intended Gallantry of Courage and scorn of Popery,
threw out the Bills that came from the Lords in the Year 1677, should ask those
they represented if they do not now wish those Bills had then passed into Laws,
I believe they would say, they did: and if they were asked whether that Bill I
mentioned before that was brought in by the Earl of Hallifax had not likewise
passed into a Law, I believe they would wish it had.

I presume not to inveigh against any of our late Loyal Parliaments whatever
slips in Politics were by any there made, or Arbitrary Votes there passed
against particular Persons, and am as impatient when I hear any inveigh against
our Representatives who in the contention of Popery exerted all the strength of
the faculties of their minds what ever errors they fell into, as I should be if
I heard any Principal speak unkindly of his Second, who contending for him in
loco lubrico, or fencing on the Ice did slip, and shall be as apt as any to
wish and hope that now such have consulted with their Country as the
Agonothetae, and know their opinions better then formerly, that they will take
other measures; and especially when they see the present State of Christendom
importuning us to be quiet more then formerly, and thus in the old Agnonistic
Games many of the lapsi athletae came to be Crowned. The Rule in those Games
was that the Agonists were to make three Attaques on each other, and he that
did slip or go back in the first and second, if yet he overcame in the third
Onset was lawfully Crowned, and good luck (say I) have they with their honor,
who having an opportunity of a third Assault against Popery, shall outdo not
only others but themselves: and I have the Charity to believe that what the
great Athletae did in the Exclusion Bill was thought lawful by them, and that
they thought therein they did not transilire metas.

And it is but with Justice that the generality of the People of England seem as
Agonothetae to have judged of the temper of our Prince in this Religionary
Certamen: and I believe whatever time can cause, that yet among all composed
and sedate Minds, his Majesty's deportment in the late Conjuncture will never
happen to be forgot, and particularly his wrestling with his Parliaments (as I
may say) by several Gracious Offers and Messages relating to the security of
the Protestant Religion, and to the making of English Men everlasting
Comprehensors of the same. He notified it to them by the Lord Chancellor on
March the 11th 78. That this is the time to secure Religion at home and
strengthen it from abroad, by strengthening the Interests of all the
Protestants in Europe, etc. The results of this Council seem to be decisive of
the fate of this Kingdom, etc.

And I must confess I wish that tempus acceptabile (as I called it before) had
been accepted of, that great Critical Moment of time when the curious needed no
intelligence from that Oracular Statesman of the measures taken abroad to
extirpate Protestancy, and when its Enemies in some Countries thought they had
the life of that Religion as sure within their gripe as he had that of the
Bird, when out-braving the Oracle, he asked if the Bird in the hand were dead
or alive, and when all his Majesty's real acceptable offers were thus
reiterated to all the noble Contenders, and offered like the water of life to
prevent their fainting in their Race, and that without Money and without Price.

And because his Majesty's Title has appeared as due to his Agonists Crown as
to his Inheritable Royal one, for having in the several periods of his life at
home and abroad contended so earnestly for the Protestant Faith, and purchased
an immunity from Envy it self (and that according to the right of that Law in
the Code, that restrains the obtaining of Immunities only to such a one who
has striven per omnem aetatem, cum coaevis, and has to the Athlotletae given
proof of his valor from his youth, and who has at least in tribus agonibus
been Conqueror) I think the rather that a Crown of Justice is laid up for him
both in time and in eternity for his preserving the property of his Line, in
some of those his earnest Messages aforesaid, and for that he did not by the
infringing the Legal Rights of that (as I may say) transilire lineas, or by
doing any thing of the Justice whereof he doubted and much more of the
Injustice whereof he was fully convinced.

As the figure of a Crown must be entire, so must every good Action consist of
entire Causes that is to be rewarded with it: and any Prince who does
deliberate of the doing a thing in it self unjust has need of the Caution given
to the Angel of the Church in Philadelphia, hold fast that which thou have,
that no Man take away thy Crown: and indeed for a Monarch to do an Act of
Injustice is a greater misfortune to him than to be deposed, the latter being
but the evil of punishment, and the former of sin. I reading lately in Klockius
de aerario was ashamed to see the 41. Summarium of Chap. 109th, Book 2d, to be
this, viz. A Iustitia licite in parvis subinde variariut in majoribus inviolata
sit: and ashamed to find in that Chapter Tacitus quoted by him for it, and
saying, Habet aliquid ex iniquo omne magnum exemplum, and Plutarch cited for
saying, A justitia in parvis rebus nonnunquam abeas, si salvam eam voles in
magnis. But honest Cicero tells us better things, and that, Nihil honestum esse
potest quod justitia vacat; and the Christian Morallity I am sure prohibits the
doing of one unlawful Act, tho the effect of it would be the restoring the
whole Creation in integrum to its first State in Paradise, and it enjoins the
fortitude of not fearing those that kill the Body, but are not able to kill the
Soul, as our Saviors words are in St. Math. 10. 28. and where he does not say,
fear not those that can kill the Body, but who do actually and frequently kill
the Body: but are not able to kill the Soul, implying that unjust men often
labor to do that, and would do it if they could, and their cursed solicitude
therein is not capable of being practiced more then by endeavoring to prevail
on Men by fear of imminent bodily danger to warp from principles of Justice,
and the Scripture does annex the Crown of Life to the condition of being
faithful unto death, and to not fearing the things to be suffered, as it is said
in Rev. 2. 10. the ominous Text Preached on at the Coronation of the Royal
Martyr.

And as it is a saying that Must is for the King, so he that Rules over Men
must be just, ruling in the fear of God, as part of the last words of King
David assures us, and must not by fear of Man do any unjust thing that would
imply his intermitting the filial fear of Heaven, which is justly punished by
being abandoned to the Servile Fear of Man, and to that fear bringing a Snare
(as that Kings Son has in his Proverbs told us) and when otherwise he might
have made his own wrath as the roaring of a Lion as Solomon's words are.

And it is when exact Justice is as it should be fixed in the Firmament of a
Princes Mind, that its brightness is above being Ecclipsed by any popular
temptations or fears, that it resembles the fixed Stars whose great height
dazles the eyes of gazers and which Stars cannot be eclipsed by the shadow of
the whole earth.

The Populace and their Multitudes and Commotions are in the Scripture
frequently compared to water and the Sea, and like that, they are apt to be
eating toward the Roots of the Powers of Sovereigns; but while the Mountains
of their Power are bottomed on Natural Justice, all the preying of the Sea of
the People there makes but the promontory more surely guarded, and appear more
majestic as well as be more inaccessible. And of this Sea of the Peoples as I
would wish every Prince in the just observance of the Municipal Laws of his
Country to espouse the Interest as much as the Duke of Venice does his
Adriatic, yet should I see one for fear of Popular Envy or Obloquy forbearing
to administer Justice, and to follow the real last Dictates of his practical
understanding rightly informed and servily giving up himself to obey any men's
pretended ones, I should think it to be as extravagant a Madness as Hydrophoby,
or fear of water, on the biting of a Mad Dog; and while a Sovereign observes
the immutable Principles of Justice, he may acquiesce in the results of
Providence, and expect that the troubling of the waters may be like that of the
Angel before the time of healing, or a Conjuncture of the Peoples being
possessed of healing Principles: and in fine, a King when he finds the Waters
of Popular Discontent more tumultuous by Religionary Parties as two Seas
meeting, as for example, Papists and Presbyterians, he may depend on his being
near Land, that being always near where two Seas meet: and let every Prince be
assured that it is not only Popery but Atheism in Masquerade to do an unjust
Act to support Religion.

I know that it has been incident to some good men to strain pretenses beyond
the nature of things for justice Causes of War abroad in the World to advance
the Protestant Religion. And thus in the last Age, the Crown and Populace of
England being clutter'd with the Affair of the Palatinate, the Prince Palatine
had here many well-wishers to his Title for the Bohemian Crown: and Rushworth
tells us in his 1st Vol. Ann. 1619. That he being Elected King of Bohemia
craved Advice of his Father in Law the King of Great Britain, touching the
acceptance of that Royal Dignity: and that when this Affair was debated in the
Kings Council, Archbishop Abbot whose infirmity would not suffer him to be
present at the Consultation, wrote his mind to Sir R. Nauton the Kings
Secretary, viz. That God had set up this Prince his Majesty's Son in Law as a
Mark of Honor throughout all Christendom to propagate the Gospel, and protect
the Oppressed. That for his own part he dares not but give advice to follow
where God leads, apprehending the work of God in this and that of Hungary: that
by the P^ece and Piece the Kings of the Earth that gave their power to the
Beast shall leave the Whore, and make her desolate, that he was satisfied in
Conscience that the Bohemians had just Cause to reject that Proud and Bloody
Man who had taken a Course to make that Kingdom not Elective in taking it by
Donation of another, etc. And concludes, Let all our Spirits be gathered up to
animate this Business, that the World may take notice that we are awake when
God calls.

Rushworth says, that King James disavowed the Act of his accepting that
Crown, and would never grace his Son in Law with the Style of his new Dignity.

And in King Charles the Firsts time, in the Common Prayer relating to the
Royal Family, the Prayer runs for Frederick Prince Palatine of the Rhine, and
the Lady Elizabeth his Wife: yet in the Assemblies Directory afterward as to
the Prayer for the Royal Family, that Lady Elizabeth is Styled Queen of Bohemia.

But our Princes not being satisfied, it seems that the Palatine of the Rhine
had a just Title to the Bohemian Crown, thought it not just for them to assert
it.

However, that Archbishop Abbot, the Achilles of the Protestants here in his
Generation, thought that the English Crown ought to descend in its true Line of
Succession whatever profession of Religion any Member thereof should own,
appears out of Mr. Pryns Introduction to the History of the Arch Bishop of
Canterburies Trial, where having in p. 3. mentioned the Articles sent by King
James to his Ambassador in Spain in order to the Match with the Infanta, and
that one was, That the Children of this Marriage shall no way be compelled or
constrained in point of Conscience of Religion, wherefore there is no doubt
that their Title shall be prejudiced in case it should please God that they
should prove Catholics, and in p. 6. Cited the same in Latin out of the French
Mercury, Tom. 9. as offered from England, Quod liberi ex hoc matrimonio oriundi
non cogentur neque compellentur in causa religionis vel conscientiae, neque
leges contra Catholicos attingent illos, and in casu siquis eorum fuerit
Catholicus, non ob hoc perdet jus successionis in Regna and Dominia Magnae
Britanniae, and afterward in p. 7. mentioned it as an Additional Article
offered from England, That the King of Great Britain and Prince of Wales
should bind themselves by Oath for the observance of the Articles, and that the
Privy Council should Sign the same under their hands, etc. He in p. 43.
mentions Archbishop Abbots among other Privy-Counsellers accordingly Signing
those Articles, and further in p. 46. mentions the Oath of the Privy Council
for the observance of those Articles as far as lay in them: and had before
given an account not only of Archbishop Abbots, but of other magna nomina of
the Clergy and Layety in the Council that Signed the same, and particularly of
John Bishop of Lincoln Keeper of the Great Seal, Lionel Earl of Middlesex Lord
High Treasurer of England, Henry Viscount Mandevile Lord President of the
Council, Edward Earl of Worcester Lord Privy Seal, Lewis Duke of Richmond and
Lennox Lord High Steward of the Household, James Marquess of Hamilton, James
Earl of Carlisle, Lancelot Bishop of Winchester, Oliver Viscount Grandison,
Arthur Baron Chichester of Belfast Lord Treasurer of Ireland, Sir Thomas
Edmonds Knight. Treasurer of the Household, Sir John Suckling* Comptroller of the
Household, Sir George Calvert and Sir Edward Conway Principal Secretaries of
State, Sir Richard Weston Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Julius Caesar Master
of the Rolls, who had done the same.

Mr. Pryn afterward in p. 69. having mentioned the Dissolution of the Spanish
Match, gives an account of the bringing on the Marriage with France, and says,
It was concluded in the life of King James, the Articles concerning Religion
being the same almost Verbatim, with those formerly agreed on in the Spanish
Treaty, and so easily condescended to without much Debate: and refers there
to the Rot. tractationis and ratificationis matrimonii inter Dom. Carolum Regem
and Dom. Henrettam Mariam sororem Regis Franc. 1 Car. in the Rolls.

The Demagogues of the old long Parliament who made such loud Outcries of the
danger of Popery here and of their strenuous endeavors to free the Kingdom
from it, had nothing in their Famous 19 Propositions to bar the right of any
Heir to the Crown for the being a Papist. The exact Collections afford many
instances of their declaring, That they would provide for the greatness of his
Majesty and his Royal Posterity in future times, and in which there was no
Proviso respecting any Religionary Tenets they should profess.

It appears in Mr. Pryns memorable Speech in that House of Commons on Monday
the 4th of December, 1648. touching the Kings answers to the Propositions of
both Houses, whether they were satisfactory or not in the Isle of Wight Treaty,
that that Parliament that was concerned for the saving of their own Credit as
well as the Souls of the People to make that Treaty to end with the
extermination of Popery from England, did not in the application of the most
proper means for that purpose, judge the debarring any Popish Prince here from
his Inheritance of the Crown any proper, or necessary one. For in p. 58. of
that Speech ' it is said, As to any danger to our Church from Religion there is
as good Security and Provision granted us by the King, as we did or could
desire even in our own terms. First, He has fully consented to pass an Act for
the more effectual disabling of Jesuits, Papists and Popish Recusants from
disturbing the State and deluding the Laws, and for the prescribing of a new
Oath for the more speedy discovery and Conviction of Recusants. Secondly, To an
Act of Parliament for the Education of the Children of Papists by Protestants
in the Protestant Religion. Thirdly, To an Act for the due Levying the
Penalties against Recusants, and disposing of them as both Houses shall
appoint. Fourthly, To an Act whereby the practices of the Papists against the
State may be prevented, the Laws against them duly executed, and a stricter
Course taken to prevent the saying or hearing of Mass in the Court or any other
part of the Kingdom: whereby it is made Treason for any Priests to say Mass in
the Court or Queens own Chapel. Fifthly, To an Act for abolishing all
Innovations, Popish Superstitions, Ceremonies, Altars, Rayles, Crucifixes,
Images, Pictures, Copes, Crosses, Surplices, Vestments, bowings at the name of
Jesus or toward the Altar, etc. By all which Acts added to our former Laws
against Recusants, I dare affirm we have far better Provision and Security
against Papists, Jesuits, Popish Recusants, etc for our Churches and Religions
Safety and States too, then any Protestant Church, State and Kingdom
whatsoever: so as we need not fear any future danger from Papists or Popery if
we be careful to see those Concessions duly put in Execution, when turned into
Acts, and our former Laws.

And afterward in that Speech p. 110. he shows how dear the Kings consenting to
pass five such Acts cost him: for says he, The Jesuits understanding that the
King beyond and contrary to their expectation has granted all or most of our
propositions in the Isle of Wight, and fully condescended to five new Bills for
the Extirpation of Mass, Popery and Popish Innovations ^ut of his Dominions and
putting all Laws in Execution against them, and for a speedier Discovery and
Conviction of them then formerly, etc are so enraged with the King and so
inexorably incensed against him (as I am credibly informed) that now they are
mad against him and thirst for nothing but his Blood.

Mr. Pryn had mentioned in that Speech before, that some Jesuits and Jesuited
Agitators had engaged the Army to dissolve that Treaty with the King: and it is
no wonder if that prying Order who knew the Kings Aversion to Popery, as well
as the most stupid of his Enemies did when they saw him consenting to pass five
such Bills, was the more brisk in executing its Designs against him, and that
as Mr. Pryn says in his perfect Narrative, a Priest present at the Kings death
flourished his Sword with an exclamation, That now the greatest Enemy we had in
the World was gone. But this by the way. I had not mentioned how dear the
consenting to those Bills that would have been so fatal to Popery and have
prevented the Phrase of its growth from being used at this time of day, but
that some persons not versed in the passages of those evil days, seem to think
that there was nothing of Religion to support that Kings Title to Martyrdom,
but what concerned his Adhesion to Episcopacy and its Revenue.

In the very solemn League and Covenant its takers declared, they had before
their Eyes the honor and happiness of the Kings Majesty and his Posterity. And
I have seen a printed paper of the Presbyterian Divines of one of the
Associations in the late times, wherein they do expressly affirm and argue it
that any of the Royal Posterity here ought not to be debarred from their
Hereditary Right to the Crown, by being either Papists or Idolaters.

If we look so far back as the great Conjuncture in the beginning of King
Iames' s Reign, namely in the year 1605. we shall find that there was then a
Paper before mentioned published in Print called a Protestation of the Kings
Supremacy made by the Nonconforming Ministers which were suspended or deprived
that year, and that the first Paragraph or Tenet in that Protestation is this,
We hold and maintain the same Authority and Supremacy in all Causes and over
all Persons Civil and Ecclesiastical, granted by Statute to Queen Elizabeth,
and expressed and declared in the Book of Advertisements and Injunctions and in
Master Bilson against the Jesuits, to be due in full and ample manner (without
any limitation or qualification) to the King and his Heirs and Successors for
ever, etc. And the 4 th Paragraph in that Protestation ( part whereof I have
before recited) is, viz. We hold that though the Kings of this Realm were no
Members of the Church but very Infidels, yea and Persecutors of the Truth, that
yet those Churches that shall be gathered together within these Dominions,
ought to acknowledge and yield the same Supremacy to them. And that the same is
not tied to their Faith and Christianity, but to their very Crown, from which
no Subject or Subjects have power to separate or disjoyn it. And in the 18 th
Paragraph they say, That if the King subjecting himself to Spiritual Guides and
Governors shall afterward refuse to be governed and guided by them, according
to the Word of God, and living in notorious sin without repentance, shall
wilfully contemn and despise all their Holy and Religious Censures, that then
these Governors are to refuse to Administer the Holy Things of God to him and
to leave him to himself, and to the secret Judgment of God, and wholly to resign
and give over that spiritual Charge and Tuition over him, which by calling from
God and the King they did undertake. And more then this they may not do. And
after all this we hold that he still retains and ought to retain entirely and
solidly, all that aforesaid Supreme Power and Authority over the Churches of
this Dominion, in as ample a manner as if he were the most Christian Prince in
the World.

If therefore any shall think it reasonable to pronounce that the substantial
Interest of Protestancy, and of the Kingdom does Stare moribus antiquis
virisque, I have pointed them to Archbishop Abbot, to Bishop Andrews the
Antagonist to Bellarmine (under the weight of whose Arguments Bellarmine fell
in the Certamen) and to others of our old Counselors of State, and
particularly Arthur Baron Chichester of Belfast, Lord Treasurer of Ireland,
your Lordships Noble Godfather, (in comparison of many of whom when we look on
some of our great Politic and Protestant-wouldbe's of this Age, and who would
let none be Protestants but themselves, we may well cry out, In qualem paulatim
fluximus urbem) and have shown how those great Confessors by their Overt Acts
provided against the belief of the Doctrine of Popery, without the barring any
of the Royal Line from the inheriting the Crown. And when I see some of our
(till of late) unheard of Statists so eager to dispossess the Land of the Evil
Spirit of Popery by illegal means, and the use of the great Name of Protestancy
as a Spell, I fancy to my self that they may be called on by it, as the Jewish
Exorcits were in the Acts of the Apostles, who taking on them to call over them
which had evil Spirits, the Name of the Lord Jesus, saying we adjure you by
Jesus whom Paul preaches, the evil Spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and
Paul I know, but who are ye? Thus to any who shall say that there is no way
possible to secure English Men's continuing Protestants, but by breaking in on
the Succession in the Right Line, may it be returned by Popery, the old
Protestants of the Church of England I know, and the old Nonconformist
Protestants, and the old Covenanting Presbyterian Protestants I know, who knew
otherwise to secure Protestancy, and likewise the French Protestants I know,
who never practiced any Outrage against the Great Harry the 4th of France's
Government after he had left Protestancy, but who are ye? The truth is, the
Protestants in France so vastly numerous in his time (which any one may
imagine, who considers that the most careful thinking men in that Realm make
them now to be two Millions, and that a judicious French Author has writ, that
the Jesuits have lately computed them to be above a Million and a half) have
shown the World a great example of their Protestant Loyalty in that they were
ready as cheerfully to obey their Prince when he was a Papist, as when they
served him in set Battles against the Power of the holy League, and the
majority of his Nobles, and of his Metropolis, and of the chief Cittadels in
his Realm.

After they saw him go to Mass, they never called him Julian, or Lampoon'd him
in Hymns, or demurred to his Beard, or had any fears or jealousies of his
touching a hair of their heads, nor threatened him that the Galilean would foil
him: and no Language could have more truly expressed their Sentiments then that
of the Famous Pierre du Moulin in his defense of the Faith, Nous sommes prests
d' exposer nos vies pour la defense de nos Rois, contre qui que ce soit,
fust-il de nostre Religion. Quiconque feroit autrement, ne defendroit point la
Religion, mais serviroit son ambition, and attireroit un grand blame sur la
verite de l' evangile. i. e. We are ready to expose our lives for the defense
of our Kings against whomsoever it be, although of our own Religion. And
whosoever should do otherwise, should not defend Religion, but serve his own
ambition, and would draw a great reproach on the truth of the Gospel.
Considering the indeleble Character of Hary the 4 ths Protestant Good Nature,
his Subjects of that Religion did prepare their thoughts to be Lachrymists for
him, rather then themselves, and knew that by his Coversion to Popery, if in
this life only he had hopes, he was of all men most miserable, and that his
absolution left him only in the State of a Crowned Victime.

I have before mentioned the Apology for that Scholar of the Jesuits John
Chastel, which endeavors to prove that Harry the 4 th was by that Assassin not
only wounded very fairly according to the Language of the Brothers of the
Blade, but in the Style of their Honor according to the Jesuits Morals very
heroically, and as the Contents of Cap. 1. Part. 3 d, of the Apology expresses
it, Actus Castelli heroicus est in substantia sua.

He moreover tells us in plain terms Part. 2. Cap. 7. that Excommunicatio quae
^b haeresim irrogatur, remedium potius est ecclesiae quam excommunicato, etc.
and that Excommunication for Heresy does quite take away any Regal Right; And
in Cap. 8. before mentioned, (viz. Neque etiam a Papa absolutus Rex esse
potest) he asks, Quod si quaeratur quid ergo absolutio praestet, si jus
amissum non redeat? And it follows, Quod si absolutus impaenitens existat,
effectus alius non foret, quam is de quo supra, ita si (quod Deus velit)
paenitentia foret vera, certe effectus propterea non exig^us esset futurus:
utpote in spiritualibus, remittendo illum in ecclesiae gremium, and regni
Caelorum Capacem reddendo: temporalium vero respectu, quicquid illa operari
posset, foret ad reddendum eum compotem novi juris, and per electionem
auferendo impedimentum in foro fori: quo durante is ille esse non posset. And
then he says, The Pope cannot confer such new Right to the same Kingdom on
him, for that it depends not simply on the power of the Keys so to do, and in
fine, makes the Right to the Crown irrevocably devolved on the next person
capable who has a right to it, quum ( says he) ratum sit inter jurisconsultos,
incapacem haberi ut mortuum, and non impedire sequentes. In the 3d Chapter of
the 2d Part namely, That Henry of Bourbon cannot be called King by reason of
his pretended Conversion, the vile Apologist derides the Conversion of this
Great King, and labors to prove by fifteen Instances, That after his
Conversion he did favor the Cause of Heresy more then ever, and particularly
by his observance of his Leagues and Agreements with the Queen of England and
other Heretics, ut experientia ( says he) per novas ejus actiones
locupletissime testatur.

Etenim primo faederum pacta cum haereticis sarta tectaque servat: quibus ut
hactenus nondum renunciavit, ita neque dum renunciare cogitat.

Secundo ipsi haeritici in Germania, Genevae and alibi ejus actiones comprobant.

Tertio contemnit Catholicos and promovet haereticos: illos repudiat atque
rejicit, hos vero muneribus honorat amplissimis and augustissimis in toto
regno, and alibi tum bello, tum pace, etc.

Quarto consilium suum e puris putis haereticis stabilit, etc.

So that after he had with St. Peter denied his Lord, the followers of St.
Peter's pretended Successor, called him in effect a Galilean, and said that the
Speech of his Actions bewrayed him; and after his absolution he continued in
effect, what the Pope styled him in his Bull of Excommunication, filius ^rae,
and after as a Prodigal having fed among heretical Swine, he returned to his
Romish Ghostly Fathers house, and had cried, peccavi, and abjured, and his
Father had compassion on him, he experimented the contrary to, for this my Son
was dead and is alive again, and himself was the fatted Calf that was slain;
and so much wantonness was showed by the contrivers of his dire fate, that
Gassendus in his life of Peiresk, Book 2 d shows how in the beginning of the
Year 1610. An Almanac or yearly Prognostication was brought out of Spain, in
which the Accidents of Harry the 4ths death were foretold, and that it was sent
to his Majesty to read, who slighted it, as Gassandus did likewise all judicial
Astrology, but yet supposed that the figure-flinger might possibly be
acquainted with the Plot against that Kings Life: and says, sure I am it could
not be perfectly concealed either in Spain or Italy: for even the Kings
Ambassadors and particularly the most excellent Johannes Bochartus Lord of
Champigny then Agent at Venice, had already preadvertised his Majesty thereof:
and it was sufficiently proved that all the Seafaring Men of Marseilles who
for two Months before came from Spain, brought word that there was a report
spread abroad in Spain, that the King of France was already or should be killed
by a Sword or Knife.

Poor Harry the 4 th! He who while a Protestant had Dominion over his own
Stars, and his Enemies Stars too (for they were his Enemies who made him first
be called Great, and their designing to ruin him by embroiling France in Civil
Wars* tended to the advancement of his Interest and his Glory, and the
Artifices by which they thought to have chased him out of Guyen brought him
into the heart of France, and their former by unjustifiable practices urging
the King his Predecessor, to have prosecuted him with more violence then he had
done, were the causes of his being reconciled to that King) and who then in the
most dark and stormy night of his Affairs never wanted that Illumination from
above, which was like a Star to him, and not only a sign of fairer weather, but
a mark of direction in the foul, and which would have furnished his Portraiture
in Story with another guess Star than that usually engraved on Coesars Image,
and which by its blazing seven days ore the Games consercrated to Coesar by
Augustus, did make him inter Divos, and did awe the World as being thought his
Soul which vouchsafed from Heaven to visit it with its luster, this Harry the 4
th, was at last grown the ludibrium of Star-gazers.

And if any one shall say that Franciscus de Verona Constantinus the Author of
the Apology for Chastel, was not a Voucher good enough for the spreading the
Belief of the Doctrine, that Heretical Princes by their absolution from the
Pope are not restored to their Regal Rights, let him consult the Great Thuanus
and he will find that in his Book 135, and on the Year 1605 ( where he gives an
account of the Gunpowder Treason here) he says that the Conspirators therein,
Ante omnia conscientiam instruunt, eaque instructa ad facinus audendum
obfirmant animum: sic autem a Theologis suis disserebatur. That Heretics are
yearly excommunicated by the Pope in the bulla coenae, and are ipso facto,
fallen into the punishment of the Law, and that thence it follows that
Christian Kings if they fall into Heresy, may be deposed, and their Subjects
released immediately from their Princes Dominion, nec jus illud recuperare
posse, etiamsi ecclesiae reconcilentur. Ecclesiam communem omnium parentem cum
nemini ad eam redeunti claudere gremium cum dicitur, adhibita distinctione
interpretandum esse, modo non (it ad damnum and periculum ecclesiae. Nam id
verum esse quoad animam, non quoad Regnum. Nec solum ad Principes hac labe
infectos paenam extendi, sed etiam ad eorum filios qui a Regni successione ob
vitium paternum pelluntur: haeresim quippe lepram, and morbum haereditarium
esse, atque ut disertius res exprimatur, Regnum amittere qui Romanam Religionem
deserit, diris illum devoveri, nec unquam ipsum aut illius posteros in Regnum
restitui: quoad animam a solo Pontifice posse absolvi. His se rationibus cum
satis tutos intus existimarent, munimenta externa conjurationi quaerere
coeperunt etc. ita ad facinus non solum licitum and laudabile, verum etiam
meritorium a Theologis suis auctorati accesserunt.

They thought it seems that by the Authority of the Doctrines of those Divines
they might blow up the King and three Estates with Gunpowder very fairly.

It is a thing that cannot have escaped your Lordships curious Observation,
that both the Nonconformists and Papists were sturdy Petitioners to King James
in the beginning of his Reign, that he would be a Fautor to them and their
Hypotheses. In April in the Year 1603, a Petition was presented to him called,
the humble Petition of the Ministers of the Church of England, desiring
reformation of certain Ceremonies and Abuses of the Church, and there they
particularly desire, that Ministers may not be urged to subscribe but according
to the Law, to the Articles of Religion and the Kings Supremacy only, and that
none migat be excommunicated without the consent of his Pastor, and therein
they complain of Ministers being suspended, silenced, disgraced, imprisoned for
Men's traditions.

This Petition was commonly called the Millenary Petition, the Petitioners
averring themselves to be more then a thousand: and an animadverting Answer was
made to the same by the Vice Chancellor and Doctors, and Proctors, and Heads of
Houses in the University of Oxford, and printed in the Year 1604.

Methinks a Humble Petition with a thousand hands is a kind of Contradictio in
adjecto. But the University in their Animadversions on the Petition do observe
that the two contrary Factions of Papists and Puritans did show themselves by
their Petitions discontented with the present State and Ecclesiastical
Government. They mention particulars as parallels wherein their Petitions
agreed and resemble them to Samsons Foxes, etc.

I had occasion before to mention to your Lordship the Supplication of the
Papists to King James, that was Contemporary with that of the Puritans, and
printed too in the same year; and tho I remember not any of our Historians to
have given the World an account of that memorable Petition, yet the Impartial
Thuanus does it: and in Book 135. and on the Year 1605. going to relate the
History of the Gunpowder Treason, he says, Ad libellum supplicem pro
liberate Conscientiarum a Majorum Religioni addictis ( i. e. the Papists) in
proximis Comitiis oblatum, and a Rege rejectum, fama erat, alium his proximis,
quae jam aliquoties dilata erant, porrectum iri, qui non repulsae ut prior,
periculum, sed concessionis vel ab invito ext^rquendae necessitatem adjunctam
haberet. Itaque qui regni negotia sub principe generoso ac minime suspicioso
procurabant, nihil pejus veriti in eo laborabant ut petitiones and iis
adjunctam necessitatem eluderent. Verum non de gratia, de qua desperabatur
decimo obtinenda, sed de repulsa illa vel cum regni exitio, quod minime
rebantur illi, inter conjuratos agebatur.

And as to the Puritans Petition to King James, The Resolution of the Lords and
likewise of the Judges assembled in Star Chamber shortly after, does I think
refer to it in the 3d. viz. Whether it was an offense* punishable and what
punishment they deserved, who framed Petitions and Collected a Multitude of
Hands thereto to prefer to the King in a public Cause, as the Puritans had
done with an intimation to the King that if he denied the Suit, many thousands
of his Subjects would be discontented, where to all the Justices answered, that
it was an offense finable at discretion and very near Treason and Felony in the
punishment, for they tended to the raising of Sedition and Rebellion, and
discontent among the People, to which resolution all the Lords declared that
some of the Puritans had raised a false rumor of the King how he intended to
grant a toleration to Papists, etc. And the Lords severally declared how the
King was discontented with the said false rumor, and had made but the day
before a Protestation to them that he never intended and would spend the last
drop of Blood before he would do it.

I remember not in the Millenary Petition any such expression as the insolent
intimation, that thousands would be discontented if it were not granted: but do
on the occasion of this ruffianly way of petitioning by Papists and Puritans,
remember what Alexander ab Alexandro speaks of the Persians who worshipped
Fire, that they did once in their supplicating their God, threaten him that if
he would not grant their Request they would throw him into the water.

I was therefore no imprudent Act of the Nonconforming Divines who had been
deprived of their Livings to publish voluntarily such a Protestation of their
Tenets as aforesaid, after the detection of the Papists Gun powder Treason
Plot, and by which Act the Government was diverted from putting such a
Cautionary Test on their Party as was on the Papists by the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy.

Certain it is that both the Parties appeared very rude in the manner of their
Petitioning. In the Decrets where the Text says that a thing is done Contra
fidem Catholicam, the gloss explains it to be Contra bonos mores, and so it may
be said that both the Petitioners for the Roman Catholic Faith, and for the
others alleged Catholic Faith were injurious to each by their unmannerly
Petitionings, as well as to their Prince: and their being both such frequent
Aggressors against his quiet, gave occasion for the Question to vex his Reign,
viz. Which were the worse of the two, or whether they were not equally bad, and
so many may carelessly render them according to the saying, Rustici res secant
per medium.

What Bishop Elmore the Bishop of London thought in such a Case I have said,
and yet that Bishop as Fuller tells us in the Church History, was a Learned Man
and a strict and stout Champion for Disciplin^, and on which account was more
mocked by Mar-Prelate and hated by the Nonconformists then any one. And a great
Son of the Church and Minister of the State, has judiciously in a public
Speech inculcated the different regard to be had to those who stray from the
Flock and those who would destroy it. Moreover a great Iustitiary of the Realm,
in the Trial of one of the Popish Plotte^s, took occasion to observe, That
Popery was ten times worse then the Heathen Idolatry.

And Dr. Burnet in a printed Sermon, having said, That in many places Lutherans
are no less and in some tbey are more fierce against the Calvinists then
against Papists; adds, like a strange sort of People among our selves, that are
not ashamed to own a greater aversion to any sort of Dissenters then to the
Church of Rome. I hope the Authority of that great Divine and excellent Person
will in the point of this Comparison help to allay such a mistaken Aversion to
some mistaken Dissenters. I care not who knows the great deference I have to
the judgment of that great Historian of our Reformation, and whose History of
which as the House of Commons has done right to by one of their Votes, so
likewise has the highest Judicatory in England, I mean the House of Lords by a
late Order of theirs, by which the Thanks of that House are given him for the
great service done by him to this Kingdom, and to the Protestant Religion, in
writing the History of the Reformation of the Church of England so truly and
exactly, and that he be desired to proceed to the perfecting what he further
intends therein with all convenient speed, etc. As the words in the Iournal are.

My reading lately ten small printed Controversial Discourses between two
Baronets of Cheshire near of kin to each other (in which are many references to
Historical Antiquities) concerning the Illegitimacy of one Amicia, Daughter to
one of the Earls of Chester, and my observing that one of those Authors blames
the other for not better learning the duty to his deceased Grandmother (as his
words are) then by divulging the shame of her Illigitimacy, and says, there is
no Precedent in Scripture of any man that did divulge the shame of any person,
out of whose loins he did descend except the wicked Ham, and that the other
Author thinks himself on the account of truth, and for its sake to assert her
Illegitimacy, those many Tracts passed about that Controversy from the Year
1673 to 1676, occasioned my thinking that thus have some Writers that would
take it ill perhaps not to be thought legitimate, and true Sons of the Church
of England, took too much pains to prove the Birth of its Reformation to be
illegitimate, to the great Applause of the Papists, and that our Reverend
Historian of it, did seasonably come in to Aid his Mother Church, by publishing
the very Records that would secure her from a blush on that account, and leave
that Mauvaise honte (as the French call it) to be Enemies, and has appeared by
his very laborious and judicious Writings, to be a Person as of very great
Abilities, so of a great and frank inclination to employ them even to the
over-obliging a Country, and which though naturally attended with envy from
some must too be with acknowledgements from others of that Dignity and
Authority that his mind is possessed of, and such as Valerius Maximus speaking
of as innate in Famous Men who have no extrinsic Authority, says of it, Quam
recte quis dixerit longum and beatum honorem esse sine honor. And he who in
the course of his History and his other Works has appeared so Impartial and
Accurate in his Observations of Men and things, may very well be supposed not
to have been partial in his comparison of Papists and Dissenters, nor do I
think he receded from his usual close judging of things, when in one of his
Books he said, that it is not to be denied that it were better there were no
Revealed Religion in the World, then that Mankind should by its influences be
so viti^ted as to become more barbarous and cruel then it would be, if Acted by
no higher Principles than those are with which Nature inspires Men.

I will not with our Learned and Reverend Judge, undertake to compute how many
times Popery is worse then the Religion of the Romans: but this I will say that
had I been in the Roman Senate and had there heard any one propound to them a
removal of their minds out of that Coast of Religion which by the light of
Nature lay open before them, into the Region of the Jesuits Morals, I would
have said, My Masters let us keep where we are: and should have expected that
the Reasons I would have urged for their so doing, would have had the effect of
the good Omen that happened in that remarkable Crisis, when the Roman Senators
were debating whether they should qu^t Rome or remove to Veij, and when a
Soldier then coming on the Guard, and his Captain being heard to cry out to
him, Signiser signum statue, hic optime manebimus, occasioned their adhering to
Rome.

I think that no Protestant who compares the Tenets of the Nonconformist
Divines in King James's time with the Tenets of Popery, will prefer the latter
before the former. But it is not deniable that before King James's time, and
then and since many Puritans and Nonconformists have made great Schisms in the
Church and disturbances in the State, and that especially in some particular
Conjunctures. The great Epoche of 41 in England, and likewise in Ireland, will
in our Histories preserve the Memory of the outrageous Principles of many
Presbyterian Divines in the one Kingdom, and of Popish ones in the other: but
if any shall be so partial to the Papists as either to justify their Commotion
in Ireland, or to deny all part of the influence that Commotion had on ours
here, he will find himself a vain imposer on the World.

A great inspector into our modern English Affairs, I mean the late Earl of
Clarendon has in his Animadversions on Cressys 's Book against Dr. Stilling
fleet said, That nothing can be stranger then that Mr. Cressy should so magnify
the general obedience of all Roman Catholics, that none of them was ever in
Rebel^ion against the King or his Father, when he knows very well and has some
marks of it, that the whole Irish Nation (very few Persons of Honor excepted)
joined in Rebellion against the King: but for that Rebellion neither
Presbyterian, Independent, or Anabaptists had been able to have done any harm
in England. For the Scots Rebellion was totally suppressed, and their Army
disbanded before the Irish Rebellion begun. It was that which produced all the
mischief that succeeded in England, and gave those Sects in Religion
opportunity to bring in their Confusion to the destruction of Church and State,
etc.

But as to the Papists coming in for their share in the guilt of our Commo^ion
here, we have the incontestable Authority of the Royal Martyr, who in one of
his printed Declarations says, And we are confident that a greater number of
that Religion (meaning the Popish) is in the Army of the Rebels then in our
own, and 'twas there before said, All men know the great number of Papists
which serve in their Army, Commanders and others.

The Author of the Regal Apology printed in the Year 48, in p. 36, answers
that part of the Declaration of the House of Commons, that so unworthily
r^flects on his Majesty, as to offering a toleration to the Papists in Ireland,
tontrary to his former resolutions, which says the Author, was on great and
pressing necessity which has no Law, and to that degree of necessity as the
two Houses had driven him, so the Consequences were to be set on their Score
not his own, yet even then in his Letters about that Affairs published by
themselves, he does insist on it that the Bargain may be made as good as can be
for him. But I have seen other Letters from one of his Secretaries to the
Irish, which I am assured were true, wherein where these expressions after
expostulation of their delays in his Assistance, He is informed that taking
advantage of his low Condition, you insist on something in Religion more then
formerly you were contented with. He has therefore commanded me to let you
know that were his Condition much lower, you shall never force him to any
further Concessions to the prejudice of his Conscience and of the true
Protestant Religion in which he is resolved to live, and for which he is ready
to die; and that he will join with any Protestant Prince, nay with these Rebels
themselves how odious soever ( meaning his two Houses) rather then yield the
least to you in this particular.

I should with extreme reluctance touch the Sores of these Sects who yet have
both at several times given such deadly wounds to the peace of the Kingdom, but
that they are Nusances to the public quiet in raking up the odious Comparisons
of one another practices, and that the Papists on the occasion of any of the
worse sort of Protestants or Nonconformists being Convicted of Sedition or
Treason (a thing that may be expected from the degeneracy of Humane Nature to
happen oftener from some of a Religion of so great Numbers, then from a
persuasion that has Comparatively but a handful of men for its Disciples, just
as accordingly perhaps where one Papist is hanged for Clipping or Coining
twenty Protestants are so ^ are so apt to expect that the World should acquit
the present Principles and former practices of that Sect from Disloyalty on
their Outcry that they are no Puritans or Presbyterians, and as ridiculously
as if a false Coyner Arraigned for the Fact, should trouble the Court with a
Plea and Noise, that he was no House-breaker, and but that on the detection of
a Plot of Papists, several persons that have in their public Capacities done
many Acts of Hostility to the Interest of the Kingdom, yet entirely by being
more busy Anti-Papists then others, have been immediately admitted to the good
Graces of the People, and cried up by them as Patriots and Hero's, and by their
afterward espousing the true Interest of the Kingdom as to the point of Popery,
all their former spurious Actions have been not only pardoned, but almost
according to the Canon Law legitimated; and as the Popes in any Croysad for the
Exterminium of Heretics were wont to give plenary Indulgences for all Sins
past and to come for many years, so have the People heaped such Indulgences on
such Persons that in any Conjuncture showed their zeal in the extermination of
Popery.

And though to an ordinary view these men's Title to their Fame may appear by
some of their former Actings much incumbered, yet who ever pryes into it is as
much generaly hated as are those Projectors, who rake for their Bread among the
weak Titles of other Men's Estates, and cry out (...) when they have found out a
flaw there.

It Is observable that S. James C. 2. in his Assertion of Justification by
works, gives two Instances of Persons so justified, and that one is of Abraham,
and the other of Rahab the Harlot, in v. 25. likewise also was not Rahab the
Harlot justified by workt, when she had received the Messengers, and had sent
them another way: and yet too that sen^^^ the Spies another way as the Fact is
Historically mentioned in Joshua the 2 d, would to some Scruplers seem
unjustifiable. Thus do the People in their way justify all that they believe
are assistful to them in the attaquing of the Romish Babylon, and look on them
as their Saviors, and as captious as they are against others, yet think of
nothing but saving them and all that they have; as was in the case of Rahab.

Nor is it to be wondered at that Men who have so much to account for to the
Public should be thus discharged by the populace, tho many of them are Gallios
in Religion, and were no more concerned for the Eclipse of Protestancy or the
light of the Gospel in the year 1678. or 1680. then they were for the four
Eclipses of the Luminaries, viz. two of the Sun, and two of the Moon, that will
be in the year 1701. and particularly of that of the Sun, which will be in
January then and not seen by us, but only by our Antipodes; but there is that
adherent to Popery, that if it could rivet it self into our Law here, it would
make the light of the Sun not worth the looking on, namely the Confiscation of
the Goods and Estates of those that Holy Church calls Heretics, and the
throwing them into such forlorn Prisons where they could see neither Sun or
Moon: and therefore as the Devils those Seducers in Chains are hated by Men,
because they know those Fiends would destroy their life's if they could; for the
same reason all that lie open to the Name of Heretics, will be animated with a
brisk hatred against Popery, and magnify those as their tutelar Angels that
shall pretend to defend them from it; tho such did before conspire against
them. But therefore because a Zeal against Popery is a remedy so cheap and so
easy to be had, and yet so infallible a one against the Peoples being
discontented with Men who did before so much by their Principles poison the
Realm, it is the common interest of us all, both Protestants and Papists, out of
love to our Country, to wish that no Men may be tempted so fatally to injure it
hereafter, by being beforehand sure of purchasing both Pardon and Adoration,
from the People on such easy terms.

The strong currents of Inclination I find in my self, and observe in others,
not only to Pardon, but to extol and magnify, nay to bless all Men that help
their Country, as it is contesting with Popery or Presbytery, or either of
those or any Religion-trade, and to say to them as the Expression is in the
Psalms, We bless you in the name of the Lord, will I hope be accompanied with
such an Extirpation of it as will not leave any Fiber behind it in our English
World.

As it need not be told to our Divines of the Church of England, that they are
under no obligation to strain any point of Courtesy whereby to render the
Papists generally not worse than Puritans, and that their Character has been
by the Papists all along rendered more vile than that of the Puritans, and that
Doleman in his Book of the Succession, weighing the Parties in England, and
having first spoke of the Protestants of the Church of England, afterward p.
242. says, That the Puritan party is more generally favored throughout the
whole Realm, with all those which are not of the Roman Religion, then is the
Protestant upon a certain general persuasion that the profession of the Puritan
Party is the more perfect, especially in great Towns, where Preachers have made
more impression in the Artificers and Burgesses, than in the Common People. And
among the Protestants themselves; all those that are less interested in
Ecclesiastical Livings, or other Preferments depending on the State, are more
affected commonly to the Puritans, etc. And p. 244. The Puritan Party at home
in England is thought to be most vigorous of any other; that is to say, most
ardent, quick, bold, resolute* and to have a great part of the best Captains
and Soldiers on their side; which is a point of no small moment; and that
Weston, Lib. 3. de Trip. Hom. Offic. Cap. 16. p. 226. in a very janty manner,
crying up the Puritans beyond the Prrotestants of the Church of England, says
Protestantibus in^^ Sacra praestabiliores puritanos. Qui enim estis
Protestants, hominum judicamini ignavissimi omnium, religionis etiam fuco
destituti, impiissimi aeruscatores, parati jurare in cujusvis verba, modo inde
emolumentum rebus vestris accrescat, and in p. 227. Puritani sane multo
solidius ac syncerius sua dogmata profitentur; So neither need it be told the
Papists that the Divines of the Church of England did never prefer the Tenets
of Popery, or Professors thereof to those of Puritanism or Presbytery as such,
and that they never complained of the Protection the Dutch and French Churches
have long here enjoyed with Liberty to worship God according to their peculiar
Rites and Church Discipline, and that upon the late great migration of many
French Protestants from their own Country hither, under great Circumstances of
want, our Divines, and particularly those in and near London, showed all the
efforts of their Art of Persuasion from their Pulpits to move their Hearers to
liberal Contributions to them, that they could have possibly done in the case
of their own Countrymen or Kindred; and that one of those Divines in one of the
greatest Cures there being for his Learning and Life and Endowments proper to
his Function a great Ornament to the Gospel, when he with great Eloquence so
pathetically bespoke the Relief of his Great Auditory for those poor Hugonots,
did characterize them as such of whom none was ever suspected to have
machinated any thing against their King's Person or Government, or to have
attempted the burning of his Metropolis.

I have granted that the Puritan and the Popish Petitioners did both in the
beginning of King James his Reign offend Contra bonos mores: but if any should
ask me which Sect was the more peccant by such incivility, I will say that in
one regard the Puritans were so, for that they were bred to the Knowledge of
better things: but that in another regard the Papists most certainly were so,
if Thuanus may be believed, who in the place I last cited out of him, relating
to the Gunpowder Plot, (by which it appears that their Petitioning was but a
stalking-horse, or as I may say, a Trojan Horse to hide and enclose armed Men)
further shows, That the Jesuits in England employed one privately into Spain
in the Name of the Catholics with Letters of Commendation to Creswell the
Jesuit there residing, to negotiate with the Government there, to send an Army
into England in the latter end of Queen Elizabeth' s Reign, and that afterward
one Wright was sent into Spain upon the same Errand, and that then likewise Guy
Faux was by some of the Jesuits sent thither to Creswel to hasten the Design,
and that Faux was instructed to take Care that it should be signified to the
King of Spain, that the Condition of the Roman Catholics would be worse here
under King James than it was under Queen Elizabeth, and that it might be
effected that Spinola should then Land an Army in Milford Haven. And then says
the great Historian, they not being able to effect that, proceeded to the Plot
of the Gunpowder Treason.

The Popish Petitioners then did essay how they might flectere superos and
Acheronta movere at the same time.

But in truth, as in Whale-fishing, it is customary for Mariners apprehending
Danger to the Vessel from the greatness of the Whale, to throw out an empty
Barrel into the Sea, for the Whale to toss about on the Waters, and to receive
some diversion from it, that while he is so diverted, they may the more
securely wound him with their dead-doing Irons, thus did the Papists throw out
their empty Petitions to that King only to divert and amuse him, that they
might surprise him with the ^ate they intended him.

Yet now if any one should put the Interrogatory to me, which Person I had the
least Kindness for, namely, a Nonconformist that favored the Doctrine of
Resistance, or a Papist that believed the Grounds and School-Conclusions of the
Doctrine of Popery, as King James's before mentioned Expression was (and which
whoever did, he said, could neither be a good Christian or a faithful Subject)
I shall by way of Answer crave aid from a Judgment given by Philip of Macedon,
who having heard the Merits of a Cause or Complaint that happened between two
lewd Persons, gave the Decree, That one of them should presently fly out of
Macedon, and that the other should run after him as fast as he could.

But against any Seditious Protestant, I would wish more severity exercised
than against such a Papist: for the former does not only rebel against his
Prince as the latter; but does according to Job's Expression, more rebel
against the light: and is guilty of the Simulata Sanctitas, and so according to
the Expression before mentioned out of the Apocalypse, Reward her as she has
rewarded you, and double unto her double, etc. deserves to be doubly punished
for his duplex iniquitas, and shall magnify the Justice of the King's
Ministers done to their Prince and Country, and to themselves, when in any
Conjuncture they shall find any called Protestants turning Gods and the King's
grace into wantonness, and Religion, into Rebellion, they shall level their
most solicitous endeavors with all the sharpness of the Law against such
nominal Protestants; for then the salus populi will engage them as the
Physicians say, to mind the Vrgentius Symptoma, and for which they have a Rule,
that Cum diversae repugnantesque inter se committuntur indicationes, parendum
est omnino fortioribus.

It Is fit I should recompense the trouble I have given your Lordship by what I
have said of this Question by diverting you with the News of another Question,
that among some Company was lately bandy'd in Discourse here, between a Papist
and a Nonconformist (and 'twas a much more termagant Question than the former)
namely, Whether Popery or Mahumetanism be the wo^st? I was sorry to find the
Nonconformist to give his Judgment as he did in a gross and undistinguishing
manner, that the Impostures of Mahomet were fitter to be embraced than several
Tenets he named in Popery, which tho erroneous, yet are denominable as Tenets
of Religion; but did for a while forbear giving my Opinion in the Case or
relieving the Papist with any notion of mine, tho I found the Nonconformist as
somewhat the better Disputant pressing too hard on him, gave me occasion to
have done it, than if I would.

I calling to mind how the Papists of old have so often decided it, that
Heretics are wo^se than Turks or Infidels, and that they have ranked our
Religion of the Church of England with Atheism, since I allow not of works of
super-erogation, would not super-erogate in being too hasty in moderating in
the Dispute.

Thus Maldona^e on St. John, says, Qui Catholici sunt Majore odio Calvinistas
caeterosque omnes Haereticos prosequuntur quam Gentiles. And thus Stapleton in
his Oration or Speech against the Politicians, says, That the Heretics are
worse than Turks. And Mason in his Vindiciae Ecclesiae Anglicanae, Lib. 1. Cap.
1. p. 8. cites Gulielm. Reinold. in his Calv. Turcis. l. 1. c. 7. and l. 4. c.
11. for saying Religionem nostram ( meaning that of the Church of England) ipsa
Turcica esse deteriorem. Mason further brings in Bristo, saying Religionem
nostram nullam esse ipsa Experientia prob^ri: And cites another Popish Author
for saying Protestants nullam habent fidem, nullam Spem, nullam Charitatem,
nullam Poenitentiam, nullam Iustificationem, nullam Ecclesiam, nullum Altar,
nullum Sacrificium, nullum Sacerdotium, nullam Religionem, Christum nullum, and
quotes Cardinal Alan for saying, Nostram liturgiam, sacramenta and Conciones
istiusmodi esse, quae fine dulio aeternum afferunt exitium.

The well meant pains of the Compilers of our Liturgy in inserting there some
good Prayers out of the Mass, to render it more agreeable to the Papists, was
it seems all lost; and that perhaps occasioned that angry Exclamation of Mr.
Cartwright of old, That in Ceremonies we ought to comply with the Turk rather
then the Pope.

I acquainted the Discoursers that Mr. Fox in the Edition of the Acts and
Monuments printed together in one Volume in London, in the Year 1596, does
Combat this mighty Question in p. 702, and in the following Pages, viz. Whether
the Turk or the Pope is the greater Antichrist, and at last says p. 710. In
comparing the Turk with the Pope if a Question be asked whether of them is the
truer or greater Antichrist, it were easy to see and judge that the Turk is
the more open and manifest Enemy against Christ and the Church. But if it be
asked whether of them two has been the more bloody and pernicious Adversary to
Christ and his Members, or whether of them has Consumed and Spilt more
Christian Blood, he with Sword or this with Fire and Sword together, neitheer
is it a light matter to discern, neither is it my part here to discuss, who do
only write the History and Acts of them both.

And I then telling the Nonconformist that the Jews for many obvious reasons
did prefer the Doctrine of Mahumetanisme to that of Popery, some Papists
beforementioned had preferred it to Protestancy, and as he the Nonconformist had
preferred it to Popery, he mentioned his fears that a sort of Enthusiasts among
us called Seekers, might hereby be in great danger of stumbling on the Religion
of Mahumetanisme, accordingly as of old when one went to demand of the
Philosophers of the several Sects, which was the best of them, every one named
his own Sect or Party in the first place, but all of them in the second place
granted Plato to be the most eminent, that is the next best: whereupon those
Seekers preferred Plato, because setting aside prejudicate Affection and
Self-Love, Plato's Philosophy had thus carried the Garland.

I then took occasion to tell the Company that I thought 'twas extremely unjust
to prefer Mahumetanisme with the many ridiculous and senseless things it
comprehends to Christianity in Papists, blended with many erroneous Tenets
which yet are capable of the name of Religion, and such as those great pious
Papists beforementioned, viz. Father Paul, Thuanus, D'Ossat, Erasmus, Peiresk
perhaps owned the belief of, as many thousands of others may still likewise do:
but frankly interposed my opinion that I thought that Popery complicated with
the real belief of the Jesuits Morals, and their vile Casuistical Tenets
branded by the present Pope, was as unworthy of God and Humane Nature as any
Hypothesis of Religion could be: and I as frankly told the Nonconformist whom I
looked on as one who would not outrage the Law of the Land to advance the
Gospel, that tho some erroneous points relating to Nonconformity, might without
absurdity assume the name of Religion, yet among whomsoever those Tenets should
be incorporated with the real belief and practice of the lawfulness of the
Doctrine of Resistance, and of any persons Reforming the World by Arms without
Warrant from the Municipal Laws so to do, yet such a Faith would be Faction,
and such a Nominal Religion would be a real Rebellion, and much worse then
Mahumetanisme.

I farther acquainted the Company that according to the discreet Motto of the
House of Ormond, Comm^ je trouve, and the Mode of the Age to take the measures
of knowledge by experiment, the usage that the better sort of Christians have
found under Turcisme has been by very many degrees milder then under Popery.
Erasmus indeed was of a contrary opinion, for in his Vtilissima Consultatio de
^ello Turcis inferendo, printed in the Year 1530, he says that Exaudiuntur
interim and (...) voces abominandae qui jactant esse tolerabilius agere sub
imperio Turc^^or^^^, quam sub Christianis Principibus ac sub Pontifice Romano,
and there he goes on at large to prove the inconvenience of living under the
Turkish Government: but the order of the Jesuits was not then invented, and
after a hundred years observation since, Protestants have judged as they did in
Erasmus his time.

And in a Popish Book called the Right of the Prelate and the Prince, I find
Luther, de soecul. potestat. cited p. 55. for saying that the Turk is decies
probior, prudentiorque nostris principibus. And I think it may seem greater
wisdom in him to sell such Heterodox People for slaves that he takes by force,
than to burn them.

But in the Year before that Book of Erasmus was printed, I find in Magerus his
Advocatia Armata, Laurent. Surius in Comment. rer. in orb gestar. ad annum
1529, cited for the Hungarians throwing themselves on the protection of the
Turk, rather then they would be deprived of their Right to choose their King:
and it seems under Popery in that Kingdom they had a greater kindness for the
Turk then the Emperor of Germany.

And the great Observer Thuanus on the Year 1597 in his 3 d Tome, discoursing
how the Germans being under apprehensions of the Power of the Turk and of Spain
at the same time, were thoughtfully weighing their danger, Et Comparatione
Alchorani cum inqui^itione Hispaniensi facta, an potius cum Orientali quam
occidentali Turco sibi rem esse velint, thereupon says, and si quidem res
merito suo, ac semoto omni affectu privato aestimetur, haud dubium esse quin,
optione dat^, orientalem eligant, quippe ut viribus praepollentem, sic victis
tolerabiliorem faturum, etc.

Dr. Heylin likewise seems to favor that opinion for in his Geoghraphy in
Folio, he says, The Turks compel no man to abjure the faith in which he was
born. I have heard many say that it is better for a man that would enjoy Liberty
of Conscience, to live in the Countries professing Mahumetanism than Papistry.

And I think I have read it in the Author of the Zealanders Choice, that if he
were to lay the Scene of his life any where with respect chiefly to the freedom
of owning any Religious Sentiments, it should be either in Amsterdam or
Constantinople.

As I was reading the other day in an old Canonists Tractate of Heresy, I found
this Position asserted there, that it is unlawful for a Master of Requests to
deliver a Petition for Mercy to be shown to a Heretic; but then I occasionally
thought of a more manly and god-like temper shining in part of the Alcoran, as
Mr. Gregory relates it in his Opusc. where he says, The Mahumetans have
another Lords Prayer called by them, the Prayer of Jesus the Son of Mary, and
that ends thus, And let not such an one bear rule over me that will have no
mercy on me, for thy mercies sake, O thou most merciful.

He who separates Mercy from Justice, is unjust to the very name of Justice,
and robs it of the better half of its signification, leaving its Teeth and
Claws, and taking away its Heart and Bowels.

Iarchas the Indian and chief of the Brachmans, in Philostratus, is brought in
finding fault with Apollonius Tyaneus and others of the Greeks, for that they
confined and applied the word (...) to those only who do no wrong to one
another and telling them that they were in an error: for says he among the
chiefest Offices of Justice, (...) and (...) Bounty and Goodness, together with
(...), ought to be reckoned up. And (...) and (...), just and kind men are
convertible terms in Aristophanes, and joined both together i^ Pl^^arch: and
Aristotle says, (...) Moderation or Clemency is (...), a piece of Justice
better then all Justice. And if a man would not wish his Soul, yet he would his
Body among Heathens of that temper, or Mahumetans, rather then such fiery
Canonists.

There was one thing that I told the Gentleman, who was the Papist, in the
Close of this Discourse that much surprised him, namely; that those two
Antichrists, the Turk and the Pope have sometimes held a good Correspondence
together, and that the Pope has been a Pensioner to the Turk.

King James in his Apology for the Oath of Allegiance does in p. 74 mention how
Alexander the 6 th, took of Bajazet two hundred thousand Crowns to kill his
Brother Gemen, or as some call him Sisimus whom he held Captive at Rome, and
how he accepted of his Conditions to poison the Man and had his pay.

King James voucheth for the History of this Fact Paul. Iovius, and
Guicciardine, and Cuspinian. It was a vile Ministry to the Turk that that
pretended Vicar of Christ then engaged in. King James mentions not there how
that Popes predecessor, Innocent the 8 th, was likewise Bajazets Pensioner in
the same detestable Affair: for 'twas in his time that Sisimus having rebelled
against his Brother and retired to Rhodes, was brought to that Pope to whom
Bajazet sent the Title of our blessed Saviors Cross in Hebrew, Greek and
Latin, as a present, and effectually obliged him to detain his Brother in
Custody during his Pontificat: and that Pope had a yearly Pension of 40,000
Ducats from the Turk for the continuing his Brother a Prisoner; and it seems
that Charles the 8 th King of France, making War against Pope Alexander who was
not able to resist him, the Pope was constrained to conclude a Peace, and one
Condition was that he should set the Turks Brother at liberty. But then his
Holiness being thereby to lose the said yearly Pension of 40,000 Ducats,
received from the Turk the gracious offer of 20,0000 Crowns to cause Geme or
Zizimus to be poisoned, and so he was. These faults are particularly set down
in Cyprian Valera of the lives of the Popes, writ in Spanish, and translated
into English by John Golbourne, and printed at London, Anno 1600, Page 130,
131, 136. and many other Popish Writers accord herewith, and particularly
Sabellicus, Tome 2d, of his Works, Ennead. 10. Book 9, says that Bajazet
promised that Pope, Magnam auri vim si fratrem veneno tolleret, and that
fuerunt qui crederent cum veneno sublatum, fuisseque Alexandrum pontificem ejus
consilii non ignarum, p. 781. ib. King James in p. 74. of that* Apology
mentions another of Christ's Vicars, namely, Alexander the 3 d, that writ to the
Sultan, that if he would live quietly he should by some slight, murder the
Emperor, and to that end sent him the Emperors Picture.

That Emperor, King James, says was Frederick Barbarossa: and it seems to have
been extraordinary ill nature, in that Pope Alexander after he had not without
ridiculing that piece of Scripture, Conculcabis leonem and draconem, trampled
on that Emperors neck, to write to the Pope to cut his Throat.

And that the Greek Church refusing to submit to the Pope was betrayed by him,
to the Turk is a thing enough known, as it likewise is that the Pope has often
effected it, that Arms raised in Christendom against the Turk, should be
employed against Heretics. I believe there is none thinks that the Pope by all
the Treasures that the Souls or Sins of any Christians yield him, could have
hired the Turk, so far to have degenerated from Natural Conscience as to
practice any base Art of killing the body of any of his Vassals, contrary to
the Law of his Prophet or of the Empire: and I acount nothing more ridiculous
than to believe that the Grand Seignior does employ for his Spies in the
Europaean World, a wretched sort of Mankind that appear within the Class of
Monsters, and are called by the Italian and German Writers of Politics Cingari
and by the Spanish Hittani, and the French Egyptii, and by our People Gypsies,
and who are foolishly imagined by any to have come from Egypt, and more
foolishly by Reinkingk de Regim. Saecul. and Eccles. lib. 2. class. 1. cap. 7.
n. 10. and the generality of the Grave Political Authors to be exploratores and
proditores qui Germanorum consilia and negotia Turcis produnt, and he says
further, nulla in imperio securitate gaudent, sed impune a quovis offendi
possunt.

Magerus de Advocatia armata, p. 299. says of them, Nihil aliud sunt quam
manipulus furum and colluvies pessima otiosorum and fraudulentorum hominum ex
variis nationibus non ita remotis, sed vicinis collecta, qui extra civitates in
agris, in triviis tentoria erigentes, proditionibus, latrociniis and furtis,
deception^bus and permutationibus, atque ex chiromantica oblectantes homines,
iis fraudibus victum mendicant: but renders them no Commissaries or Spies for
the Grand Seignior, or Correspondents with his Vizier, and says, that
Nonnullorum magistratuum animos vana superstitio velut lethargia adeo
invaserit, ut hoc hominum genus violare nefas putent, eosque grassari and
furari and subditis imponere passim impune sinunt. And if not only Magistrates
but private persons too spare them (for according to Reinkingk every man is a
Magistrate against them) it is an Indicium that they are but inconsiderable
Extravagants in the World: and it is therefore I think pity that our Learned
Countryman Brown in his vulgar errors, where he shows the error of their being
thought to come from Egypt, does yet represent them as Spies employed by the
Grand Seignior.

I shall here observe to your Lordship one thing that occurred to me not
without sharp regret, and that is, that I read lately in the Works of
Crackanthorp, one of the most learned men in Oxford in his time, and a most
faithful Citer of Authors, the famous Hosius of the Church of Rome cited for a
more intolerable Blasphemy against the holy Jesus, then any I remember in the
Alcoran.

Crackanthorp arming his Logic against the errors of Popery does in his
Chapter, De loco arguendi ab authoritate, say, that, ipsi primarii sacerdotes
quos maxim ab errore immunes fecit Mosis Cathedra and promissio illa Dei (
Math. 26. 65.) Ipsi indicabunt tibi judicii veritatem, illi inquam Christum
blasphemasse, and reum mortis esse judicarunt. Pudeat vos Hosii vestri, cujus
haec sunt verba ( Hos. lib. 2. Con. Brent. fol. 54.) Veritas indicii hic
judicata, vera sententia hic pronuntiata fuit. Quaenam illa? Reus est mortis.
Hanc sententiam a spiritu sancto profectam esse non est dubium. O hominem
sacrilegum and blasphemum! Ille ne Reus mortis, qui innocens and innoxius vitam
dedit?

But as inhumane as any Principles of Papists or Mahumetans, or any
Enthusiasts, or as desperate as the very Jesuits beforementioned ones are
supposeable to be, and as much as any of Mankind can strive to delude others by
Implicit Faith, yet as it is in no man's power presently to believe what even
his own, and much less what his Guides appetite would have him, notwithstanding
any Ecclesiastical Association he may have prosessedly linked his Faith in; so
no man can ensure the continuance of his Belief* or its holding for a Moment:
and therefore the more absurd and inhumane any men's Tenets are, I shall expect
them to be the less believed, and for the less time, and it is more then Holy
Church can know that any one at all believes as it believes, how great soever
the number that pretends so to do, appears.

Of all Papists not professing themselves bound to withdraw their Allegiance
from Heretical Princes, and even from such as by a particular Bull were
Excommunicated by the Pope, History affords many Examples, and particularly of
the many Loyal Papists, who when the inheritable Right of the Crown of France
was devolved on the King of Navarre, a Protestant, and as such Excommunicated,
with their Lives and Fortunes asserted his Title to the Crown. Any of the
Readers of Thuanus know that in Book 93 it is related, how when many Papists
would have debarred him from the Succession, and that the minds of those qui in
Castris erant, were in that point variously affected, yet Major and sanior pars
sic existimabat nullam publicae salutis spem superesse, nisi servato legitimae
successionis ordine, and so were for Harry the 4 ths Right therein, and whom
they believed was late reconciled to the King his Predecessor for that he did
per eum res administrare as the Historian's words are, i. e. Harry the 4 th a
Protestant Successor, was Primier Ministre to Harry the 3 d a Papist.

And not only the Major part and the sober Party of the Popish Soldiery, ( i.
e. in Thuanus his words sanior pars) was loyally addicted to the Right of the
Protestant Successor, but several of the Grandees of the Popish Clergy were so,
and particularly the Archbishop, whose Speech for that purpose Thuanus Book
106. sets down, wherein it is said, Neque vero aut Regis personam, aut
subditorum robur debilitatemque heic considerandum esse, quando Reges lege ad
regnum vocantur. Neque exemplis doceri posse quicquid contrajactetur, in prisca
lege populum Israeliticum ob Religionem regibus suis defecisse, etc. sed totum
id Deo dijudicandum reliquisse, in cujus manibus regum corda sunt, quae and
ille pro arbitrio quo vult, inclinat. Quid in Christiana Ecclesia? Nonne
Christum generis humani redemptorem ejusque beatissimam matrem nomina sua apud
censum, Augusto imperante, Gentilium sacris addicto professos esse? Nonne
Caesari suo and Petri nomine tributum pependisse? Quod vero de legibus
civilibus and imperialibus constitut* affertur quibus Manichaei and Arriani a
dignitatum, magistratuum ac publicorum munerum participatione excluduntur, id
intelligi de magistratibus inferioribus, non de principalibus, qui nisi cum
excidio populorum and Reip. eversione jure suo privari non possunt, de quibus
decernere ad solius Dei Omnipotentis Iurisdictionem pertinet. The whole Speech
is argumentative to that purpose out of the old and new Testament and Fathers,
etc. and that Noble Loyalty of those Papists to a Protestant Successor met with
a requital as to their Religion, and thereby I may say in the Scripture
expression that they did at once heap both a Crown and Coals of Fire upon his
head.

Any one may be rather apt to think me less sanguine (as I may say) in my
belief of Shame's operating more and more among both Lay and Clerical Roman
Catholics, and even among our Jesuited Protestants (I mean many of our
Non-Conformists that have had sanguinary and disloyal Principles transfused
into them by Jesuits,) to the making them out of love with such Principles,
when he shall consider how the ingenious Maimbourg does in the 6 th Book of his
History of Calvinisme reflect on the great Calvin for his opinion and practice
relating to the punishment of Heretics with death, and instanceth in the Case
of Servetus who was burned by the Magistrates of Geneva as an Heretic, on
Calvin's instigating them so to deal with him, as Maimbourg tells us, and
concludes his Historical Account of the Parisian Massacre, with the mention of
the said opinion and practice of Calvin, and does with great Judgment and
Candor thus observe, viz. On a veu neanmoins de tout temps que le moyen le
plus efficace quand l' heresy est deja puissamment etablie, n' estoient point
les supplices, beaucoup moins la violence and le trop de Rigueur. Bien loin que
le massacre qu' on fit a Paris and entant d' autres villes ait aneanti, ou du
moins affoibli le Calvinisme, qu' au Contraire il en devint plus enracine, plus
puissant and plus formidable, qu' auparavant. Les Huguenots ne voulurent plus
se fire aux declarations que l' on fit p^ur les rasleurer, etc.

Alsted in his Chronology of Heresy tells us that Michael Servetus Hispanus
docuit nullam esse in Deo realem generationem aut distinctionem: and Calvin in
his Opuscula says of Servetus, vel sola modestia potuisset vitam redimere: but
I believe the World will grow more modest then to burn men for immodesty: and
it is most certain that as the World grows the nearer to its Period and growing
more and more populous, that populousness will naturally tend to unite all
Countries at home by preparing them to resist Invasion from abroad, and make
the fantastical squandring away the Members of the Commonwealth more and more
ridiculous and insensibly to grow out of fashion.

Thus 'twas with the increase of the People among the Jews and Turks, that the
Sicacious Zealots among the former, and Dervices among the latter did gradually
decrease, and at last insensibly grew obsolete.

And thus of old did Draco's Laws evaporate, Aulus Gellius tells us in his
Noctes Atticae, that Draco Atheniensis vir bonus multaque esse prudentia
existimatus est: jurisque divini and humani peritus fuit. Is Draco leges quibus
Athenienses uterentur primus omnium tulit. In illis legibus furem cujuscunque
modi furti supplicio capitis puniendum esse, and alia pleraque nimis severe
censuit, sanxitque. Ejus igitur leges quoniam videbantur impendio acerbiores,
non decreto jussoque sed tacito illeteratoque Atheniensium consensu obliteratae
sunt. And this I believe would have been the fate of the sicarious Morality of
the Jesuits although this present Pope had not exposed their Principles as he
has done, and their Consecrastis manus Iehovae be absolete, how much soever
many of them think to out-brave the Popes Decree, who I wonder that they are
not so hardy to write to the Pope to revoke it, in the comtemptuous Style of
Merbizan the Turk, that when Pius the 2 d published a Bull wherein he granted
Indulgences to all them that would bear Arms against him, writ a Letter to his
Holiness willing and requiring him to call in his Epigramms again, (as Dr.
Done relates it, citing the Historiae and alia impressa ante Alcoran. f. 99.)
and in the Style of Casaubon calling Paul the 5 ths Excommunication against the
Venetians, dirum carmen, a cruel Lampoon.

Dr. Peter du Moulin in a Discourse of his, printed in the Year 1675. says,
that the Jesuits were then i. e. in the time of the late Usurpation, and are
now the principal directors of the Consciences of the English Papists. And
there was published in the Year 1662, a Pamphlet writ by a Person of no vulgar
understanding, and who I suppose was a Papist, and the Title of it was an
expedient or a sure and easy way of reducing all Dissenters etc. wherein the
Author says, of the Papists (meaning in England and Wales) there are 7 Parts
of 10, Gentlemen and People of great Quality: and therefore since the Jesuits
have formerly made the Pope infallible in his judgment of matter of Fact, and
that the Pope has thus de facto thrown that turpitude of their Principles
(that one may call lutum sanguine maceratum) from his Court and even from that
of the Roman Inquisition, and the Sordes whereof Gentlemen could never receive
into the Cabinets of their mind without fear and shame, they must now either be
ashamed of their Jesuitical Guides, or of their Pope, and the more ingenious
and modest sort of Jesuits will by natural instinct be more and more ashamed
of such Principles, and be sometimes pale with fear, and sometimes red with the
Die of Blushes, as they observe the World picqued with their Dishonor
pronounce against them as the Pope their infallible Censor has done, and the
Jesuits see that the Principles are too hot for them to touch where there is
an Inquisition and too foul where there is none.

According to that great Moral Observation of Tertullian's, Omne malum aut
timore aut pudore natura perfudit, all the fair-killing Principles of the
Jesuits and particularly those referred to in the 13 th, 14 th, 15 th, 30 th,
32 d Tenets in the Pope's Decree, must really appear foul, and as too foul play
to be used in our populous English World.

Time was in the old Monastic days when the Popish Clerical Actors were so
numerous on the Stage of the World and so rich, and the Spectators so few and
so poor, that it was dangerous for these to his at them or not to applaud them,
but it is now otherwise, and the Scene of Time is altered.

The Tables are turned since the Author of a Popish Book called, The Right and
Jurisdiction of the Prelate and the Prince, imprinted with license of
Superiors, Anno Dom. 1617 was so hardy as in Chap. 15 th, p. 269. having spoke
of the Oath of Allegiance, to say, The King after this Oath is no more secure
than before, because the Catholics who take this Oath against their
Conscience, know that they are not bound to keep their Oath. Yea the Prince
thereby brings himself into greater danger, for by so unwonted and odious an
Oath so contrary to his Subjects Consciences, he cannot but make himself
odious, and there having insinuated the great numbers of the Papists, to apply
then very gravely to his Prince that saying of Cicero in his Offices, Multorum
odiis nullae opes, nullae vires resistere queunt: and that Author further tells
us out of Tully, quem metuunt oderunt. Men hate whom they fear: and then does
like a grave Animal thus proceed very honestly telling us, And what security
has a Prince among them that hate him? when Subjects hate their Prince, they
are discontented; when they are discontented they are desperate; when they are
desperate, they care not for their own lives; when they care not for their own
lives, let then the Prince fear his; for as Seneca says, Qui suam vitam
contemnit, tuae dominus erit. He that contemns his own life will be Master of
thine. And from this Source proceeded the late Gunpowder Plot.

But I believe not only fear but shame would divert Papists from writing at
this rate at this time of day: and I look on it as either a Sham or infatuation
in a Protestant writer, who in a Pamphlet whose haughty Title was the Humble
Remonstrance and Petition of English Protestants against English and Irish
Papists, to the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament,
and which was published not long after the discovery of the Popish Plot, when
in p. 2. the Author says of the Papists and the Plot, Nor will the more
impudent of them deny the thing in general, but much the contrary insulting to
us with Tertullian 's implevimus omnia against the old Pagans. We fill your
Courts, your Armies, your Navies: it must take, you cannot avoid it, it is a
just cause to extirpate Heresy root and branch.

I believe there were no Papists so void of shame and sense as to speak then
what this Author mentions.

The Bishop of Winchester in his Letter to the Duchess, January the 24 th,
1670. and since printed, speaking of those, who were averse from Popery or
afraid of it, says that, their number did take in 99 parts of 100 in the whole
Nation. His Lordship was a very modest Calculator in making the number of those
who then de facto feared Popery to be no larger: and consequently according to
the Rule of quem metuunt ^derunt, referred to by the Author of the Prelate and
the Prince, the great number of those here who hated Popery was very visible,
and made the implevimus omnia to be a very empty and ridiculous suggestion. But
were the number of Papists much greater then any timid Protestants seem to make
it, the great real increase of Mankind, and men's being thereby preserved, must
render the turpitude of the former Principles of Cruelty to be very shameful.

In the Style of the Heathen Morality 'twas usual to call any thing turpe that
was not honestum, or honorable, or contrary to the generous nature of man, and
therefore to brand with the name of turpitude many lawful Actions, for Non omne
quod licet honestum: and thus what is unworthy of a Man or a Christian to do is
often so called in the New Testament, and it is an error in any men's judgments
or fancies to appropriate so much the meaning of that word to fleshly Lusts.
The Devil is called an unclean Spirit in the New Testament though not
supposeable to use bodily Lusts or to confine his temptations to them. The
filthiness of sin is mentioned by St. Paul to Timothy, and St. James 1. 21.
commands the laying aside all filthiness, etc.

A Sentence obtained from a Judge that was given by Bribery is said to be lata
per sordes, and for the turpitude of such a judgment a Judge was long since
brought to a shameful end in this Realm, and in his Enditement for Bribery
'twas said that he did violare sacramentum Domini Regis, and the reason thereof
was, that the Oath of our Kings relating to the doing of Justice to their
People, such corrupt Judges did by their injustice do violence to that Oath of
our Monarchs* and in like manner all Kings generally being by their Coronation
Oaths bound to protect and defend their People, I ask what King on earth can do
it, if either an outrageous Pope or the General of the Jesuits shall secretly
cause men to be killed by their Emissaries, and what Subject can any were enjoy
the benefit of the Tacit Paction between him and the Law to the effect of fac
hoc and vives, if he must hold his life by the Tenure of a Jesuits Caprice?

This Orders sicarious Principles must therefore be naturally as fatal to it as
those of their Calumny beforementioned, and indeed this their affected
Arbitrary Power over Heretics lives is liable to the Battery of fear and shame
from the other Papists; for if such believing the Justice of the Pope's Decree,
shall speak ill of the Jesuits Contumacy, and on that account render that
Society disobedient to Holy Church and scandalous to the same, will not Tenet
the 30 th condemned by the Pope, viz. It is lawful for a Person of Honor to
kill a man that intends to calumniate him if there is no other way to avoid
that Reproach, render the lives of such Papists forfeitable to the Jesuits
Assassins: and again will it not render the Jesuits lives forfeitable by their
own Principles to such Papists, and thus our Popish Layety and the Jesuits be
in a State of War, instead of such Layety being amicable Disciples and
bountiful Patrons to them?

Neither the Law of God or the Land do trust the punishment of Malefactors to
private persons: but as Tolosanus de Repub. tells us, l. 13. c. 132. Processum
fuit judicialiter and sententia excommunicationis contra vermes radices segetum
edentes in diocesi Curiensi and constantiensi, (and he there sets down such a
Sentence of Excommunication pronounced against those animalcula) so much more
ought such Locusts tho now as to the Pope they have no King, (I allude to
Solomon's words, The Locusts have no Kings, yet go they forth in Bands) and tho
their Principles would eradicate the Lives of our Hereditary Kings and their
Subjects to have the legal benefit of Judicial Proceedings; but the turpitude
of such Principles and Practices as pollutes the Land with Blood, and may bring
a Curse upon it, is likely to bring them many an extrajudicial Curse from the
Popish and Protestant Populace; and if as Tully tells us in his Offices, that
there was a Law at Athens, that ordered public Execrations against all that
did, viam erranti non monstrare, such Confessors as by insinuations put people
out of the right way by vile irreligionary casuistical Principles so fatal to
Souls and Bodies, must naturally be anathematized by them.

Thus likewise by shame and fear in our populous English World must all Bloody
and Rebellious Principles owned by any Persons that assume the the name of
Protestants be naturally hated: and if any are not ashamed or afraid togive
just occasion of Jealousy concerning such Hostile Principles, being secretly
harbored in their minds, others will be ashamed and afraid to keep them
Company, and as if there were some speedy Judgment impending on those who
conversed with them, according to that Proverb of the Jews, Migrandum est ex eo
loco in quo Rex non timetur.

The last prefatory Paragraph before the Bishops Survey is, that the Heads and
Preachers of the several Factions are such as had a great share in the late
Rebellion.

Such men tho like the Trumpeter in Alciat, they made part of the fighters, and
had been fairly dealt with by the Amnesty if they had not been permitted any
more in their profession to have lifted up their voices like Trumpets again, or
trusted to make any harangues to the People in public, yet at the time of that
Survey were very few, and are now generally as silent in the Region of the Dead
as Meroz was when they cursed him; and themselves are according to my
Calculating Observation turned to Earth, whose Voices like Air in the wrong
place made such Earthquakes in Church and State: and both fear and shame might
teach them how in bello non bis peccare, if their being Experts of the
inconveniences of War had not naturally excited in many an aversion to it; but
with the surviving Experts there does undoubtedly a reminiscentia (which Mr.
Hobbs calls a re-conning) survive, how that the long Parliament had not
formerly more fears and jealousies of Popery then of Presbytery, and of some of
the Divines of that persuasion designing to trouble every Parish with a New
Court-Christian, after the tremendous example in History of the Inquisition for
Heretical Pravity being first committed to the Orders of the Dominican and
Franciscan Friars, and without any Tribunal, and which by their zeal in
preaching they afterward obtained with a vengeance, and to the Scandal of
Humane Nature; and how that that Parliament as Fuller observes in his
Church History, would not trust the Presbyters to carry the Keys of
Excommunication at their Girdle, so that the Power thereof was not entrusted to
them, but ultimately resolved into a Committee of eminent Persons of
Parliament, in which Thomas Earl of Arundel was first named; and moreover how
that England was then turned into such a common shore of Heretical Opinions
that one of the most Learned of the Presbyterian Divines, Mr. James Cranford in
a Sermon of his called Haereseo-machria preached before the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen at S. Paul's on February the 1 st, 1645. and printed in the following
Year, says there in p. 47. In eighty years there did not arise among us so
many horrid opinions and blasphemous Heresies under Episcopacy (a Government
decryed as Antichristian) as have risen in these few years since we have been
without a Government.

He had before in p. 5. said, it is lamentable what success errors have had
among our selves in these last 3 or 4 years of Ecclesiastical Anarchy and
Con^^sion, whether we respect the numbers of Errors of the erroneous.
Amsterdam, Poland, Transylvania, Places most infamous for Heresies, are now
righteous if compared with England, London, which in so short a space have
broached or entertained above 160 Errors, many of them damnable.

And therefore I do not wonder that in a Pamphlet called, The exact Collection
of the Debates in the House of Commons in the last Parliament, one Member is
there brought in, observing in his Speech concerning the Dissenters, that it is
not probable that ever they will have a King of their opinion, nor yet a
Parliament by the best discoveries they had made of their strength at the last
Election. For according to the best Calculations that I can make, they could
not bring in above 1. in 20.

The present Gentlemanly Temper appearing in the People of England, as to the
not having Aversion or Resentments of Anger against any Men's persons or their
Converse by reason of their asserting controvertible points that are capable of
the name of Religion, must naturally make any ashamed to vex their patience and
disturb their security by asserting Principles that really are Irreligion.

If any one did rake in the dust of Libraries for Names of absolete Heresies to
render the Papists or any else the fouler thereby, he would in effect but
needlessly foul his own fingers; as for example, if any one should say the
Papists have borrowed their Practice of extreme Unction from the Valentinians
and Heracleonites, their Notion of the Orders and Quires of Angels from the
Archonticks, the use and worshipping of Images from the Carpocratians, the
praying to the Virgin-Mary from the Colliridians, the Veneration of the Cross
from the Armenians, the Baptism by Women from Marcion, the Baptizing in an
unknown Tongue from the Marcosians, and the voluntary Poverty and single Life
of Priests from the Apostolici, the using of small Bells in Celebrating the
Mysteries of Religion from the Meletians. Nor would any be much concerned
whether any old or new unheard of Heretics communicated the Disease of these
Notions to the weak minds of the erring, since it does not infect Humane
Society.

And there are several Traditions mentioned in some of the Ancient Fathers as
Apostolical, which tho the Papists do not observe, yet the World would not make
any angry Exclamations against them if it heard they did, as namely, the
mixture of Milk and Honey given to them that are newly Baptized, the abstaining
from washing a whole Week after, Oblations for the Birthday yearly, not to fast
or kneel in Prayer or worshipping of God on the the Lords Day, nor between
Easter and Whitsuntide, all which are mentioned in Tertullian. Nor would any be
now angry with another that held either part of the Question, viz. If the
Hallelujah may be sung in Lent?

The great Controversy about Easter that heretofore put all the World in a
Rattle, and almost shook it to pieces, what a Toy is it self now reputed,
insomuch that our latest Ascertainers here of the time of its Celebration
seemed not to think it tanti to be awake when they were about it; and tho our
lately having in our Almanacks two Easters in one year easily awakened the
Non-Conformists, to take notice of it and to say, that therefore they could not
give their unfeigned assent and consent to all and every thing contained and
prescribed in and by the Book entitled the Book of Common Prayer, etc. And tho
thereupon a person of the Royal Society very profoundly knowing in all the
Mathematical Sciences, and likewise in the knowledge of Theology and of the
Canon Law, and the Ecclesiastical Law of England, has published an infallible
way of fixing Easter for ever (and that it may be no longer a Fugitive from the
Rule of its Practice as it often is at present (nor dance away from it self, as
I may say, in allusion to the vulgar error of the Suns dancing on Easter day)
and fixing it so as perhaps none else could have done, nor possibly himself any
other way; yet has this great right done to that great day been by the
generality of people, not so much regarded as would an Advice to a Painter, or
such like Composure have been.

Any one that would design to make another fermentation in the World by the
terms of Homo-ousios and Homoi-ousios would no more effect it, than by the
Critics Controversy in Boccaline, whether Consumptum should be spelled with a
p or no: to which purpose I heard one cite it out of Luther, that he said anima
mea odit terminum istum Homo-ousion, tho yet he knew Homo-ousios was the right
opinion and Homoi-ousios the wrong.

And that one word Heresy that has produced such furious Tempests in the World
that have torn up States and Kingdoms by the Roots, how is it now generally
among men of ingenuity and wit here reduced to its quiet and primitive
signification, viz. the taking of an opinion, or a private opinion without
reference to truth or falsehood, and to import nothing more of affront then when
used by Tully, as Non sum in eadem tecum haeresi; I am not of your opinion: and
the common Vogue of Heretics amounts to opiniatre, and Heresy to opiniatrete:
and as a Whirlwind may be supposed to have blown some one thing into its
place, as each other thing out of it, so have the Whirl-winds Heresy has
disturbed the World by, happened at last to blow its signification into its
right and original State.

Our Courts Christian which in order to the Salus animae might still prosecute
Men for Heresy, as well as Usury, have given no Heretics or Usurers, any Cause
of Complaint for molestation; tho yet in the Articles of Visitation this is
one, is there any person a known or reputed Heretic or Schismatic. But as in
the Diocesess in the Country and even in the Cities there, the Churchwardens
having not troubled themselves to know what Animal a Heretic is, so neither is
our Layety in our Metropolis in the humor to mind the Genus and Differentia in
the definition of a Heretic. Nor will they be ever likely to make any such
Presentment as Mr. Nath. Bacon said in one of his printed Discourses; he has
seen, made formerly by some of St. Mary Overies, Item we saine that John
Stephens is a man we cannot well tell what to make of him, and that he has
Books we know not what they are.

Our English Genius is so improved by the excellent temper and discourses of
that breed of rational Divines our Church of England has been blessed with since
the King's Restoration, that it generally abhors the thoughts of punishing a
Heretic as such with death, as a severity that has in it the turpitude of
injustice and cruelty. And since the very Fathers and Schoolmen could never
agree about the point who are formally Heretics and that the acutest among
them make the formality of Heresy to consist in Pertinacy or Contumacy, which
are inward Acts of the Mind and which none but the Scrutator renum can know, it
may well seem shameful for any to agree in punishing it with death.

What a shameful narrowness of mind was there in the Divines that governed our
Church in the times of the late Usurpation, when those Triers of Ministers
would allow none to have a Living or Cure of Souls that asserted the Tenets of
Arminius in Religion, which yet carry a face of so much probability to be
maintained, that a man who having used his utmost care in the investigation of
truth therein asserts them, may claim it as his due by the purchase of Christ's
Blood, that when he is required to deliver his opinion about the same, his
asserting it that way should not expose him to punishment. And there is no
Controverted Religionary Speculative Point of that Nature wherein there is
among Learned Men probabilis causa litigandi (and in some Cases too where it
may touch too close upon our Articles and Homilies) in which liberty of
differing in Judgment is here either prejudicial to their Interest or common
Esteem. Thus tho all the Reformed Churches make the Pope to be Antichrist, and
particularly our Church of England in its Homilies has done so, our Famous Dr.
Hammond adventured as he thought himself obliged in Conscience to publish it,
that Simon Magus was the man.

The most judicious Comparers of times are sensible that there is now a more
valuable libera theologia in England then was during the Usurpation. How glad
would many of the Independent, and Presbyterian Divines then have been of the
liberty to have taught their Flocks the Notions they then thought of importance
as to the Divine Decrees, tho they had been allowed to have so done only in
Surplices, or in Vests of Indian feathers, or any habits imaginable? The old
way of arguing about speculative points in Religion with passion and loudness
and being tedious therein, is grown out of use, and a Gentlemanly Candor in
discourse of the same with that moderate temper that men use in debating
natural Experiments has succeeded in its room, and it is accounted Pedantry for
any one in good Company to pass for a Victor in Notions by having the last
word, and seeming a Baffler in dispute. And the truth is, our Divines and the
Lay Literati having since the King's Restoration been more addicted to the
Study of real Learning then formerly, which requires quiet of thought in its
pursuit, has brought noise out of Request.

I need not again mention the Obligation our Land has received from the Royal
Society, in making so great a Plantation of real knowledge in it. 'Twas high
time at last when the Kingdom was settled on its proper Basis to improve it
with such strong and nervous knowledge, that would be like the strong man
keeping Possession in men's understandings, during which either Poperies or
Presbyteries Kingdom of Darkness cannot overthrow our Quiet.

There were in the Year 1599. reckoned in Christendom 2,25044 Monasteries, and
from whence all the great Revenue there bestowed on men to think, sent not
perhaps one Notion of real Learning into the World. But their professed
business was to extinguish the light of Knowledge, and not to increase it, and
that which they made their real Study was to find out Artifices to make Mankind
fit still and quiet in the dark, and to invent torments and punishments for
those that would not do so: and to ridicule those who pryed into nature and but
looked toward Arithmetic and Geometry, by the Name of Students of the black
Art and Conjurers, a humor that was not quite exterminated hence from the time
of Friar Bacon to my Lord Bacon: for our pious Martyrologer mentioning
occasionaly Dr. Dee the Mathematician, called him Dr. Dee the Conjurer.

Thus Almighty God tho the first thing he made for the World in general was
external light, yet one of the last things he has made or so much blessed the
World with, is real Learnings intellectual Light, and even that whereby we so
knowingly converse with his works of Nature: and so careless was Mankind in
considering the frame of their own bodies, that Dr. Henshaw a late Ornament of
the Royal Society has truly observed it in his Book of Fermentation, That
within the Compass of this last Century the knowledge of Anatomy has been
enriched by a full third part at least. Mankind was so busy in murdering one
another bodies of old under the Notion of Christians, and afterward as
Heretics, that it had no leisure to dissect them, and was wholly taken up by
studying experiments of Cruelty equal to the making of live Anatomies of each
other. And tho the Holy Jesus came into the World not to destroy men's lives but
to save them, and for that purpose tho the Divine Philanthropy chose that time
for his coming into the World when the (...) was arrived at a greater height
then ever before, yet by the depraved nature of man perverting and corrupting
the use of Religion, the fantastic vile sacrificing of men has since
increased.

In the Infanticidium of Herod's that was presently after the Birth of the Holy
Child Jesus, Samuel Siderocrates says, that there were slain of Infants of 2
years old and under that Age, 444000: and Paulus Volzius makes them to be a
Million and 44 Thousand.

And afterward among the Heathens, he was accounted the Magnus Apollo, not who
could find ways of saving, but destroying Christian men. No fewer than seven
Books were writ by Vlpian to show the several punishments that ought to be
inflicted on Christians. And tho Livy says of the Romans, in hoc gloriari
licet nulli gentium mitiores placuisse paenas, yet Tacitus tells us of the
Christians in the 15th Book of his Annals, Primo correpti qui fatebantur,
deinde indicio eorum multitudo ingens haud perinde in crimine incendii, quam
odio humani generis convicti sunt. Ea pereuntibus addita ludibria, aut ferarum
tergis contecti, laniatu canum interirent, aut crucibus affixi aut flammandi,
aut ubi defecisset dies in usum nocturni luminis urerentur.

Several Authors relate it as a Decree of Nero' s, Quisquis Christianum se esse
confitetur, is tanquam generis humani convictus hostis, sine ulteriori sui
defensione, capite plectitor.

Enough has been already said to parallel the Cruelty of new Rome, with that
of old toward the Heterodox: and how ingenious the Virtuosi of the Inquisition
have been in finding out such torments for Heretics, as can multiply one death
into a thousand, I with horror think of. How profound a submission and
deference to the unaccountable Will of Heaven does this Consideration require,
namely, that Christ's little Flock even in the Ark of his Church, is not only
endangered by a deluge from without, but by one within, and that of its own
blood, and that the Sheep of Christ appear to a common eye to be (as it were)
made on purpose to feed the grievous Wolves that are entered in among them, and
as it may be supposed that thousands of harmless Sheep were in the Ark of Noah
employed to feed, perhaps about 20 pair of the hurtful Carnivorous Beasts: nay
which is more, that Heaven should permit such great slaughters of its little
Flock to feed the very vitiated fancies of the worst of men, as was before
insinuated!

But who can without shame for depraved Mankind, and a heart inwardly bleeding,
think of the result of the Popes Gift of America to the King of Spain, where so
many Millions of the poor Natives having had no promulgation of the Law of
Christianity, and were accountable to God only for the violation of the Law of
Nature, were so unnaturally murdered by the Spaniards, that it would seem
incredible that God having made of one blood all Nations (as it is said in the
Scripture) and there being a natural Cognation between all Humane kind as the
expression is in the Digests, they should depopulate that part of the World of
a greater number of Souls than is now living in the flourishing Kingdom of
France, if that Famous Spanish Bishop Bartholomaeus de las Casas has made a
true Estimate of the Spanish Cruelty in the West Indies, namely, that in about
45 years the Spaniards by several monstrous Cruelties put to death 20 Millions
of Indians.

At this rate of murderous Mankinds thus outraging one another, the World would
seem to be likely to end before it was (as I may say) to purpose begun, I mean
the purpose of God Almighty.

But the thought of the shame of being outwitted by our Neighbor Nations, and
the fear of being outdone by them in strength, populousness and riches, and our
certain knowledge, (as was partly before hinted) that toward the latter end of
the World by the growing populousness of Mankind, we must naturally and without
any eye on prediction in Scripture more and more hear of Wars and rumors of
Wars, and the shame of our encouraging a few Traders in Contraband Religions to
hope they can ever destroy the Peace and Trade of the Kingdom again, must
(supposing Heretics to be men) naturally make the former Mode of killing them
appear not more barbarous then ridiculous.

Sir W. P. having in his excellent Manuscript, called Verbum sapienti made
excellent Computations of the wealth of the Kingdom, and of the value of the
People, and of the several expenses of the Kingdom and of its Revenues, and in
his last Chapter there considered how to employ the People and with what great
industry, does like a Noble Philosopher conclude it with these two Queries and
their Answers, viz. But when should we rest from this great industry? I answer
when we have certainly more Money than any of our Neighbor States, (tho never
so little) both in Arithmetical and Geometrical Proportion ( i. e. when we have
more years Provision aforehand, and more present Effects.) What then should we
busy our selves about? I answer in ratiocinations upon the Works and Will of
God, to be supported not only by the indolency, but also by the pleasure of the
body, and not only by the tranquillity but serenity of the mind, and this
exercise is the natural end of man in this World, and that which best disposes
him for his Spiritual Happiness in that other which is to come. The motions of
the mind being the quickest of all others afford most variety wherein is the
very form and being of pleasure, and by how much the more we have of this
pleasure, by so much the more we are capable of it, ad infinitum.

And thanks be to Heaven we have no Isthmus in Nature to dig through, which yet
by our many hands might be done. It Is but the removal of the broken Fence and
bowing Wall of a Religion-Trade, which we can well look over and easily see
through as now broken and bowing, and which is the more loathed for having so
long and so much debarred us from real Trade and real Knowledge, and too from
real Religion, and this flowery Coast will be as free to the feet of us Northern
Heretics so called, as it is now to our Eyes, and we through the effects of our
populousness, and being necessitated to industry, be secured from any fear of
sharing in a Prophetic Calculation that might be called, The Burden of the
North, made by a late Author of a Discourse of Trade, That the French without
the use of their Iron, will command all the Silver of the North and sweep it
away thence by the over-balance of Trade. But after all the Souths raillery on
the North, they will find that the Northern half of the World has more Earth,
more Men, more Ships and Seamen, more Stars, more day, and more light of the
Gospel, and I may add, more good nature and frankness, more bodily strength and
fewer Plagues, and Earthquakes then the Southern. And where most people are
it is no Heresy nor Enthusiastic Prophecy, to say that there will in time be
most Trade: which appeared by England's not being afraid to throw the Die of
War against both France and Spain, in the beginning of the Reign of the Royal
Martyr.

As the over-balance of Trade is insensibly lost in any Country, it is likewise
so regained, and in time will appear regained, and like health in the body of a
man of a strong Vitals after his being seized by and recovered from a Chronical
Disease, and of the time of the beginning and ending of which by unforeseen
Accidents, no shadow of a Dial or sound of a Clock could give the indication.

I shall assign an instance of this in our own Kingdom. The Author of Britannia
languens calculates 2,50000 l. per Annum to have been formerly at a Medium for
76 years brought into England by the balance of its whole Trade in the World.

Committees of Parliament have worthily labored in several Sessions to model
and draw Bills for the making us wear our own Woollen Manufactures, and many
who have writ Books and Proposals about Trade, have very honestly endeavored
to persuade us so to do. But as the saying is, accidit in puncto, etc. an
Accident too low for our States-mens consideration, has for several years
caused England to gain more then it did by the aforesaid Balance of Trade, viz.
the said 2,50000 l. at a Medium for 76 years; and this Accident is the general
fashion of Women's wearing Crape. And because I have conversed with none who has
observed the effect of this Accident, and which tho seeming small, is very
momentous, and appears (as many things in Trade do) like great Weights hanging
sometimes on small Wires, I shall divert your Lordship by Calculating en
passant what England gains thereby, in such a way as the Nature of the thing
will bear, and may passable serve to have it done in.

A pound of Wool makes 15 yards of Crape. Each Female one with another may be
supposed to wear about 10 yards of Crape in her Apparel. There are in London
probably about 100,000 Females that wear Crape. It may be supposed that in all
England and Wales there being ten times as many Females as in London, that one
half of this proportion of the London Crape-wearers may wear Crape in the
Country, viz. half a Million in all. It may be supposed therefore that the
Crape-wearers one with another wearing ten yards a piece, that five Millions of
Yards of Crape may be yearly worn in England and Wales, and that one pound of
Wool making fifteen yards of Crape will occasion the Consumption of a third
part of a Million of Pounds weight of Wool per Annum, viz. 333000 and 333
pounds weight of Wool which (accounting fine Wool such as makes Crape to be
worth one Shilling per Pound) amounts to 16000 l. Sterling. The labor of the
People in Manufacturing the same, amounts to about thirty times as much as the
Wool, viz. half a Million of Pounds Sterling: and this yearly gain England
cannot miss of while the Women of the Court continue the fashion of wearing
Crape, whom the Women of the City and Country will imitate in their garb.

If any shall think that the allowance of 10 yards to be yearly worn by each
Female Crape-wearer may seem too much, he may consider that some Crape used by
men about their Apparel, and the great quantity thereof employed in shrouding
the Dead, pursuant to the late Act (and which but for the invention and use of
the Manufacture of Crape, perhaps would not have been effectually put in
Execution) may probably incline him to be of an opinion that England gains more
vastly by this new Manufacture of Crape, then I have supposed.

The ridiculing humor of so many in the Age, may perhaps move them to think
observations of this kind to be unimportant. But if any shall take a Prospect
of the substantial and great wisdom of our Ancestors in our Statute-Book, he
may find there 11 Acts of Parliament about Thrums and Yarn, and many about
Fustians, and 26 about Worsted, and Worsted-Weavers, and another Statute of
Pouledavis: but there is that of moment in my Account relating to England's
Gain from Crape, that after 145 Statutes made to advance our Wool and Drapery
and Dyers and our Woollen Manufactures, so much decayed in spite of them all,
this seeming poor little thing has without any Act of Parliament enriched us.

And many are the Foundations of Manufactures laid in our Country Cities, and
daily growing since the time that Dr. Williams Archbishop of York in his
Speech in the Parliament of 1640. in defense of the Bishops Votes observed,
that Tapsters, Brewers, Innkeepers, Tailors and Shoo-makers do integrate and
make up the body of our Country Cities and Incorporations.

And tho the Northern Heretics are crasso sub aere nati, yet have they (as was
said) compensative Advantages from nature, and as if nature meant them more
then others for Lords of the Sea and Navigation, the Pole of the Magnet which
seateth it self North, has been observed to be always the most vigorous and
strong Pole to all intents and purposes, and the Magnetical Virtue impressed on
the Earth is there more strong likewise, I mean on the Church Land seized on
from the Papal Idlers and Burdens of that Earth to support the necessary
defense of the State, and therefore will necessarily attract men's Iron and
their understandings with Justice to keep it. Dr. Heylin in his Geography in
Folio tells us, that it is not so much the Authority of Calvin, or the Malignant
Zeal of Beza, or the impetuous Clamors of their Disciples which made the
Episcopal Order to grow out of Credit, as the Avarice of some great Persons in
Court and State, who greedily gaped after the poor Remnant of their Possessions.

But tho nothing like an over-Balance of the Clergy in the wealth of the
Kingdom ought to have sunk that Order and its Revenue in England, (where
perhaps ten times as much is spent either on the Law or on Physic as is on the
Clergy) it need not be wondered at, that in those Countries of the North where
they are continually standing to their Arms at least of defense, and
Calculating their Provision for War, that the Lutheran Princes (as Heylin
says) have divided the Episcopal Function from its Revenue assuming to
themselves much of the latter, and sometime giving part thereof to their
Nobility, with the Title of Administrators of such a Bishopric, and of
super-intendent to those who have there the Pastoral Solicitude, and with some
proportion of the Revenue for their maintenance not much exceeding what is
usually received by Calvinist Ministers.

And if my Lord Primate Bramhal may pass for a good Casuistical Judge of the
Law of God, who in p. 39. of his just Vindication of the Church of England,
speaking of an excessive Revenue of the Clergy and their over-balancing the
Layety, says, And if the excess be so exorbitant that it is absolutely and
evidently destructive to the Constitution of the Commonwealth (it is lawful
upon some Conditions and Cautions not necessary to be here inserted) to prune
the superfluous Branches, and to reduce them to a right temper and aequilibrium
for the preservation and well being of the whole Body Politic, and if any
Credit ought to be given to the Account of Cardinal Pool showed to me within
these few hours, relating to the over-Balance of the old Ecclesiastic Revenue
here, after he had used all his own diligence and that of others to prepare a
Calculation of the same for the Pope, and had sent 3 Reams of Paper of this to
the Pope that are now in his Archives, and had acquainted the Pope therein,
That it was visible that had not the Church here fallen into the Shipwreck of
its Revenues, the Ecclesiastics had here in a short time insensibly rendered
themselves Lords of the whole Kingdom, and that there were more Colleges and
Hospitals in England than in France, which exceeds England by two thirds both
in Lands and Numbers of People, we may very well conclude that had any
accidental force in Queen Mary's time renversed the alienation of the Church
Lands, that force would not have long continued, and should any as wild
Imaginers may suppose, happen for the future here, or perhaps in other Kingdoms
of the North, those Lands would soon appear to all to have such a Magnetical
Virtue as is in the Globe of the Earth, whereby as to its natural points it
disposes it self to the Poles, being so framed and ordered to those points
that those parts which are now at the Poles would not naturally abide under the
Equator, nor Green-land remain in the place of Magellanica; and thus it may be
said that if the whole Earth were violently removed, it would not forsake its
Primitive Points nor pitch in the East or West, but very soon return to its
Polary position again, and resemblingly in any new forced over-balance of those
Church Lands, the very dull Earth's Animus revertendi, to the just libration of
States and Kingdoms would soon be apparent; and neither the Popes moving the
Earth, or even Archimedes his doing it would have been of any importance: and
the Papal Pride elevating him to say with Lucifer sedebo in monte testamenti in
lateribus Aquilonis, I will sit in the sides of the North would soon be
attended with the Exclamation of How art thou fallen, O Lucifer, Son of the
Morning, etc. and, Is this the man that made the Earth to tremble? France that
I believe exceeded England by two thirds in the number of People in Queen
Mary's time when Cardinal Pool made his Estimate thereof, did securely
heretofore suffer great numbers of its People to be unemployed in it, as
namely, the Beggars and others of the lower ranks, and through want of
opportune means of subsisting at home to seek their Fortunes abroad, and that
not as it is in the Case of so many Scots yearly leaving their Country, (the
which perhaps is not able well to nourish more Inhabitants than it has) but
through the abovementioned want of encouragement to continue in that opulent
and fertile Kingdom, a Kingdom that Grotius does but right to, when in the
Dedicatory Epistle of his De jure belli and pacis to Lewis the just, having
mentioned the Kingdom of Heaven, he says, which Kingdom only is better then
yours.

And it is no wonder if the Ministers and Counselors of State there did not
concern themselves to make rational Estimates of the growing Populousness of
the Northern Countries, and particularly of England, when nothing of that kind
was perhaps so much as attempted here before the probable inferences of the
Observator on the Bills of Mortality made about the same.

As to the former unconcernedness of France in preserving or increasing the
numbers of its People, there is an observation of Sir Thomas Culpeper Knight,
in his Discourse about Usury where he says, France tho so good a soil lies
half of it waste, the Natives even loathing their own Country, and burdening
all the habitable World with their beggarly Colonies, one third of the Lacqueys
and Valets in Europe being French Men. Witness Dr. Heylin who tells us, that
once at Madrid they banished them all as dangerous for their numbers, finding
the French Servants in that Town alone to exceed Thirty Thousand, so just and
natural is it for oppression to disarm it self.

But I have already mentioned it that the present Great French Monarch, not
more renowned for his Armaforis then his Consilium domi, and his able
Counselors there, does by Accurate Measures study the increase of his People,
and it is very remarkable that in the Code Louys which he published in April,
1667. he made some Ordinances with great care for the Registring the
Christenings and Marriages and Burials in each Parish in his Realm, as appears
by Title 20. Article 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. there from p. 107, to 112. and
with much more exactness then the Bills of Mortality in our Metropolis are
ordered, and the which that Great Prince thought worthy to be enjoined in his
Code of Laws, having perhaps been informed by his Ministers that many Political
Inferences as to the knowing the numbers of People and their increase in any
State are to be made from the Bills of Mortality, on the occasion of some such
published about 3 years before by the Observator on the Bills of Mortality in
England, and where tho many are apt to think that the Registring of the Births
of People was first used and invented by Cromwell, in Harry the 8 ths time; yet
is the thing as old as the ancient times of the Romans, and among them
introduced by Servius Tullius, who to ascertain the number of Births and
Burials, ordered that when a Child was born, the Kindred of the Child should
bring a piece of Money into the Aerarium of Juno Lucina, and so likewise in the
Exchequer of Venus libitina when any died or came to Age. And this Custom being
quite abolished, was revived by Augustus Caesar at the Birth of Children as
Lips. on Tacit. observes.

But what was worthy of the French King's providing for the stability of his
Throne, he further ordered an exact Registry to be took of the numbers of his
half Subjects, I mean the Regulars and Seculars by the following Articles
there, namely, the 15 th, 16th, 17th, in that Title.

Mr. Samuel Pepys that Great Treasurer of Naval and Maritime Knowledge, and of
that great Variety of the Learning which we call recondita eruditio, having
Communicated to me the sight of a Paper mentioning that in the whole Number of
Men in the Realm of Spain, long since when by secret Survey, there were
returned a 11 Hundred and 25 Thousand and 3 Hundred and 90 Men, (and which
secret Survey I suppose was made some time before the Year 1588.) I observed
that the number of the Regular and Secular Clergy was not included in that
Survey.

But I think the numbering of the many Regulars there who (no doubt) so often
say in their hearts, Nos numerus sumus, etc. had been of as much importance to
the Government, as the numbering of the Laymen, and for the number of which
the Code Louis has as aforesaid so carefully provided, and thereby made the
prudence of this French Kings Code outweigh Iustinian's, and has discovered to
the World the acuteness of his understanding, to be not inferior to that of his
Sword. And the Expenses of the Crown being under the Government of this Monarch
so very much greater than in his Fathers time, have necessarily occasioned such
an exact knowledge of the Numbers and Wealth of his Realm, as has provided him
his strong Sinews for War.

Thuanus on the Year 1615. tells us how that Lewis the 13th, Having appointed
some Persons to compute his Expenses and Receipts for the Year 1614. That one
and twenty Millions and fifty thousand Livres. i. e. (at 20d. a Livre) one
Million, 7 Hundred, 54 Thousand, 66 Pounds Sterling, were issued out of the
Exchequer, and that 17 Millions and 8 Hundred Thousand Livres, i. e. 1 Million,
4 Hundred, 83 Thousand, 3 Hundred 30 Pounds Sterling were brought into it, and
so his Expenses then exceeded his Receipts three Millions seven Hundred
Thousand Livres: i. e. 2 Hundred 70 Thousand 8 Hundred 33 l. Sterling: and
beside those Receipts and Expenses the Historian says, that there were
eighteen Millions of Livres Collected out of the Provinces i. e. 1 Million 5
Hundred 8 Thousand 3 Hundred Thirty Three Pounds Sterling, and which were
distributed in them for the Pay of the Officers there employed for other
Expenses there. So that the Expenses and Receipts of that Crown since the Year
1614. were more then quadrupled in the Year 1673, of the which I mentioned the
Total before and abstracted the same from a Paper that some Merchants gave in
to the Loyal long Parliament, wherein the particular Sums accruing from the
respective Generalities in France are set down, as likewise others are in
Klockius de aerario for another Year.

We have already found that it is not so many of our Peoples taking the name of
this great and wise Monarch in vain, that will do our Business, or their
wishing the Ocean of the Wealth of that Kingdom exhausted that will do it; and
it is now visible to all that nothing can prevent its increase but the stopping
up the Rivers of Money that run into that Sea, from our Countries and others
for the Commodities and Manufactures of that Kingdom, that can only produce
that effect, and which not so much our hatred of France, as love of our selves
will necessitate us to produce, and which therefore must stop up the Rivers of
Contributions, that from deluded or Enthusiastic People formerly ran into the
Religion-Trade, and then the great Cry of Templum Domini get as little Wool
from the Kingdom as it has brought to it, and the zeal of the very Vox populi
drive such Buyers and Sellers and Money changers out of it that formerly made
it a Den of Thieves: and indeed if it should be supposed that the Balance of
solid Trade should continue for the future to be against us, to the proportion
it has been estimated of late years, neither Papists nor Presbyterians would be
able to maintain a double Clergy as now they do, I mean their own, and that by
Law established.

It Is fresh in Memory that the House of Commons, in the Kings long Parliament,
ordered the Commissioners of the Customs to compute for them what Goods went
hence to France in a year, and their value, and what in that time came from
thence hither and their value, and that they computed that the value of those
exported hence into France was about 1 hundred and 70 thousand Pounds, and the
value of those imported here from France was about 1 Million and a half, beside
6 or 7 hundred thousand Pounds worth of Goods, they supposed were brought in by
stealth as Silks, Embroyderies, etc. at which rate it is possible we may have
about a 3 d part of the Current Money of England yearly carried into it: and
indeed all our grave Laws against sending Money in Specie out of the Country
when the Balance of Trade is against us, are but hedging in the Cuckoo: and so
we have by necessity of Nature the Prospect of a busy World before us, that we
may recover that Balance on our side. And during that Conjuncture of Business
all the Nerves of our Minds must be extended to prevent our doom, from that
forementioned Sentence of late so much in vogue, and which I have heard some
men living falsely vouched for the Authors of, viz. Res nolunt male
administrari; for it is in Tully, who I suppose had it from Aristotle, to whom
Venerable Bede who died 949 years ago, refers in his Axiomata Philosophica
printed at London in 12o, as the Author of it in the Margint of that Axiom,
entia nolunt male disponi, quoting Aristotle's Metaphysics. Among Bedes works
2d Tome p. 151. the Axiom is thus worded, Nolunt entia male gubernari. Men may
ill Administer their understandings, as by Credulity, Supineness and the like,
and they may think by the Artifice of Laws to pinion the wings of our riches
from flying away, and as absurdly as Sylla would by an Edict be judged fair:
but things meant by the word entia or being will not be ill administered: and
it is easier to fix Quicksilver then the being of our Silver here, if our
importations preponderate. The gravity of our Laws can no more make it stay
still here than the Vox populi, and the Almanacks can make a real Solstice, or
the Sun at the time of the year they call the Solstice not to move forward in
the Zodiac, as much as at any other times.

The Being of Money in a populous Country that has no competent Mines in it,
depends on the Being of Trade, and the Being of the so many Millions of Mouths
in our Realm, will necessitate the Millions of hands to work, and the growing
dearness of Provisions, and cheapness of Wages will enforce men to work harder,
and the res parta labor will not be ill administered, nor sacrificed to Idlers,
nor false Gods as formerly find true Perfumes here, nor Metaphysical Entities
or Notions rob men of useful Chemical Essences, or rob Kingdoms of their being
defended, and enriched, by destroying the Beings or Lives of so many Men as
Heretics, and Beings that the Papacy endeavoring to administer ill, and by
its enslaving men making Persons res, caused so many defections from it; nor
that precious thing called time suffer it self to be ill administered by
Presbyterians erecting ten thousand new Tribunals, or (as one may call them)
Ecclesiastical Courts of Pye-powder, that is one in each of our Parishes, when
as those men have been heard to complain of the Grievances Trade has found
from one Court-Christian in a Diocese: and the same necessity which did make
our Manufacturing Peoples Appetite for their Daily Bread to be the ingenii
largitor, or whet their Wits for the invention of Crape, may in all probability
produce Manufactures of Hemp and Flax as considerable as that of Wool has
been and is, which I think must naturally happen from the many French
Protestants and others here lately planted, and a more important Linen
Manufacture be here by them introduced, then was the woollen one set up by the
Dutch Protestants, whom the Duke of Alva's Persecution brought hither: and
which no Act of Parliament here or Projects of Workhouses would probably have
effected, or necessity else have brought in among us in some Ages. And hence
will a great improvement of our Land and Employment of our People probably
happen by the sowing of Hemp and Flax, for which so much Money goes out yearly
hence in specie, and then design of sowing which has hitherto proved Abortive
in several Parliaments, and particularly in one of the last Parliaments of
Queen Elizabeth, and likewise in the King's long Parliament. Considering how
easy it will be for those of the French Nation who are here, and who were used
to make Canvas and Sail-cloth for our Naval uses, (and for which France has
long had so much Money from us) to make it here and by the Bait of the Gain
thereby accruing, to engage several of our Poor to work in that Manufacture,
our Nation is not likely to be long without it here advanced, and many of our
People therein busied: and 'twill easily appear necessary to all to promote the
making the same here, who shall recollect that the French King in that last War
with him did forbid the importing it hither. And that coarser Manufacture once
introduced will naturally make way for the Manufacture of fine Linen, and those
Manufactures found generally gainful will naturally employ the Proprietors of
Land in sowing great part of the same with Hemp and Flax, and our good Land
hereby retriving its former value of years purchase, be no longer ill
administered.

I believe therefore that if shortly the Curious abroad shall send to their
knowing Correspondents here for a Political Map, or Scheme of our Affairs, and
ask what is become of the fantastic Vtopias, Oceanas, and new Atlantis'es that
our late Visionaries and idle Santerers to a pretended new Jerusalem ^roubled
England with, and shall further send hither to their friends that old Question,
Quid rerum nunc geritur in Anglia, The Return they will receive from England
will be to the following effect, viz. That People in that Noble and very
Populous Country do there mind things, that the Trade of words is spoiled, that
the business of sowing Tares is over, and that he will be the inimicus homo to
himself who does it; that the sowing the Wind of Errors in the Church, and the
reaping the Whirlwind of Confusion in the State is grown hateful: that they
have done weaving of jus Divinum, and dying of Religion with false Colors, and
preparing Nets and Snares of death for one another: and that the most
ungovernable Animals troubling others with Projects of Government of the Church
is out of fashion; that they have done there with Science falsely so called, and
quae non habet amicum nisi ignorantem, and with Trade falsely so called, the
false Religion-one that has no friend but the knave; that their eyes are there
opened and they see, that res accendunt lumina rebus, and their hands are at
work in Trade and Lucre without turpitude; that they can no more be brought
like St. Francis his Novice to set Plants with the head downward, nor at the
instigation of factious Heads of Religionary Parties, to do with their Notions
as Friar John at his Abbots Command, did with a dry withered stick which he
planted, and twice a day for a whole year fetched water two Miles off to water
it, and omitting it no Festival day; that they speak more of Christ and talk
less of Antichrist, and do promote Christianity by solid Industry and Charity;
and the living there are Aparrel'd with their own Linen as the Dead are with
their own Wool, and are grown so dexterous in the Linen Trade that it may be
said of them what Klockius does of the Dutch, it is to be doubted, plusne in
lanificio an vero in linificio illi praestent; and thus by means of a true and
undefiled and laborious Religion there, Antichristus lino periit, as I may say
with Allusion to a forementioned Phrophecy. The Genius and Interest that
England has in several Conjunctures been intent on devouring the
Religion-Trade (and which still has slipped from its seizure) has now at last
effectually swallowed it up: and just as a Cormorant swallowing an Eel, and the
Eel slipping out through its Body, is soon by that potent Creature again
swallowed, and again slipping through its Body, is at last certainly macerated
and dissolved in its Stomach, and still the Cormorant has weakened the Eel in
its passage through it, thus has it in England fared with the Religion-Trade:
that as Luther said of one great point in Religion, it was doctrina stantis and
cadentis Ecclesiae, the Notion of the not getting or losing by Religion there,
is accounted the Doctrina stantis and cadentis Reipublicae. That time has laid
so close and long a Siege to the Popish and Presbyterian Religion-Trade, that
as it was in the Siege of Ostend, there is no more Earth left it to defend.
That as Physicians observe of superfetation in Women, if it be made with
considerable intermission, the latter most commonly proves Abortive, for that
the first being confirmed engrosseth the Aliment from the other, it has
happened so in England to the superfetation of Reformation. That the Trade of
Reformation unduely prosecuted by Art, has been diverted by the Reformation of
Trade resulting from Nature, and the over spreading the Land with such a great
and useful Linen-Trade and Materials for the same, as has in a manner
exterminated Poverty from the same.

And while now Nature seems to Court our Expectation with the probability of
this new Scheme of Trade, and Manufacture, (and which perhaps will stay with us
till the Scheme or fashion of this World shall finally pass away) I shall take
occasion to discharge my self of a promise I long ago made to your Lordship,
when you were Treasurer of the Navy, which was to send you an account of the
rough Hemp and Flax, and Sail-Cloth, and of all the other Manufactures of Hemp
and Flax, imported into England yearly: and now that it may appear what
quantities of Hemp and Flax, and the Manufactures thereof have been here
imported, and from what Countries, and that thereby we may usefully take our
measures about the proportion, to which this new Trade and improvement of our
Land should at least be advanced, and because likewise the former measures of
computing what Sail-Cloth and fine Linen have been here imported, were taken
generally from blundering Estimates and random Calculations, and that we may
see it possible, tho France has got the start of us in the Linen Manufacture,
that we may yet overtake it in the Race, for that it is apparent tho much
Sail-Cloth, yet little or no fine Linen has thence come to us, I shall here
entertain your Lordship with an Account of the Linen-Cloth, Canvas, Linen Yarn,
Hemp, Flax and Cordage imported into the Port of London, from Michaelmas 1668.
to Michaelmas 1669. which was drawn up for me by the favor of one of the late
Farmers of the Customs. I happened to make choice of that year for the quantity
of those importations, as being a year of Peace, but was since told by the
Merchants that that year being the second after the Fire of London, there was
then imported into London about a 3 d part less of those Commodities than was
in common years; the which happened because the year before being the next
after the Fire, an extraordinary glut of those Goods was then brought in.

Your Lordship thereby seeing what then came into the Port of London, will in
effect see what came into the whole Kingdom, the Out-Ports bearing a proportion
of a 3 d to that of London: and by finding that we have so much Hemp from the
East Countries now we are put to it to go to Market there with ready Money
instead of our woollen Manufactures as formerly, (as we likewise do for our
Pitch and Tar, and Masts) find that we are more closely concerned in point of
interest, to have our Hemp provided at home.

And it will appear high time for us to begin somewhat like a Linen
Manufacture, when a running view of this Account presents us with so great a
quantity of old Sheets imported from Holland and France (tho perhaps designed
by us for our Plantations) and of Linen Yarn and some Linen from Scotland: and
since in that year by an Abstract of the exportations of Ireland I have seen,
that Country so long unsettled, had yet so much Linen Yarn and Linen Cloth for
its own use, that 522 pieces of Linen Cloth of 40 Else in a Piece, and 4
Thousand 6 Hundred, and 25 Hundred weight of Linen Yarn then were thence
exported.

The Account I mentioned is as follows, viz.

An Account of Linen Cloth, Canvas, Linnen-Yarn, Hemp, Flax, and Cordage,
Imported into the Port of London from Michaelmas 1668, to Michaelmas 1669. viz.
Holland Linen Else 764465. Cambricks ps 7614. Canv. with thread ps 1856. Ditto
with Silk ps 866. Holland Duck C Else 1047. Packing Canvas C Else 329. Old
Sheets pr 42890. Linen Yarn 1 6880. Steel Hemp C with 1211. Rough Hemp C with
1325. Rough Flax C with 2731. Cordage C with 601. Flanders Linen Else 598349.
Cambricks ps 3601. Damask tabling yds 1093. Damask Napkin yds 2440. Diaper
tabling yds 4387. Diaper Napkin yds 19974. Linen Yarn l. 5600. Rough Hemp. C
with 1266. Germany Broad Germany C Else 11783. Narrow Germ. C Else 21172. Packing
Canvas C Else 407. Barras C Else 3066. Hinderlands C Else 1910. Sletia Diap.
tabl. yds 16089. Sletia Diap. napk. yds 76198. Damask table yds 3148. Damask
Napkins yds 11437. Sletia Lawnes ps 5505. Linen Yarn l. 353690. Rough Hemp C
with 302. France Lockrams ps 23581. Vittry Canvas C Else 6265. Normandy Canvas C
Else 3128. Quintons ps 1433. Died Linen ps 557. Diaper tabling yds 7604.
Diaper Napkins yds 33896. Old Sheets pr 2820. Poul Davies Bolts 50. Cordage l
15. Eastland Hinderlands C Else 146. Packing Canvas C Else 2491. Polonia Linen
C Else 271. Quinsbr. Canvas Bolts 1899. Poul Davies Bolts 90. Linen Yarn l
9700. Rough Hemp. C with 27251. Rough Flax C with 5720. Russia Muscovia Linen C
Else 256. Linen Yarn l 3600. Rough Hemp C with 237. Cordage C with 30. Scotland
Linen C Else 1420. Linen Yarn l 23680. East Indies Callicoes ps 251986.

That little sowing of Hemp and Flax here that has been, has already met with
as much encouragement as this comes to* namely, that it is all bought up by the
years end: and in our way to the Manufactures of Hemp, the above Account does
so far encourage us as to let us see that almost all our Cordage is made in
England; and since by some Accounts I have seen of the Importations in
Amsterdam, almost as much Hemp and Flax is there brought in yearly as into the
whole Kingdom of England, the necessity that will be driving us on to the Linen
Manufacture, will be accompanied with this comfortable Consideration, that as
it is possible for us to overtake France therein, so we may Holland (at least in
the making of Sail-Cloth) in regard we may if we will have as much Hemp and
Flax growing in our own Soil as they send for to Riga and elsewhere abroad.

The French Protestants at Ipswich have lately made finer Linen than ever was
made in England, namely, of 15 s. the Ell: and for which tho they had their
Linen Yarn from France, yet afterward they sowed Flax near Ipswich whereof to
make Yarn, and it was observed to grow so high, that the People resorted from
all parts adjacent of the Country to see it, they having never seen any so high
before.

A Judgment so penetrating as your Lordships will easily find how the said
Account may be many ways useful to the public in point of Trade, as for
example, the Consideration is obvious that those Countries we receive no Hemp
or Flax or their Manufactures from, we may profitably in the way of Traffic
hereafter carry them to, and by that means know our proper Markets, as
particularly Spain, Italy, Portugal, etc.

That great Bankrupsy in London that has thence like a Plague infected so many
of our Country Traders, and laid there too so much Land in some sort desolate,
will by natural necessity oblige them to countenance this improvement of the
Realm by new Commodities and Manufactures: and that which has in many of our
poor Idlers, Created such an Aversion from the sowing of Hemp and Flax, namely,
the toil of beating the same, will soon cease by the acquainting them with the
Invention of a Mill near a Rivolet by which as much Hemp may be beaten in a day
as can be by two hundred men: and they who have been incessant in complaining
of others being French Pensioners, and thought themselves slighted because they
were not so, shall by the Protestants of that Nation thus leading us by the
hand to a rich Manufacture, find France to have thus sent Donatives to our
whole Land. And from the example of their innate Loyalty to their Hereditary
Monarch, and thankfulness to ours for their protection, I doubt not but many of
our Malcontents will imbibe principles of obedience to Government and a sense
of their safety under that Asylum: and such persons whatever their pretensions
are, will deserve ill of the Kingdom and its Trade and Manufacture, who by
their excessive Complaints of the danger of Popery and of the Fantome of that
pretended Religion frighting us out of our Laws, shall really deter more such
Protestant Strangers from planting among us. But as men may be said to be
deterred by shame from fearing any thing in throngs, and where they are secure
from robbery, and can suffer only by petty Larceny, so I believe will this
populous State of our Country insensibly wear off the excess of our fears; and
do expect such a future State in England as will make men ashamed of their past
fears, and their former deference to ill bodeing Prophets.

Gassendus in his Works tells us, that all the Astrologers of France concluded,
that by reason of the great Conjunction of watery signs in Piscis and Aquarius
in the Year 1524, that there should then be another deluge in that Realm, and
in Germany, in the Month of February, a rainy Month, and that many of the
People thereupon went with their Goods and Cattle from the Low Lands to the
hilly Country, and yet that Month proved the driest Month that ever was known:
and thus do I expect that many of our Melancholy Prophets in England will be
toto caelo, mistaken in their auguries. And if natural Considerations did not
induce me thus to foretell good to my Country, another Consideration might tempt
me to predict ill, namely, the warding off all the risque of a false Prophet:
for among the Jews if a man prophesied of future ill to a Person or State, and
it came not to pass, he was not therefore pronounced a false Prophet, by reason
of the infinite goodness often inclining the Divine Nature to avert its
threatened Anger; but if he Prophesied of good Success, and it happened not, he
was then reputed a false Prophet, for that ( they said) Heaven never cancelled
a Decree of Mercy.

Considering how often things at random predicted have come to pass, and tho
like Seeds carelessly thrown into the Field of Time have yet grown up, and how
many even of the higher Class of understandings, have been tempted to believe
the predictions of the illiterate, and that such could read the Book of Fate
who yet could read no other (as appeared by Sir Thomas Moore and Bishop Fisher
being tainted with some belief of the holy Maid of Kent's Sayings, or at least
seeming so to be) and that the prediction of things as I partly before hinted
may help as a Natural Cause to give them Birth, I wishing so well to my Country
and its Religion by Law Established, have however adventured from Natural
Causes to give my judgment for the future State thereof as I have done, not
despairing of its influences on some present Despairers.

And moreover the Class of Magna nomina, who have faulter'd in their measures
of Prophecy, is so great that an obscure mistaken person may well hope to hide
himself among them

Father Parsons ali^s Doleman, in his Book of the Succession, does p. 258. give
his final Conjecture of the great future Event of the Succession after the
death of Queen Elizabeth, saying, My opinion is that this Affair cannot
possibly be ended by any possibility moral without some War at leastwise for
sometime at the beginning, and gives his reasons for that his opinion. And how
all our hot Apocalyptick Men and Teazers of Antichrist have erred in the times
of the great Changes they have predicted in the World, is obvious: and
therefore the most sagacious of that sort of Expositers, have made the things
they have foretold to be far distant in time, and before which they knew they
should long be in the number of Non entes doctores, as one calls the Schoolmen:
and thus likewise the ingenious Author of the Treatise of Taxes and
Contributions, printed in London 1667, does p. 23. say, that Before five
hundred years we may be all transplanted from hence into America, these
Countries being overrun with Turks and made wast as the Seats of the famous
Eastern Empires at this day.

Mr. Herbert, our pious Vates, made Religion standing a tiptoe to take its
flight thither many years ago. And the ingenious Author of the Zelanders Choice
has therein told us that the French would never part with Vtrecht, and that
our King's Declaration of Indulgence would never be recalled; but the contrary
happened in both Cases, and the Vote of the House of Commons in order to his
Majesty's recalling the latter, was carried by the Party there favoring the
Nonconformists, and could not have been without them, which that Author did not
foresee, and that those Nonconformists would be well neither full nor fasting,
and therefore their reflections on the King's Ministers for denying Indulgence
to them since, ought to be very gentle.

Mr. Fox in his Martyrology in one Volume p. 694. gives us this conjectural
prediction that the Turk will seize Rome, and founds one of his reasons for it
on the 18 Chapter of the Rev. and that he shall consume it with fire, and Ribera
the Jesuit in Chap. 14th of the Rev. says, Romam igitur non tantum propter
priora peccata conflagratarum esse magno incendio, sed etiam propter illa quae
extremis illis temporibus commissura est ex hujus Apocalypsis verbis adeo
perspicue cognoscimus, ut ne stul^issimus quidem negare possit. Neither Mr. Fox
nor the Jesuit name any particular time when Rome shall be consumed with Fire:
but many whose Enthusiastic fancies have played with the fire of Rome,
adventured to lay the Scene of its ruin in the Year 1666: and to assert this,
a Latin Book was professedly writ and called, Romae ruina finalis Anno Dom.
1666. and printed in London in the Year 1663. in the Title whereof it is said,
that Rome shall be incendio delenda, in the Year 1666.

And no doubt our many Prophetic Writers that read that Sentence as from Gods
Tribunal, that Rome shall be destroyed that year, angered the Conclave there;
and they might well think that to such hot heads there belonged incendiary
hands; and accordingly as it was before cited out of the Pamp^let called, The
Arts and pernicious designs of Rome, wherein is shown what are the Aims of the
Jesuits, etc. the Author makes the Conflagration of London ( in case it were a
practice of Humane Contrivance) to have been caused by Rome and the Consistory
there, and the Jesuits as being willing to signalize that year of 666, with
some remarkable mischief done to Protestants in check to the fancies of some
that predicted Romes utter destruction then, it is possible that they might
grant against our City the reprisal of performances for our Prophecies against
theirs: which if they did was a Revenge very disproportionate; for according to
that rule of the Pharisees revenge, namely, an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for
a Tooth, they should only have equipped Airy Prophecies against us, and not
Fireships, and by a little obvious Art have hounded the number of the Beast
666 upon us. And though I am sufficiently convinced by the Quotations out of
the Canon Law, and the Canonists referred to in Gundissalvus that the Tenet of
burning whole Cities if the Majority thereof are Heretics, is chargeable on
the Church of Rome as approved by it, and tho the Lord Chancellor and two
Houses of Commons, and the Magistrates of London have given their judgment of
the Causers of that Fire as aforesaid, and tho one of our great Divines and
whose Name all Protestants in our Land must mention with great honor, Dr.
William Lloyd Dean of Bangir, has in his Funeral Sermon of Sir Edmund Godfrey
p. 38. speaking of the incredible patience found in the Citizens of London at
the time of its Conflagration, as an effect of the Protestant Religion, further
said, Tho so many believed and very few much doubted whence it came, that it
was from the same hands which we justly suspect for this wickedness (meaning
the Murder of Sir Edmund Godfrey) yet was there no Tumult rose upon it, no
violence done that extended to the life of any Person, yet shall I never
without the knowledge of convincing proofs of such a Fact projected, or
modelled by some in Authority in the Church of Rome, and the Spiritual Guides
of our Lay-Papists, charge the Odium of the Fact on more of them than make the
least of numbers, nor yet the allowance of this Tenet on the generality of
Papists here at home, or abroad in the World, and would say that as infallible
as the Pope was, he knew not what spirit he was of, when he thus in his Law
called for fire on Heretical Cities; I allude to our Savior's words to the
Disciples that importuned him to call for Fire from Heaven to burn the
Samaritans.

I know the Roman Catholic Author of the forementioned Pamphlet, called the
Arts of Rome, etc. in the Epistle of it, says of the Jesuits and Friars, that
what they hold lawful to be done, they may be justly presumed to do whenever
opportunity serves, and that they see it conducible to their Interest to do it.
Thus likewise Judges of Ecclesiastical Courts when the consideration of the
Nullity of a Marriage by reason of fear resulting from threatenings is before
them, do carefully regard this point concerning the Menacer, an solitus est
minas exequi, a thing the Jesuits have not been wanting to do, when Power and
Opportunity have not been wanting: and there is no doubt but the Jesuits by
reason of their 4th Vow to the Pope, over and above the Implicit Obedience they
have sworn to their Superiors, are to execute whatever he shall command: nor is
it doubtable but that when it is said by the Canonists that the Pope has power
to burn Heretical Cities, he will reduce that Power into Act when he sees
convenient; and as Dr. Done in his Pseudo Martyr well notes, the Lawyers teach
us that the word potest does often signify actum: for which he quotes Bartolus
on the Digests.

I believe the truth of his Computation where he says in p. 228 of that Book,
That the Jesuits are in possession of most of the Papists hearts in England,
but I likewise believe his other Computation in that Book, where in p. 127. he
says, quoting Rebadenira, that in the Year 1608. the whole number of the
Society of the Jesuits were 10581. and that tho their number is much increased
since, there are not so many in England as were when the Book was printed, viz*
Anno 1610. and the Dr. whose Style was as the Oxford Antiquities say of Mr.
Foxes, in Romanenses satis acerbus, (tho I think neither of their Styles was so
a jot too much) does in Chap. 10th of that Book, very learnedly and largely
show that many Eminent and Popish Writers have bitterly inveighed against
Gratian the Compiler of the Decretum of the Canon Law.

No doubt that Law was never in gross received in England, in the times of our
Popish Ancestors, and so neither did nor does bind English Papists in the Court
of Conscience, more than the Council of Trent does in some Popish Countries
where it never was received: and I find Bellarmine cited by the Dr. for saying,
that there are many things in the Decretal Epistles which do not make a matter
to be de fide, but only do declare what the opinions of the Popes were in such
cases.

I believe that no un-jesuited Papist (nor perhaps some sober Party in that
Order) will think the worse of me for calling the Decretum of the Popes Canon
Law, by reason of its empowering him thus to burn Cities, h^rrendum Decretum:
and it may perhaps appear ridiculous as well as horrid in the Pope in that Law,
to rake in the Ashes of sweet St. Cyprian for fire to burn Heretical Towns, and
to make him, who was in a manner Excommunicated by the Pope for rebaptizing
such as were baptized by Heretics, to be the Founder of that wild Tenet of
converting guiltless Lime, and Brick and Timber to rubbish, because they had
afforded dwelling places to People, that differed in judgment from Rome: and to
make him, who in the Year 258. was a Martyr for not being an Idolater, to be
the Author of burning Cities, that would not adore the Host.

But moreover it may be said that in the Decrets made by the Pope to Ape the
Pandects, and to consist chiefly of Canons of Councils, sayings of Fathers, and
Constitutions of Popes as the Pandects do of the responsa prudentum, etc.
Gratian's founding a Tenet on Cyprian, or any places out of other Authors,
gives it only the weight that Cyprian and they had in their proper works: and
the Stream of Authority from their Writings in Gratian is not to be supposed
able to rise higher than the Spring: and thus the Canonists agree on this as a
Rule, that the things quoted in Gratian, Vim legis habent quatenus reperiuntur
illic unde dep^ompta sunt: and they tell us, that if any things that are said
to be impia, hiulca, barbara, sine ratione, falsa fideique Historicae adversa,
are found there, they are to be passed by as Gratian Dreams, ut nec confirmatio
Pontificum generalis ad ea sese extendere possit. And on this Account his
Gl^ssographer Andreas, himself does often turn his gloss into an Animadversion
on his Master (for that name he bestows on Gratian) and says sometimes,
Magister hic non tenetur (meaning Observatur) and sometimes Superficialis est
magistri argumentatio, and elsewhere with a strain of Ruffianism, fateor te
plane mentitum Gratiane.

And if any one will read Pere Veron's Book of the Rule of Catholic Faith,
Dedicated to the Lords of the Assembly general of the Clergy sitting at Paris
in the Year 1645. he will find, he says, as for Gratian 's Decrees, and the
Gloss, they can claim nothing of Faith, the Author being a particular Doctor
and Subject to many mistakes even in the Citation of Authors, nor does he
pretend to any such thing: much less weight has the Gloss than the Decrees,
where many silly and ridiculous passages are discovered. As for the Papal
Decrees contained in the body of the Canon Law, or published since, none of
them do constitute an Article of Faith, etc. Bellarmine makes no difficulty to
acknowledge Errors in several of them: as for example, where the Canon out of
Gratian is objected, quod proposuisti, extracted out of Gregory the 3d, where
it is said, that if a Woman should be sick and by that means unable to render
her duty to her Husband, the Husband if he have not the gift of continency may
take another Wife: he replys thus, that the Pope failed through ignorance,
which we do not deny may happen to Popes, when they do not properly define but
only declare their opinions, as Gregory seems here to have done.

And no doubt but every Papist laughs at the definition of a Whore in the
Decrets, i. e. Quae multorum libidini patet, and at the gloss there making by
multorum to be meant 23000.

My Lord, I discoursed frankly of all these last mentioned matters to my Roman
Catholic Friend, who (I said) would join Issue in the Plea about Religion, if
the Pope's Power of firing Heretical Cities, were a Tenet chargeable on the
Church of Rome, and have perhaps said as much to throw off the Obligation on
any Papists to obey the Pope or his Canon Law, in the infliction of such dire
Vengeance on whole Cities, as they would wish said, and do think my self
indispensably obliged when I discourse with any of Mankind about any Quaesitum
relating to natural truth, and much more to Theological, with all possible
candor to say what the matter will fairly bear on both sides, as accounting
any man's Judgment given ex part to be of little or no value, and esteeming him
a falsarius, who conceals any thing of truth.

But this Gentleman being a close pursuer of truth told me, he knew well enough
that the Canon Law did not as such bind all Papists in foro conscientiae, but
he would stay in no Church that he should find to be built in any Akeldama, or
Field of Blood, that is, a Church that approved of Tenets destructive of Civil
Societies, or condemned not Tenets that where any other Religion than the Popes
was, would Condemn men like Nebuchadnezor to grasing and to solitude, or if
they would live in Towns or Cities, make them live there in Houses under
Ground, as Dr. Brown in his Travels says, He saw some Towns in the Turkish
Dominions where Christians so lived like the Troglodytes, and subterraneous
Nations about Egypt, and which might be occasioned by many Armies marching that
way and burning of Towns en passant; and that till the Pope disclaimed this
power, and damned such Tenet in his Canon Law, that hung up there a Light
conspicuous to the World, for the lawful kindling of the Torches that should
set fire to Heretical Cities, such Cities as he called Heretical would be in
fear of their being incendio delendae; and that in the mean time the Jesuits,
who assert the plenitude of his power, would implicitly obey his Commands, and
their Emissaries execute theirs, without considering whether Gratian as a Fool,
or a Knave misapplied Cyprian: and he granted that if, as an Universal Censor
morum, the Pope did Command the Jesuits or others to inflict spiritual
Censures in Cases of Sin, or Non-belief of any Religionary Notion, and those
Censures were not to operate beyond the Soul, that Civil Societies might yet be
maintained; but to give the Pope power to issue out Orders to burn the Cities
and Towns, where the Roman Catholic Religion is not professed, is (said he,)
to give him Arbitrary Power over a great part of the World, and to leave it to
his Arbitrage, whether there shall be any Political Government and Commerce in
the States and Kingdoms of Heretics, and the World might suffer Confusion by
the Papacy's having this power de facto, as much as if it had it de jure, and
that several places have been burned as Heretical, and when certainly they had
a right not to be so served, and particularly the Heretical Villages at the
Massacre of Merindol, of which Dr. Heylin in his Geoghraphy in Folio, makes
mention, saying, that in the Year 1560. there were above 1250 Churches of the
Hugonots in France, which cannot in such a long time but be wonderfully
augmented, tho scarce any of them have escaped some Massacre or other. Of these
Massacres two are most memorable, viz. that of Merindol and Chabiers, as being
the first, and that of Paris as being the greatest. That of Merindol happened
in the Year 1545. the instrument of it being Minier, the President of the
Council of Aix: for having Condemned those poor people of Heresy, he mustered a
small Army and set fire on the Villages. He directed me further for the proof
of that Fact to Maimbourg's History of Calvinism, Book 2d, where he mentions
the Decree of the Parliament of Aix to which Heylin refers, and says Maimbourg
of it, Par le quel il Condamn' par Contumace dix neuf de Ces Heretics a estre
braslez, etc. ordonne que toutes les Maisons de Merindol qui sont toutes
remplies de Ces Heretics soient entierement demolies, and renverses de fond
en comble, etc.

He further said, that there was another guess Fire projected by the Jesuits,
as was before mentioned out of Thuanus, and which was abetted by the Pope,
which showed there was another Pope beside Eugenius, that thought the burning
of Heretical Cities lawful and meritorious: and he referred it to the
Consideration of the Critics in Gunpowder, how far so great a quantity of it
lodged in a strait Vault, might have tended to the demolishing of the Heretical
Cities of Westminster and even of London, if the experiment of the Gunpowder
Treason had took effect, for said he, the utmost power of Gunpowder was never
yet tried. He told me that Osborn in his King James, having spoke of the
Gunpowder Treason says, I never met two of the like conceit concerning any
effect or extent, this Powder might have reached had it not failed of success:
some men confining it to the Circle it lay in and no farther: whereas the
judgment of others no less experienced, delivered at least the whole Isle to
the fury of it: and then he quotes it as the more probable Conjecture, then
that it could not but work dire effects on the City it self.

He further discoursed that in this Case, of securing Protestant Cities from
Fire at the Popes pleasure, Pere Veron's artifice in making the Church of Rome,
chargeable with nothing to be believed but what is proposed by the Catholic
Church in her general Councils, or by her Universal Practice to be believed, as
an Article or Doctrine of Catholic Faith, or any Papists in this Case joining
with Protestants to decry the Canon Law, is but trifling away time, as to any
giving light to our understandings or keeping Fire from our Cities: for if each
Pope believes he has this power, and the Jesuits too believe it, the Notion
of a things not being de fide, will not be sufficient to save our Cities, when
the Incendiaries even by the Doctrine of probability may save their Souls, and
when they shall have such Doctors as the Pope and Gratian and (as they may
think) Cyprian for the opinion of burning the Nests of Heretical Hornets.

He moreover mentioned how Bellarmine as to the Tenet of all Christian
Monarchies owing subjection to the Pope, said, the contrary to it is Heretical,
tho he well knew that no definition of the Church ever made it Heresy, and
might as well have called the denial of this Incendiary Power of the Pope
against Heretical Cities, to be Heresy.

Moreover he told me he had read Bellarmine cited in that Book of Done p. 277.
for writing against a Doctor, who had defended the Venetian Cause against the
Popes Censures, and reprimanding that Doctor in these words, viz. It is a
grievous rashness not to be left unpunished, that he should say the Canons as
being but Humane Laws cannot have equal Authority with divine: for this is a
Contempt of the Canons, as tho they were not made by the direction of the Holy
Ghost: and yet says Done, citing that Doctor that impugned the Canons, those
Canons that he referred to were but two, and cited but by Gratian. And that
Done further in that Page observed, that when Parsons is to make his advantage
of any Sentence in Gratian, he uses to dignify it thus, that it is translated
by the Popes into the Corpse of the Canon Law, and so not only allowed and
admitted and approved but commended and commanded, canonized and determined for
Canonical Law, and authorized and set forth for Sacred and Authentical by all
Popes whatsoever. Treat. of Mitag. ca. 7. ^. 42.

That moreover tho we know that neither the Decrets nor Decretals, were ever as
such received as Law in England, yet the Pope and Jesuits saying that they
ought so to have been, and that they were and are obligatory upon us, it will
follow that by reason of an unlucky Proverb of Ben Syrah, Quantulus ignis
quantam materiam accendit, and which is used by the Apostle St. James saying*
Behold how great a matter a little fire kindles, and for that there are some
little People ready to apply that little fire, when the Pope or Jesuits would
have them, the Majority of the Papists here, being Jesuited (as was observed)
and that part of them not being of the Gentry, would not be biased by generous
education and temper against the Commands of the mercenary Pope or Jesuits,
and for that even in the Jesuited Gentry here, there were Bigots found to plot
and to prepare to execute the Gunpowder Treason, it is apparent that the Pope
may if he will be very troublesome to our Cities with his Writ de Civitate
comburenda, and that he or the Jesuits can command numbers of instruments to
execute that his Writ (as I may call it) who will think that therein that they
do as lawful an Act, as if the four first General Councils had expressly
warranted the same.

He said that the Popes Decrets and Decretals are in several Popish Countries
so much regarded, that to encourage men to study the same, Academick Degrees
are conferred, namely, of Doctores decretorum, and Doctores decretalium. That
in France where the Canon Law was never in gross received; as Minier the
President of the Council of Aix did set fire on the Heretical Villages as such,
so he has heard that Boerius an eminent Lawyer of France, and President of a
Parliament there, and who has published a Volume of Decisions, has in Tractatu
de seditiosis asserted this Tenet of the Pope's power to burn Heretical Cities.
That the Christians of old when they groaned under the heaviest weight of the
Pagan Persecution, abhorred this revenge against their idolatrous Enemies, as
appeared by Tertullian's Apology, and their sense of the ease with which this
revenge might have been executed, Quando vel una nox pauculis faculis
largitatem ultionis posset operari, si malum malo dispungi penes nos liceret,
sed absit ut aut igni humano vindicetur Divina secta, i. e. One night with a
few Firebrarnds would yield us sufficient Revenge, if it were lawful for us to
discount evil with evil: but God forbid that the followers of the Divine
Religion should either revenge themselves with Humane Fire, etc. That the very
Heathens of old accounted there was turpitude in promoting not only their own
profit, but that of their Country, in firing the Fleet of proclaimed Enemies;
as appeared in Athens when Themistocles by order from the Senate, had privately
Communicated to Aristides how he could destroy the Lacedaemonians by privately
burning their Fleet, and Aristides had reported to the Senate that the project
of Themistocles communicated to him was profitable for the State, but was not
honest, they unanimously resolved against hearing it (as Tully tells us in his
Offices) and much less would they have deliberated of its turpitude. That the
Athenians in the time of open War with King Philip, and when their Priests
offering their most solemn religious Sacrifices to the Gods for the prosperity
of their Country, did Philippum liberos, terrestres navalesque copias atque
omnem Macedoniam exitiali carmine and diris imprecationibus detestari, yet
intercepting some Letters writ by him, they returned them to him unopen'd.

That the Pope and his Trent Council having never disowned this power, nor
branded this Canon, nor yet by any index expurgatorius, damned the Writings of
Gratian, or Gundissalvus or the Famous Canonists by him cited for this opinion,
it was plain that they might therefore be said to approve of the same, that Qui
non prohibet cum potest jubet.

That the Trent Council had gone far in the Confirmation of the Canon Law; and
that the saying used by the Fathers in that Council, was here applicable, viz.
Omnia nostra facimus, quibus authoritatem nostram impertimur.

In fine, he saying that every one ought to withdraw from a Church while it in
effect approved Doctrines in the Faith erroneous, and in practice impious, and
asking me if some of the Great Writers of the Church of England, as namely,
Bishop Jewel, Bishop Andrews, Archbishop La^d, Bishop Sanderson, or any of
them had industriously published it in Print, that we might lawfully employ
Emissaries to burn Rome, or any City where all or the Majority were Papists,
and that such Writing of theirs was never censured by Authority, and impugned
by any of our Divines, tho yet by occasion thereof no Anti-Papists had ever
been the Incendiaries of Popish Cities, I would not however withdraw from the
Communion of the Church of England, till I saw such Tenet of those Divines
publicly branded, and till such Writing had received the usage that the Canon
Law had from Luther, when he cast it into the Flames; I plainly told him that I
would: and the like he said he was inclined to as to Communion with the Church
of Rome, if he found that the Fact of that fiery Tenet against Heretical
Cities, was chargeable on the Pope in his Law and in the Writers thereupon as
aforesaid. And as little Credit as I wish all Mushroom Prophets and Prophecies
may find, I am of opinion, if ever any clear discovery should happen in time to
be made of that Fires having proceeded from the Councils of great numbers of
Jesuits, Friars, or other Papists, (a thing I never Expect) that Popery would
thereby be loaded with such a lasting general Odium here and in Foreign
Countries both Popish and Protestant, as it would hardly breath under the
weight of, and the Prophets of the effects of the Year 1666, would cry that
their predictions did hit right, and boldly say to us their upbraiders, that 66
in its effects is not yet past, just like the Sooth-sayer who being rallied by
Caesar going to the Senate House, and saying, the Ides of March were come,
replied to him, that they were not passed.

There is another happy effect, I expect from the grown and growing numbers of
our populous Nation, and all men's errors, being necessarily the more visible to
each other by their close Vicinage, namely, that men will be ashamed to
aggravate the supposed Political Errors of the Ministers of our Princes as
formerly, and much more not to take it patiently when their Princes pardon them.

How shameful a thing was it that the Kings Pardon was not allowed as good, by
the Lords and Commons, to Archbishop Laud, when nothing but that could save
them from the danger of the Laws, for taking away any man's life by Ordinance of
Parliament.

But so sharp and perfect a ha^er is your Lordship of all Cruel and Arbitrary
Practices, that I think I have heard you say, that you have often wondered why
none ever moved in the House of Lords, that the Proceedings there against
Archbishop Laud might be took out of their Iournal, as well as those against
the Earl of Strafford were, which was to me an Indication that you would have
consented to such a Motion.

Mr. Fox in his Bo^k of Martyrs in one Volume, p. 1085. in the Story of the
life and death of the Lord Cromwell ( who was Vicegerent to Harry the 8th, for
Ecclesiastical Affairs) brings many instances of the cruel injustice by Acts of
Attainder, that many Great and Excellent Men suffered: and has these words in
the Margent, Examples of men falsely Accused and Judged, and ^aith in that p.
Not that I here speak or mean against the High Courts of Parliament of this our
Realm, etc. to whom I always attribute their due Reverence and Authority: but
as it happens sometimes in General Councils, which tho they be never so
general, yet sometimes they may and do err, so they that say Princes and
Parliaments may be misinformed sometimes by some Sinister Heads in matters
Civil and Politic, do not therein derogate or impair the High Estate of
Parliaments, but rather give wholesome Admonitions to Princes and Parliament
Men, to be more Circumspect and Vigilant what Council they shall admit, and
what Witnesses they do Credit.

This passage out of our pious Martyrologer makes me with a just Compassion to
the Merits of several Illustrious Persons, to call to mind the severity of the
Votes of a Loyal Parliament against them.

It was with great precaution and solemnity, that the Athenian Wisdom fastened
the name of Enemy on any one; and of which the frequent imposition and on
slight occasions, and on persons not known to have done any Act of Hostility to
the Kingdom, would make the word lose the Odium of its signification, as many
Words and Phrases have done, and to import no more stated hatred or enmity in
any man to his Country, than do the expressions of Course put into Writs of
Prohibition; or Mandamuses, to our Bishops and their Officials, viz. Of
intending our disherison, or machinating against our Crown and Dignity* mean
any thing of Treason in them which yet the words so expressly import.

Tully tells us in his Offices, that the Original use of the Word Hostis, for
one who was perduellis, came from the lenity of the Romans: hostis enim (says
he) apud majores nostros is dicebatur quem nunc peregrinum dicimus: and
according to this acception of the Word Enemy for Stranger, I shall venture to
say that I think they were Strangers to the Earl of Hallifax, and persons
misinformed (as Mr. Fox his Expression was) who in the late Loyal House of
Commons did think him to be hostis patriae, and whom they who know him, do know
likewise to bear no Enmity to any part of the Creation of God, and to be one
that is so far from any inclination to injure his Country for his Prince, that
either or his Prince or his Country he would not injure the most abject Member
of Mankind.

How shamefully void of sense have I observed some few querulous people here to
be, who have professed to doubt that a very honorable man has of late
remitted somewhat of his fervor, in the defense of our Religion and Laws, who
has so long on every occasion in every place been such an unwearied Agonist
for both, and one who would not fear to be an Athanasius contra mundum,
whenever he should in his Province be lawfully called to be its Antagonist; and
that with contempt too even of the Bribe of Popularity: and of the continuance
of whose confirmed and obstinate habit of an Heroical Love to his Country, they
who have long known him have never doubted, but have agreed in this point of
his perseverance in what Tully calls the pietas in patriam, to pronounce as the
warier Arminians do concerning Grace, viz. that there is a State of Grace
attainable in this life, from which it is difficult if not impossible to fall
away.

With as little Art and faint Colors as I have here drawn the Picture of this
Great Man, any one will say it is very like the Earl of Radnor: and the truth
is, considering that this same pietas in patriam, and the inflexible
observation of Justice, have not been so much incarnate in the lives of later
Christians, as of ancient Heathens, nor perhaps so legible in their Writings,
(and therefore as if that Practice of Piety had been too among Pancirols Res
deperditae, Boccaline held it a proper Advertisement, That all the Princes of
the World should beseech Apollo, that he would insert into their People the
love of their Country) when I would occasionally in discourse do Justice to
this Great Exemplar of it, I endeavor to whet my imagination with thoughts out
of the Roman Authors, and do think of Co^tumacy in Virtue (according to Pliny's
using that word in a good sense) and of the inexplebilis virtutis veraeque
laudis homo, and of the forementioned sooner making Crimen honestum, quam
turpem Catonem, and of the multa and terribilia Piso Contemsit, dum speciosum
mentis suae flecti non vult rigorem, and of what is in Valerius Maximus of
Scipio Africanus, quem Dii immortales nasci voluerunt ut esset in quo se virtus
per omnes numeros hominibus efficaciter ostenderet, and of Ciceros accounting
the pietas in patriam to be the via ad Caelum.

Some here who Correspond with Sir W. I. asking me if I had not heard that you
were prayed for at Mass in Ireland, I told them I had, and that the Earl of
Essex mentioned the same in the House of Lords, and that your Lordship replied,
that if any well meaning Papists in their Mass-house, or Jews in their
Synagogue, or Mahumetans in their Mosc unasked and unsought to, prayed for you,
you would be glad to be the better by their Devotion, tho yet you believed that
none of them did ever, yet supplicate Heaven in your behalf. I told my friends
here that if that thing had been true (and tho on the account of what has been
beforementioned, I believed it not to be so in the least) yet they would soon
cease to infer thence that your Lordships love for the Protestant Religion was
diminished, if they would reflect on the Case of Rawlins White in the Acts and
Monuments, where it appears that the Bishop of Landaff in the Year 1555. just
before he Condemned the said Rawlins to the Fire as an Heretic, ordered a
Priest to say a Mass for him: and as that Bishop in vain Courting him a little
before, to abandon the Protestant Faith, and then asking him how he d^d, and
how he found himself inclined, the poor Captive replied, Rawlins you l^ft me,
and Rawlins you find me, and Rawlins I will continue; that thus constant your
Lordship will prove to your Religion and your self, upon any thing that can
happen; and that whoever shall write the Story of your Lordships life after you
have finished your Mortality, will have cause to say of you as Mr. Fox p. 411.
mentions, that one who writes of Wicliff recorded of him that he persevered in
his Religion, ita ut cano placeret quod Iuveni complacebat, that the same thing
pleased him in his old Age, which did in his youth.

Nor do I indeed doubt but that when your Lordship shall be upon your passage
to the other World, you will take your long leave of your friends in the Style
with which Dr. Holland the Regius Professor of Divinity at Oxford was observed
commonly to bid his friends farewell, viz. Commendo vos amori Dei and odio
Papatus; and that your Lordship who has been so successful an Agonist against
Popery, will share in the Glories of that Promise from Heaven, To him that
overcomes will I give the Morning Star: and that as the Morning Star is the
same with the Evening one, and in the Morning is called Phosphorus, and in the
Evening Hesperugo, so the Protestant Religion will appear in the Evening of
your Life, with the same brightness that it did in the Morning thereof, and so
continue till you shall arrive at that Region, where all the Morning Stars sang
together, and all the Sons of God shouted for joy.

How unreasonably rigid are they who when the Ministers of Princes are studying
and procuring the ease of Mankind, as your Lordship has done, will in spite
of fate disquiet themselves in rendering the lives of such Ministers uneasy; a
temper that I think showed it self over much in a late Speech in the House of
Commons, of Sir W. I. who, if my Information be true, did not reverently use
the power of his Popularity, when with much Acrimony reflecting on some in the
Kings Council, he was supposed to have aimed at your Lordship in words to this
effect, There is another in the Council a Noble Man too among the Kings
Ministers, and a Lawyer, but if we cannot reach him, do not impeach him;
intimating that he would have been glad of any being able with Articles and
Proofs concludent, to have reached your Lordship in order to Impeachment.

There is another Honorable Person who is your Colleague in the King's Council,
a Great Man and a Lawyer too, whom I was sorry to find by the printed Votes of
the House of Commons that were sent into the Country, so many persons were
endeavoring to reach with matter of Impeachment, I mean, my Lord Chief Justice
North. It seemed to me a thing worthy the name of News, that the advising and
assisting in the drawing up and passing a Proclamation against Tumultuous
Petitions, should be thought a sufficient ground to proceed upon to an
Impeachment against him for high Crimes and Misdemeanors.

The security and quiet of Kings and their People are to be so tenderly
regarded, that the drawing one Proclamation after another to prevent the
blowing or breathing in the Kings Face (I allude to the words in one of the
Articles against Woolsy) by Tumultuous Petitioners (a thing punishable at
Common Law, and likewise by the severity of the Council Board) seems strangely
imputed as a Crime to a Judge and Privy Councellor.

The people petitioning in Multitudes are so far from being like the Horse not
knowing his own strength, that their coming in such numbers shows they have
Calculated it, and perhaps with more nicety than the Author of the Discourse
before the Royal Society, concerning the use of Duplicate Proportion had
Calculated the strength of Animals, the which strength he says, is as the
square roots of their weights and substance, and if 1728 Mice were
equiponderate to one Horse, the said Horse is but 1/144 part as strong as all
the said Mice; and so might easily strip the Horses Neck of the Thunder that
God and Nature (according to Jobs expression) have clothed it with; and their
petitioning in numbers being a real Proclamation of their power, it was the
part of so good a Councellor of State, and Mathematician to advise his Prince
and his Country not to be taken in a Trap by the Petitioning Mice: and it was
worthy of so knowing a Judge, to forewarn them of being entrapped by the Law,
and as the Millenary Petitioners were forewarned in King James his time.

What occasioned the Proclamation referred to by the House of Commons, I know
not; but by what I have observed of his accurateness in the administration of
Justice in his great Sphere, and of his Mathematical Genius even not receeding
from it self while on the Tribunal he in every Cause demonstrates the
rationality of the Laws of England, and makes Justice there in its Arithmetical
and Geometrical proportion so visible to all, and by what I have seen of the
serenity of his temper in having had once or twice the honor of his
Conversation, I believe that as a Privy Councellor he would too as much
occasionally assert any Legal Right the Subject has to Petition his Prince, as
he would the Right of the latter not to be illegally and with the apparent
Menace of Members addressed to, a way of Petitioning that has so often and so
lately been the Prologue to the ensuing Tragedy of War.

I was very much pleased to hear how this Learned Judge, being once moved to
grand a Prohibition to the Court Christian in a certain Cause, and that the
Council fencing with Presidents pro and con that came not home to the point,
his Lordship declared in words to this purpose, that in any proceeding that was
against Universal Reason he would grant the Writ; and I think it was as proper
for him as a Statesman to advise a Prohibition in the way of a Proclamation
against Tumultuous Petitions, than which nothing can be more against Universal
Reason. But if a person who is so great a Master of that Reason, and indeed of
Universal Learning, and of that part of it that deserves the name of Real, and
whose single Learning would serve to vindicate a whole profession from Erasmus
his Aspersion of doctissimum g^nus indoctorum hominum, and of knowing nothing
of the Sense and Reason of the World beyond Dover, and the brightness of whose
parts has given a Luster to the Science of the Law, and by whom if by any of
this Age that may be thought possible to be done that our Great Lord Bacon
advised King James to Crown his Reign with, namely, the bringing the Body of
the Common Law, or our jus non scriptum into a Digest, I say if a person thus
accomplished cannot have the skill to walk through the World free from
Impeachment, it will be sufficient to make all men of Illustrious Abilities and
Godlike Inclinations to do good, retire from dangerous Mankind, and not
adventure to Aid Princes who are Gods Viceroys in the Government of the World,
and to be happy in themselves without preserving it, as the first being was
before he made it.

What a diminution was it to the honor of the Age, that the Popularity of Sir
W. I. a person who in the florid part of his youth, appeared but an Entering
Clerk, or one who entered Judgments for Attorneys, and in the greatest Figure he
made in Parliament, or the Court acquired no fame by various Learning and Skill
in the Politics, or by having profoundly studied the great Book of the World,
should yet as with the Impetus of an Oracle run down the great Characters of
this Lord, and of your Lordship and the Earl of Hallifax, that are known to the
World to be so great for Loyalty and Learning, and the Comprehensive Knowledge
of the present and past State of Christendom: and that after that Loyal and
Learned Person, and undefatigable assertor of our Laws and Religion, Sir L.
Ienkins had with great Reason and Courage in a Speech in the House of Commons
against the Exclusion Bill affirmed, that the passing the same would be
contrary to the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and Sir W. I. thereupon
answering it with the Non est haeres viventis, he had somewhat like a general
humme of Applause from the House, and almost as if his had been the voice of
God and and not of Man?

But on this occasion I should be unjust and too reserved to your Lordship, if
I should not tell you that a Gentleman of good parts and a great Estate, a
Member of that Parliament, acquainted me that he being then one of the great
Admirers and Followers of Sir W. I. and frequently present with him in the most
private Cabals, did observe him to be full of fears of the Courts being brought
to favor the Exclusion-Bill, as supposing that the Parliament would be thereby
engaged to part with great Sums of Money: and that he observed Sir W. I. and
others of the Cabal, were at a stand in their Politics as not knowing what
steps to make next if that Bill had passed, and the Consideration whereof (he
told me) made him not desirous to participate further in their Councils.

Thus just is it for Heaven sometimes to blind and confound and abandon good
men in their Councels, when they abandon plain Principles and Dictates of
Reason, and when they will not do what they know, to suffer them not to know
what they do, and particularly not to know while they were so busily founding
Dominion or Empire in Grace, that they were riding Post to Rome as fast as ever
that Father of the Trent-Council did, who was so often employed to the Holy See
to bring thence the Holy Ghost in a Cloak-bag.

It is some Consolation to your Lordship to have fellow sufferers in the
Obloquy cast upon you, by the Tongue of a young Man, in a matter so remote from
verisimilitude, and not worth the twice naming, and whose Person I thought not
worthy the naming once, however a Loyal Parliament thought his Accusations
worthy the Press: and in whose reproach that Honorable Person, and your
Lordships old friend the Earl of Peterborough shared with you. But by what I
have found to be the judged Character of that Lord, among the most Impartial
Studiers of Men in the Age, I may justly say that the honor of the Age was a
fellow sufferer with you both, by the public Countenancing of the dirt by so
obscure a hand thrown on a Person of so Noble Descent both from Father and
Mother, and of so much Courage and Loyalty and Learning, and on whom his great
knowledge of all History Ancient and Modern, has so much accomplished as a
Statesman, and one who in his Travels in the World abroad left there such
impressions of his real value on the most Critical Observers, that his Prince
thought him to be the most proper Person to employ abroad as Ambassador, in
negotiating the Marriage between his Royal Highness and the Princess of Modena,
whereby we may yet hope for an Heir Male to inherit the Crown of England; I
never heard that any thing but sham could represent this Lord otherwise than a
true Son of the Church of England: and having once or twice seen him en passant
at your Lordships House, and observed the lineaments of Honesty and Honor in
his looks, do think that his very face may serve to confute thousands of such
Tongues as that which aspersed him. But both his Lordship and yours have
likewise in that Persons Accusations, and in the greatest Circumstances of
improbability, been fellow sufferers with the greatest Subject, and therefore
need not be ashamed of your fate, according to what the Famous Historian so
well said, Post Carthaginem captam vinc^ neminem pudeat.

Yet having said all this, I shall say that perhaps had it been the fortune of
that Loyal Parliament to have sat longer, it might too have happened that none
of your Lordships that I have named would at last ^ave thought it Parliamentum
sine misericordia, and that I believe you will not find any future one so, and
that your Lordships who have so eminent^y supported the Northern Heresy so
called, will be like the North Magnetic and attract a general popular love,
which after all its variations will return again to you.

But it is high time for me to take off my hand from this Map of the Future
State of England, that as a Predicter rather than a Prophet I have here so
particularly delineated, and as one who according to what is in St. Matthew,
When it is Evening, say it will be fair weather, for the Sky is red, etc. and
from Natural Causes have as well as I could, discerned the signs of the times,
and what it may be a shame for any one that is a piece of a Philosopher to be
wholly ignorant of, when the inspired Prophet tells us, that the Stork knows
her appointed times, and the Turtle and the Crane and the Swallow observe the
time of their coming, and that it is obvious that the Beasts of the Field as
well as Birds of the Air foresee unseasonable weather, from the disposition of
the Air.

Nor is it hard for any Considerer now in relation to some of the Popish and
Protestant Recusants to undertake what the Magicians, Astrologers, and
Chaldeans durst not to the King of Babylon, I mean to tell them what their
Dream was: they dreamt to rule us still by a Nation within a Nation as the
Mamalukes did Egypt, they dreamt of Offices and like idle Millenaries of
Lactantius his golden Age, when the Cliffs of the Mountains shall sweat out
Honey, and the Springs and Rivers shall flow with Milk and Wine, and of a
pingue solum that shall tire no Husbandmen, and of such a Country as Campania
the Garden of Italy that shall not be called terra del lavoro. But I do predict
that the noise of the World, and their being necessarily disturbed by the busy
in whose way they stand will awaken them, and that if they will have any food
to raise the vapors, that will again feed sleep in them, they must work for
it, and that no Papists and Presbyterians will in their sleep cry out of
Persecution as formerly, and that no Papist will hereafter applaud either the
Justice or temper of Mr. Coleman in writing as aforesaid to the Inter-Nuncio,
of the Execution of the Penal Laws against the Papists, and saying, Which are
so insupportable that it is impossible any that is reached by them to have
wherewithal to eat Bread, if they be executed according to the said
Proclamation.

Nor I believe will such Complaining be heard in our Streets from any of the
Nonconformist Divines, as I have read in Print from one Learned Divine of
them, viz. some of the ejected Ministers are so reduced and find so little
succor, that they live upon brown Bread and Water, some have died through the
effects of want, we will be thankful to be under no severer usage than Colliers
and Barge-men, and Seamen, than begging Rogues and Vagabonds have.

But as among the Augurs of old, the Poultreys not eating their Meat or Bread,
served as an indication that the Roman Army was not then to fight, so I hope
that the same thing was meant by the sullenness of Mr. Colemans Augury and the
others Complaint, and that both Papists and Protestants will here eat the Bread
of Quietness with Thanksgiving.

And considering the great number of Attorneys and Sollicitors and Dealers
toward the Law, that has long overspread the Land, and planted in the same
such a general proneness to litigation, and overran it so with Briars and
Thorns of the Law that our Country is not more famous for our Wool, than
infamous for our so much fleecing one another, and considering how another
thing has occasionally put so many men to be skilful Masters of the Science of
Defense with the Weapons of the Law, I mean the farming of so much of the
public Revenue, I may well predict that if such a wild probability should
happen as any Princes hereafter endeavoring by any illegal Course to advance
Popery, that tho good and loyal people would be Lachrymists to him, they would
be soon apt to make all ministerially concerned therein to be Lachrymists to
them.

Although England had a King, namely, Harry the 1 st, of whom it is recorded, that
reforming the old and untrue measures, he made a measure after the length of
his Arm, yet as we have one who has graciously measured the Arm of his Power
by the Laws, so I may safely adventure to foretell what his lawful Successors
will do; and it is to this purpose in some of the most subtle seditious
Pamphlets notified in Print by the ill wishers to the next Heir to the Crown,
viz. that they fear more mischief from him as Chief Favorite and Minister to
his Prince, than they would from him if ever he should live to wear a Crown:
for then (say they) we shall know how to be provided against him by the Course
of the Law.

Nor is it to be doubted but that he who never was known to advise his Prince,
to incommode any one contrary to the Law, will never employ his own power to
the illegal detriment of any man. During this time that his Prince has so
justly placed so much of the Royal Favor on him, may he not as to his
administration thereof say with the same Justice as the great Prophet, Whose Ox
or Ass have I taken? May it not be asked whom of the mad sort of Cattle that
with an infinity of Calumnies and Shams gored his reputation, or wild Asses
that kicked at the same, did he hurt with power or yet take the fair advantage
of the Law against, till his many loyal friends who were secret true
Lachrymists, for the public false misreports spread against him, did importune
him so for the Kingdoms good to defend his honor, and that they might no more
be punished by seeing the limbs of his reputation lie torn and mangled in every
Coffee-house, who had so often exposed those of his Body to Bullets and
Chain-shot in Sea Fights, for the saving the life and honor of their Country?

Those therefore that could in earnest write to the effect abovementioned in
such seditious Pamphlets, let them talk or look as gravely as they will, I
shall yet think but in jest while at other times they are amusing any with
questions about their being Lachrymists under such a Prince; and they put me in
mind of a famous Musician we had in the Court in King James's time, Dr. John
Dowland, who printed a Book of Songs and Pavans for the Lute with the Title of
Lachrymae, and Dedicated it to Queen Anne, and in the Table of the Book,
several of them are thus remarked, viz. Lachrymae antiquae, Lachrymae gementes,
Lachrymae verae, and he observes there in the Epistle what is obvious enough
that Tears are not always shed in sorrow, but sometimes in joy and gladness.
But there is another thing of more weight that occurs to my thoughts from the
remembering that Mr. Henry Peacham in his Book, called the Complete Gentleman,
does on the name of this Lutinest Johannes Dowlandus, bestow the Anagram, annos
ludendo hausi, and that is, that many in several Parliaments who thought they
could do no right to Protestancy but by doing wrong to the next Heir, did too
much and too long play with the Royal Offers, and when they might (if they
pleased) have effected as quick a prevention of the growth of Popery under any
Roman Catholiek Successor, as was took care of in Scotland.

Yet however I have said enough for my continuing to think that as in that
Kingdom, there are are few or none that fear that the belief of Popery can ever
there gain much ground, and ever be the Paramount Religion there, and who think
not that the words of arise Peter kill and eat, will sooner bring the Scots to
eat Hogs Flesh, and believe there is a Divine Right for their so doing (St.
Peter's Sheet from Heaven in the Vision having had that Animal in it) than to
swallow the belief of Popery, or of the Iure-Divinity of the Pope, so the fears
of its growth in England, or of any occasion for the Virtue of the Lachrymae
antiquae of the Primitive Christians will daily grow more and more moderate,
and in time be extinguished.

The late Archbishop of St. Andrews estimated the number of Papists and their
Children in Scotland, to be but about a thousand: but their number in the
States of the United Provinces is vastly more, insomuch that the ingenious
Author of the Policy of the Clergy of France to destroy the Protestants of that
Kingdom, mentions, that there are in Holland, a Country of small extent, ten
times more Popish Ecclesiastics than there are Protestant M^nisters in all
France, which is very large. There is a complete Clergy and Hierarchy.
Amsterdam and all the other great Cities have their Bishops. Those Bishops have
their Chapter and their Priests. There are even religious houses. They are
somewhat disguised, but are as well known as the Ecclesiastics are in France,
and are not in the least assaulted, etc. There was one day in a Longboat or
Ship a Priest dressed in black Cloths who was not otherwise disguised than that
his Coat was short, who said his Breviary before a hundred persons, with as
much Liberty as he could have done in France.

And yet perhaps the number of those who in Holland fear them, or who pretend
to fear them, is but the least of numbers.

I think too in this sharp sighted age, where Art among the Inquisitive follows
Nature as carefully as Equity does Law, one may safely predict that in the
Dividend of our time little will come to the share of Metaphysics, or the
considering how Metaphysica agit de iis quae sunt supra naturam, and that the
World being infinitely busy will not trouble it self with Arriagas infinitum
infinito infinitius: and Christendom's being universally employed in preparing
its defense against War, and giving us time only for real Learning will divert
us from either much opposing or defending the old point, whether Universal be
ens reale, or whether Vniversalia are res extra singularia. If by Metaphysics
we could find a real Answer to the Question, what is truth, or what is time, of
which it has devoured so much, or learn how to measure it by knowing what is a
Clock, we might go on with its entitas, which Mr. Hobs well englisheth, the
isseness of a thing; but since it resolves not what things are as aforesaid,
but as Hudibrass says, only what is what, I think as Filesac. de authorit.
opi^c. c. 1. mentions, that the Council in France forbad Aristotle's
Metaphysics, and punished with Excommunication the exscribing, reading or
having that Book, our time will hold little Communion hereafter with Second
Notions on those who Trade in them, and that as it will seem very absurd to
sacrifice much time to the enquiry if Universal is a real being* and whether
Vniversalia are res extra singularia, and to sacrifice men for believing the
contrary, so it will likewise seem to enquire Whether there be one Catholic,
or Universal Apostolic Church existent apart from particular Churches, which
sense and reason tell us are and must be many, tho the Catholic Church be but
one, and for the want of considering which so many People have been decoyed
into the Church of Rome.

Many are the things that an ordinary Philosopher may predict concerning Rome,
and particularly varying from the Prophecy, that it was to be destroyed by
Fire, may soretel Romam fore luce delendam, and as Tully's words are in his
Book de Natura Deorum, Opinionem Commenta delebit dies, veritatis judicia
confirmabit. And thus too it is easy to predict that the light of Reason and
Experience will forever blot out here the Innovations that came from Geneva as
well as those from Rome. The Jewish Rabbis have from the words of the Sol
Iustitiae arising with healing in his wings, introduced a Proverb of The Sun
arises, the infirmity decreaseth, meaning thereby that the Diseases that make
Mortals groan and languish in the Night, are somewhat abated by the rising Sun:
and thus the State of our Nation will be attended with greater health on the
decay of Presbytery's Kingdom of Darkness.

The Walls of its Jericho are fallen down flat with the sound of the Trumpets
of the Dissenters own Sayings, so usefully published.

Tho I have said enough to speak my opinion of all Dissenters to the Discipline
of our Church, not owning such sanguinary Principles as are chargeable on some
Papists, yet the Dissenters Sayings have proved enough what some of their
Principles were. Nor can it be forgot that King James did very justly in the
Conference at Hampton Court, accuse the Notes in the Geneva Bible to be
Seditious and to savor of Traitorous Conceits, and that he instanced there in
the Notes on Exodus 1. 19. Where they allow of disobedience to Sovereign Kings
and Princes.

As absurd as that Tenet beforementioned in the Decrets, and there founded on
the 13th of Deuteronomy is, I would wish no Presbyterian to insult over any
Papists for it: for it is visible in no meaner a Book than the Assemblies
Annotations on Zechary 13. 3. where the Father and Mother of a false Prophet
are commanded to say to him thou shall not live, and it is said, his Father and
Mother that begat him, shall thrust him through when he Prophesies. The
Comment on the words, Thou shall not live affirms, that the equity of the Law
of Deuteronomy. 13. 6. 9. remains under the Gospel: and with less danger is a Thief,
an Adulterer, a Witch tolerated than such an Heretic and Seducer. The present
pleading for liberty of Conscience in Preaching and Practice is a thing
extremely shameful, dangerous and destructive: and the Comment on the the words
His Father, etc. is, His Parents themselves shall not spare him, preferring
therein their Zeal and Piety toward God before the Affection and Love which
naturally they bear toward their own Children. See Deuteronomy. 13. 6. 9. No less Zeal
is required under the Gospel than was under the Law.

I pray God deliver all Mankind from the cruel rigor of the Equity (as those
Divines term it) of that Judicial Mosaic Law binding under the Gospel: and from
that kind of Zeal binding under the Gospel that did under the Law, by virtue of
the 6th and 9th Verses of that Chapter, and from the 16th V. of which Chapter
the Obligation for firing Heretical Cities was as well deduced by the Pope.

The Church of England illuminates us with better Doctrine, and our Reverend
Bishop Sanderson tells us in his 4th Lecture De obligatione conscientiae, that
no Law given by Moses does directly and formally, and per se ^ind the
Conscience of a Christian, i. e. as it was given by Moses, for that every
Mosaic Law as such was positive, and did oblige those only it was put upon, i.
e. the Jews, and shows that the Precepts of the Decalogue oblige, not because
Moses commanded them, but because of their being consentaneous to nature, and
confirmed by the Gospel, and so does manumit the Christian World from the Yoke
of the Judicial Law that was made only for the stiff necks of Jews. Calvin
himself on that place of Zachary 13. 3. does blunder as shamefully as did our
Assembly men: for he there makes the Penal Jewish Laws to bind under the
Gospel. His words there are these, Sequitur ergo non modo legem illam fuisse
Iudaeis positam, quemadmodum nugantur fanatici homines, sed extenditur etiam ad
nos eadem lex, and himself was in this point the Fanatic, and not the contrary
opinors: and deniable it is not, that several of the Calvinistick and Lutheran
Divines beyond Sea did imbibe the error of hereticidium from the same mistaken
Principle of Monk Gratians, namely, that the Penal^severe Jewish Laws were
obligatory under the Gospel: and tho no Presbyterians (that I know of) were
here Arraigned for any design to fire our Metropolis, and some Fanatical
Fifth-Monarchy men only were Arraigned, Convicted, and Executed for such a
design (and whose Names I think might on that account have been properly enough
engraven on the City Monument) yet of the out-^age of our Presbyterians having
actually fired the Church and State with an intestine War, the whole Kingdom is
a Monument: and where now their Principles are so seen, and seen through, that
I believe any other such inhumane Ecclesiastics as many of our former
Presbyterians were, will be ashamed to appear among us. Their Assembly is
adjourned to the Grave, and no Divines will (I believe) in any future Course of
time find the People of England willing to have 4 s. a day, the wages of each
in the Parliaments Synod, allowed to them for endeavoring to bring our
Consciences under the Mosaic Pedagogy: and the noise of the World from Hammers
of Heretics either in any Presbyterian Synod in England, or in any new Popish
General Council beyond Sea, will (I believe) be utterly over.

And tho perhaps the Centum gravamina did heretofore cause the last pretended
General Council to be called, I mean the Famous Tridentine one, I may, looking
on the Course of Nature, conclude, that there will never be any General Council
more; and that not only for that the Pope has been horse de page, since the
breaking up that of Trent, but because that having been Revera a Council of
Pensioners, and having stood the Papacy for Pensions in 3000 Crowns a Month, (
i. e. in 750 l. Sterling) and having put the Popes to that Charge during its
sitting for 18 years, as it is easy to Calculate how much in pounds Sterling
that Council cost the Popes in all, so it is as easy to foresee that if the
Pope should have occasion for the fellow to that Council, he would not have
that quantity of Money to spare for the same.

There is another thing that I may from the Course of Nature fortel much quiet
to my Prince, and happiness to my Country by, and that is the extermination of
all Mercenary Loyalty, and of an inglorious Loyalty-Trade as well as of a
Religion-Trade, and men's not thinking they are to have Offices or Donatives for
not being Villains, or that by Monopolizing to themselves the name of the
Loyal, they should expect therefore a lucrative Monopoly, the which would stain
their Loyalty indeed, and make it as null and void as any Monopoly: for the
word Loyal being used for Lawful, he is not homo legalis in one sense, who is
bought to be just.

The apparent vast number of the Kings Subjects rendering them too many to hope
all for largesses, and the too great probability of the Future State of England
according to my Notion, requiring for the support and defense of the
Government, all that to be employed in order thereunto, what giving Parliaments
can well give, will make People ashamed to cling to the Royal-Oak like Ivy, and
by preying on its vigor make it the less able to give shelter by its branches.

I was overjoyed with a piece of News a Gentleman sent me, namely that he
discoursing once at dinner with the Lord Hide, the first Commissioner of the
Treasury, concerning the Insolence of some men's expecting to be rewarded by the
King, for not doing mischief to his Government or Revenue, his Lordship
occasionally mentioned somewhat to this effect, viz. that the Trade of ^^ch men
was now broke: there will now be no more taking off of men as the word was: and
if by his Lordship's Advice to his Great Master, the resolving against taking
off of men by Pensions and Rewards, was settled as a new Fundamental Rule in
the English Politics, as I am informed it was, I shall think his Lordship
deserves to find an everlasting Triumph in the History of the Age, and to be
more honored by England than if as Commander of an Army he had vanquished very
many Thousands of its Enemies: for that the taking off of Hydra's Heads by
Gifts (as was beforementioned) would be an endless work, and the ill effects
thereof inclusive of so much Hostility to the public, would be innumerable.
But God be thanked the King by the Political Conduct of this his Minister is
now made Victorious over all those Enemies: and if I had heard that any near
his Majesty had moved for a day of Thanksgiving by reason hereof, I should not
have wondered at it; the thing being of so great importance to England. And no
doubt but the shame of any men's diminishing the Royal Revenue by begging from
the Crown will be the greater, when the necessary improvement of our Land by
our numerous People shall have enriched as many as deserve to be so, and when
to all, who are industrious, there will every where be multiplex praeda in
medio posita, and the effects of diligence fill all hands with profit, and eyes
with pleasure.

This is one kind of a New Heaven and a New Earth, that perhaps we may shortly
see in old England, and when men shall by enquiries about Religion design only
lucriferous experiments, and not luciferous as my Lord Bacon's Phrase is; and
men shall improve their fortunes by the improvement and culture of the Earth:
and to this effect we find the Prophecies of Prosperity to the Jews in the old
Testament expressed by the Trees yielding their fruit, and the Earth their
increase, the Seed shall be prosperous, the Vine shall give her Fruit and the
Ground shall give her increase, the Earth shall hear the Corn and the Wine and
the Oil, etc.

And they who are now by seducers that augment wild fears and jealousies
directed to look up for strange Prodigies to the Sky, will need no Monitors to
behold with joy the unusual fruitfulness of the cultivated Earth: and therefore
I think that one Philosopher looking on the Future State of England may well
say to another, Aspice venturo laetentur ut omnia saeclo.

Then shall men on the account of Profit turn their Swords to Ploughshares, and
the Religion-Trading false Prophet baffled by fate, shall then say as it is in
Zachary, Non sunt Propheta, agricola sum.

I do not wonder at some men's menacing our English World with ill news from
Fate. It is no irrational thing to suppose that the false Prophets in all ages
did often find it turn to their private account to foretell evil rather than
good to Kingdoms; for that many might hope to mend their fortunes by the
public ruins, and would therefore be well pleased with the Predictors of ill
to the public, and would celebrate the Predicters; and therefore it was not
without cunning contrived that the prolation of Events by the ancient Oracles,
should be in a double sense sometimes, because it might then be a moot point
whether the Party of those that desired the quiet or disorder of great Bodies
of People was most considerable.

The most sagacious sort of false Prophets whose chief business it was to be
true to themselves (as the falsest Dice of Gamesters are most true to the
users) did often choose to alarm the People with disastrous Events: and thus
the Witch of Endor chose to make the Shamm-Samuel entertain Saul with the
prediction of his and his Sons death the next day. But it is time for us to
follow that great admonition of Beware of false Prophets, when we hear so many
foretelling us, as by inspiration, of nothing but lamentation and weeping and
great mourning in England, for the continuance of the decay of Trade, and
unavoidable ruin of the Protestant Religion, and when many such deluders and
counterfeit Lachrymists cannot (I fancy) about our weeping on this account,
take their measures together without smiling, according to that Say of Tully,
Potest augur augurem videre and non ridere? It is a very great saying of
Tully's in his 2d Book de Divinatione, Nam ut vere loquamur, superstitio fusa
per orbem oppressit omnium fere animos, atque hominum occupavit imbecillitatem.
And as wise as Socrates was, yet in Xenophon he disputes that, (...), and
Oracles were necessary to the preservation of Commonwealths, and Plutarch does
allege experience in Confirmation thereof; and the murmuring Jews thought
themselves ill used by Providence when the age wanted a Prophet among them, tho
yet the Prophets were so frequent in denunciations of woe to them, and like
Seamen they liked weather that was somewhat like a storm, rather than to lie in
the World becalmed. It Is said in Psalm 74. There is no more any Prophet, we see
not our signs.

And as much as Superstition had in Tully's words, dasterded almost all men's
spirits, yet the Cheat of the Augury was so contrived and diversified as
sometimes on occasion to heighten and enlarge them, and in effect to enlarge
the Empire it self.

Augusto augurio postquam inclyta condita Roma est. But many of our Augurs
endeavor only to enlarge our fears and jealousies, and to intimidate our
spirits and to render the Genius of the Nation less august, and only to enlarge
their own fortunes.

But the ill ominous Birds are flying away: and the many Loyal Addresses with
which the Land re-echoes, and the avowed readiness of so many good men to serve
the best of Princes with their Lives as well as Fortunes upon occasion, import
the best of Auguries to England, and such an one as Homer mentions, (...). i.
e. Vnum augurium est praestantissimum, pugnare pro patri^: and to which Verse
of Homer, Tully probably intended a reference when in his de senectute he said,
Optimis auguriis ea geri, quae pro Reip. Salute gerentur.

Your Lordship has formerly among the great transactions of your life shown
your self a noble Adventurer, for the honor and danger that this kind of
Augury can import, and particularly by your carrying at once your Law in your
head, and your life in your hand in the sight of a Party that had been so
successful with their Swords and even to wind-ward of all others by
inspiration, and when the Conduct of your Politics so highly advanced your
Prince's Restoration, and so much helped to effect the quashing of all the
furious Prophecies of Monarchy ceasing in England.

Not without apologizing for my guilt of a solecism like his who discoursed of
War before Hanibal, by my having so largely addressed my Sentiments of the
Future State of England to such an Oracle as your Lordship, I must at last say,
Non ego sum Vates, sed prisci conscius aevi, etc. and have only taken my
measures from natural Causes, and judging of things to come by what have been,
and by nature's most firm Constancy to it self, and things not being ill
administrable; and at this rate can further very safely predict that according
to Iuvenal, Nunquam aliud natura, aliud sapientia dicet.

And moreover I have in my predictions of the Future State of England
interspersed many Remarks that may be directive, and naturally tend to enrich
the Land and advance its Trade and Industry; and thus I do account that our
Writers of Almanacks do some way compensate the loss of Peoples time employed
in regarding how they turn the hand of the Lottery of Fate round the World, and
foretell various Revolutions and Events here at home and abroad, by their
likewise telling them in what Months to set Quick-sets and Fruit and
Timber Trees, dig Gardens, fell Timber, uncover the Roots of Trees, and to trim
all sorts of Fruit Trees from Moss, Canker, and superfluous Branches, when to
transplant Trees and when to remove Grafts or young Trees, and when to sow all
manner of Garden Seeds and Herbs, when to sow Wheat, and to sow Hemp and Flax,
and by raising in them rational expectations of the Future State of the Earth
meliorated by its Culture.

My Lord, according to the common connection of thoughts, it here comes in my
way to think that it is usual in the Scripture and in several Books, to express
the sense of placing Notions and Tenets and Doctrines in the World, by the
Terms of Seeds and Plants, and the spreading of the same by the growth increase
and propagation of Plants, and the ceasing of them by the Terms of decrease,
withering or extirpation. Our Savior's Parables of the Sower, and some Seeds
falling by the way side and being devoured by the Fowls, and some falling upon
stony places where they had not much Earth, and forthwith springing up because
they had no deepness of Earth, and being scorched when the Sun was up, and
because they had not root withering away, and his Indication of false Prophets
by the similitude of Trees, and knowing them by their Fruit, and his reference
to false Doctrines, when he says, That every Plant which my heavenly Father
has not planted shall be rooted up, and his expression of false Religionary
Notions by Tares in the Parable, are known to all conversant with their English
Bibles, as is likewise his resembling himself to the Vine, and his Father to
the Husbandman, and his saying, that every Branch in me that bears not Fruit
he takes away, and St. Paul's calling the Church God's Husbandry, and when he
tells the Corinthians of his Planting and Apollos his watering.

And we have heard enough of a Collegium de propaganda fide, among the
Romanists, and their many labored points De extirpandis haereticis, and of the
Exterminium Haereticorum: and of their Arts to ex^irpate whatsoever Religionary
Notions they are pleased to call Heretical, and of Nature in this Realm having
extirpated those Arts: and we know how naturally Protestancy did shoot up again
in this our Soil under Queen Elizabeth's Reign, after its being cut down near
the Ground in Queen Mary's: Quippe solo natura subest: and accordingly Job
regarding the Nature of the Soil says, There is hope of a Tree if it be cut
down that it will sprout again, and that the tender Branch thereof will not
cease, tho the Root thereof wax old in the Earth, and the Stock thereof die in
the Ground, yet through the Scent of Water it will bud and bring forth Boughs
like a Plant: and the hand of the God of Nature kept her hands from extirpating
it: and the irrigation of Nature wrought more powerfully than her Fi^es, and
the Scent of Water made Sagacious, Loyal Protestants with their Lachrymae verae
and lachrymae antiquae presage the growth of Protestancy: but as our Laws now
are and likely forever to be, Protestants here may not only take their measures
of the natural duration of their Religion, from the similitude of the sublime
Prophet, viz. as the days of a Tree are the days of my People, but from the
stability of the Lex terrae and the very Earth.

I have before spoke of the Papal Power ending in England under Harry the 8th,
per simplicem desinentiam, and by the power of Nature: and without the
Midwifery of the trouble of his Conscience, or any Artifice in troubling the
Divines and Academies of Christendom about his Marriage with his Brothers
Relict, the birth of Fate would by necessity of Nature have (I think) happened
as it did. Alas! His Marrying her, who had been his Brothers Wife, was only
against the Judicial Law of the Jews, and I am sure was not against the Law of
Nature, as all granting the Law of Nature to be indispensable, and the
necessity of Cain and Abel Marrying their own Sisters, and Gods Commanding them
to increase and multiply, and God's calling Sara Abraham's Wife, who yet was
his Sister, (when as that Matrimonial Contract if it had been against Nature
had been null) and granting likewise that God, who never commanded any thing
against the Law of Nature, did yet in the Levitical Law Command a Brother to
take his Brothers Wife to Marry her, and to raise up Seed to his Brother, must
grant: I therefore concluded, that without Harry the 8ths either having any
Conscience or any Trouble in it, the weakest pretense in the strong hand of
Nature would have been an effectual Weapon, to have then beat down the Papal
Power in England, It was Nature that did, as I may say, raise up that strong
Seed at that time both in England and Germany and elsewhere, that ended in the
Divorce of England* and many Territories from the Papal Power.

And to resume the Comparison of the Seed of Plants, it is obvious to us to
consider that while our Ships Royal were formerly made of the Oaks in our
Forests that were generally self-sown, that is, such as sprang from Acorns
dropping from Trees, or that Birds in their flights let fall, it may be said
that those materials for rearing the Walls of the Kingdom, were themselves
reared by the hand of Nature, and that those Seeds falling in a Soil proper
for them, and by the Forest Laws guarded at first from the fe^t of Men or
Beasts, and by the Autumnal Rains naturally beaten into the Earth, and defended
by the procerity of many other Trees from the injuries of the Wind and Sun,
were by the Husbandry of the God of Nature brought within the high Style of
Arbores Dei, as the Psalmist's expression is. And moreover while it many times
happens, that we see one Timber Tree grow out of the Body of another, and
particularly an Oak out of a Beech (and which may be well supposed to have so
happened from an Acorn dropped by a Bird into the hollow part of a decaying
Beech) and there meeting with a reception from the putrid parts of the Beech,
and the Rain there furthering its passage downward; and the Dews there watering
it from Heaven, and the Beech fencing it conveniently from the Wind and Sun,
the Stem of an Oak does there naturally shoot up, and as naturally pierce its
way for its strong Branches through the sides of the Beech, and work its Root
into the ground through the Root of that Tree, and in time causes it as
certainly to be thrust out of Nature as it could have been by any extirpation;
and when a decaying Oak is thus powerfully vanquished by the Seed of a less
famous Tree, (as to this purpose we are told by Mr. Evelyn in his excellent
Discourse of Forest Trees, that persons of undoubted truth have asserted it,
that they have seen a Tree cut in the middle whose heart was Ash-wood and the
exterior part Oak) we may justly say that Nature did produce all these effects.
And the Energy of nature thus casually causing one Tree to penetrate through
another into the Earth, and there without noise forever to displace it, is as
perfectly applicable to Religionary Tenets and Doctrines: and thus (as I may
with a running view observe) the Seed of the Christian Religion, being (tho
from some mean and obscure hands) dropped on the decaying great Trees of Judaism
and Paganism, presently wrought it self through their Bodies and Roots; and
afterward the nobleness of the temper of the Primitive Christianity decaying in
the World, that Religion, whose heart of Oak had lasted so long, and outbraved
all the Storms of Persecution, was yet pierced through by Arrianism: and Arrius
perplexing the simplicity of the Christian Religion with such Intrigues of vain
Philosophy, that instead of converting men's hearts turned their brains, and
even Constantine's own (as appeared by his banishing Athanasius, and then
recalling, and then banishing him again) and when the Christian Divines vexed
every vein of his heart more than they did Iulian's, and very laudably in his
Council of Nice presented him with Lampoons one against another, and
Christianity so soon proving top heavy when 'twas made the State Religion of
the World, and Athanasius himself was at length the only sober Party, and when
the Arrians happened to be the first Christians that persecuted men for
Religionary Tenets, (and as Grotius in his De Iure belli, l. 2. c. 20. tells
us, In Arrianam haer^sin acriter invehitur Athanasius, quod prima in
contradicentes usa esset Iudicum pot^state, and quos non potuit verbis
inducere, eos vi, plagis, verberibusque ad se pertrahere anniteretur, and did
bastinado People into Conversion) and when the Orthodox Christians had groaned
longer under the Arrian Persecution, than they had done under the Pagan, and
when the Christian Religion whose Precepts do so nobly transcend the Morality
of all others, did shortly after appear in the World with such a Figure of a
Dotard Tree as gave Salvian cause to exclaim, Praeter paucissimos quosdam, qui
mala fugiunt* quid est aliud omnis coetus Christianorum quam sentina vitiorum,
it was but congruous to nature that those rapacious Birds of prey the
Mahumetans, dropping the Seed of their new invented Religion on the Christian
as decayed by Arrianism, that it should so soon work it self through all its
parts and roots in Asia and Africa, and that the Crescent there should so
powerfully d^ive away the Cross. And thus too, when Italy was overrun with the
barbarous Nations partly of the Pagan, and par^ly of the Arrian Belief,
Pag^nism and Arrianism being then Dotard Trees in the World, the Seed of the
Christian Doctrine falling on them from the Pious and Learned hands of Gregory
the Great, did easily work through them, and for the Conversion of them, and
likewise of our English Nation, about the Year 600 from Heathenish Idolatry,
the greatest Celebrations are due to him: and no wonder if the Papacy then
yielding so good Fruit, did then cast so venerable a shade in the World. But
that Tree afterward being observed to degenerate and decay, within Six Years
(as the general Observation of our Apocalyptick Men is, ( Valeat quantum valere
possit) and who thus tells us of the aetates Antichristi, viz. Nascentis in
Bonifacio circa Ann. 606; Iuveniliter exultantis in 2. Consilio Nicaeno, Anno.
787. Regnantis in Hildebrando and successoribus post An. 1075. Triumphantis in
Leone Decimo, Ann. 1517. Vltima senescentis est: and say, that shortly after it
began to be consumptive,) and the decays of it being obvious to the view of the
gazing World, and the Branches of the Lutheran and Calvinistick Tenets
appearing through its sides, the quiet and gentle Order of Capuchins was
invented for the praying for its growth and flourishing in the Year 1530. and
ten years afterward the Active Fiery Order of the Jesuits was invented to
extirpate the Men that wished ill to its growth, and after that the Fathers of
the Oratory were set up to extol and preach up the Tree, but Nature would not
be extirpated: the Potent Seminal Virtue of the Rational Religion dropped on the
Tree of the other, has passed its roots through and through, and (as I may
say) transubstantiated it self through them, and rooted it self deep both into
the intellectual World, and into States and Kingdoms and their Laws, and will
in time probably leave not one Fiber or Capillamentum of the Roots of the
Irreligionary part of the Tenets of Popery remaining in Nature: and show the
World that the Schisma Anglicanum that Sanders and other Papists cry out of as
so unnatural, was a mere natural Scissure or Rupture of the parts of the
decaying Tree of the Church of Rome, that came to pass from the Seed of the
Protestant Religion being cast thereon.

And such a Natural Scissure has the Religion of the Church of England made
through the sides and roots of Protestant Recusancy: and the Seeds that by the
hands of Non-conformists, probably guided by Jesuits, have been laid on the
Royal-Oak of the Church of England, which they vainly thought decayed, were in
effect thrown away: and as the old Prophetic Fiction represents it, that every
great Tree included a certain Tutelar Genius and still living with it, it may
be said that Nature it self is the Tutelar Genius of that Plant of Renown, that
(according to the Scripture expression) we may call the Church of England, and
will ever live with it.

The Numbers of our Non-conformists are daily decaying, and the names of their
Tenets will probably be in a short time forgotten.

We are told in Townsend's Collections that Sir Walter Raleigh mentioned it in
one of the Parliaments of Queen Elizabeth, viz. in Anno 1593. That there were
then near 20000 Brownists in England: a number somewhat near as great as that
of the Papists to be estimated from the Bishops Survey. The name of those
Schismatics is evaporated, and their Tenets are not more known or enquired
into by the Populace, then are the Heresies of the Bardesanistae, the Aquei,
the Abelonitae, the Messaliani, and some others.

As was remarked concerning the late Nonconforming Divines not having bred up
their Sons to Nonconformity; the same thing is much observable among the
Lay-Dissenters, and that their Children do not generally imbibe their Parents
principle of Dissentership; but rather the contrary. The Gross of their Numbers
always consisting chiefly of Artisa^s and Retail-Traders in Corporations,
(where before the King's Restoration they were numerous) and naturally hating
Popery and its Parade of Ceremonies, cannot but be sensible of the sharp hatred
against the same in the Professors of the Religion of the Church of England, as
by Law Established; and how vastly such Professors do every where over-shoot
the Dissenters in numbers: and how the Seed of the Church of England has as
naturally and with as much ease pierced through the Body of theirs and
dissolved its Roots* as does the Seed of an Oak often growing in the Body of a
decayed Willow.

The times were known in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King
Charles the first, and likewise since, (till within these late years) that some
Statesmen when their Court-Interest was decaying and in danger of Extirpation,
could, by wheadling Dissenters into a belief that they would plant their
persuasion in the Church, plant themselves the better in the State: but (
humanly speaking) such Conjunctures of time will come here no more: and the
seeming Eradication of such a Religion-Trade in Church and State, is a strong
Indication, That our Heavenly Father or (as I may say) the God of Nature never
planted it.

But if there were no Laws in being to extirpate any Dissenters Schism, or
separation from our Church, or to Mulct or Excommunicate the obstinate
Separaters, or if any of those Laws were never Executed (as through the
vigilance of our Magistrates they have been) yet is there one apparent way
whereby the Conformists to the Church of England could now as easily lessen
their numbers, and consequently extirpate their Potency every where, as they
can frame a thought or resolution to do it, and by no other Engine than that
with which our Universities of Oxford and Cambridge batter the Contumacy of
particular Townsmen, namely, not by Excommunicating, but by discommuning them,
that is to say, by forbidding the Scholars to Trade with them.

Their own forbearance of buying from Conformists the Wares that those of their
own Sect do sell, may reasonably invite such a re^aliation. While heretofore
they were so numerous in England, their Congregated Churches helped many of the
mean Artists and poor Traders thereof, with the pretense of Liberty of
Conscience to force a Trade by Combination among themselves: and their doing it
then turned to some account; but would now be altogether insignificant in this
wane of their Numbers.

And thus without sweat or blood, or one Information brought on Penal Statutes,
or the least occasion or color for their Outcry of Persecution, may the many
Millions of Conformists here humble the Comparative handful of Popish and
Protestant Recusants both in Corporations, and out of them too when they
please, and in effect reduce them to the Condition the many Empericks in our
Land would be in, if they only sold Physic to one another.

I affect not to be a Propounder of any new Law, or of the execution of any old
that may give the least Addition of trouble to any Member of the Realm, whose
Principles and Practices are not justly suspected to threaten the disturbance
of the whole: and my being informed by some of my Correspondents, who are very
impartial observers of things, that many of the Dissenters of this Age have
made the Press send forth several of the Antimoniarchical Principles of the
former, and as if they designed to revive its Rebellion, and that tho the same
Laws that have secured our Religion, have likewise secured the Power of the
Militia solely to the King, and Enacted, that it is not lawful on any pretense
to take up Arms, etc. yet that the Government is justly apprehensive of many
Dissenters and their Pastors, owning the former Doctrine of Resistance, I could
wish (as I did in behalf of the Papists) that they would themselves offer to
his Majesty's Consideration such a way of a Test or Assurance of their being
become sound parts of the State, and that they aim at no power of disturbing
it; and as to his Royal Wisdom may appear substantial and satisfactory till
they do so I wish that not only the Magistracy but all private loyal persons
would have such a regardful eye on them as is had in Foreign parts on those
that come for Prattiques from infected places, and bring no Letters of Health,
and that they would have Prattique or Commerce with such of them: which would
soon enforce them to live by themselves.

I have in this Discourse already acknowledged it to your Lordships just
praise, that you are not of too narrow a Spirit or Principles as to Protestant
Dissenters, as supposing that you had such Sentiments of the usage fit to be
afforded to some of them, that our Learned Bishop of Winchester owned in a
Letter to your Lordship, which you once showed me: and I was as ready to be
their Excusator as any of the Church of England could be till I saw their
ingratitude so instrumental in Cancelling the Declaration of Indulgence: and
still out of a natural inclination do, as I said in the Case of the Papists,
wish them all that share of the Royal Favor that would not undo themselves and
others: and (as I said in the Case of the Papists) do suppose the continuance
of the old Laws against Protestant Recusants necessary in this Conjuncture,
that the King in whom the Executive Power of the Laws is lodged, may sharpen
the edge against any one of the Party that should be an aggressor against the
Peace of the Kingdom, and especially considering how often many of the Puritans
have took the advantage of the public pressures of the Crown in former Ages,
and that while it was in procinctu to withstand a Foreign Invasion. My Lord
Keeper Puckering's Observation of their Temper expressed in his memorable
Speech is known to all: and the present apprehensions in the Government of
danger from Dissenters, have sufficiently evinced the Prudence of his Majesty's
Measures in not repealing the Penal Clauses in our Statutes against Protestant
Recusants. When they who were regarded as weak Brethren, do now fortiter
Calumniari and Libel the Government, and call whom they will Julian, it is
necessary that the Prince by having the power of the Penal Laws in his hand,
should be able to discriminate those who have not yet discriminated themselves:
and in the Case of Persons stupid and perverse, it is fitter that Children
should be Lachrymists than old men.

When the Divines of the Church of England have of late from one end of the
Land to the other alarmed the People with Exhortations against Disloyalty, as
loud as those in a late Conjuncture against Popery, and the King's Ministers
were informed of the Altum silentium, in the Conventicles as to any making the
English Bibles there support the Rights of our English Kings, and that the
Iulians there were Apostates from the Principles of the Non-Conformists in King
James's time, and had forgot how Reynolds, Whitaker, Cartwright, Dod, Traverse,
etc. had in their Writings disowned the assigning it as a Cause of the
Primitive Obedience, Quia deerant vire, and that a new Sect of false weak
Brethren had learned to urge the deerant vires, 'twas time for the King to keep
the strength of the old Laws in his hands, and occasionally to arm them against
the petulant insolence of any Seditious Protestant or Popish Recusants.

I have been far from recommending in this Discourse the Exterminium
haereticorum, or Extirpation of any Recusants: but have endeavored with the
sedateness requisite in a Philosophical or Political Disquisition, to give my
Judgment of the Natural Causes that induce me to expect the Extermination only
of things, or Principles Relionary, and indeed to speak more properly, of that
part of Men's Principles only that is irreligionary and against Nature, and to
expect such parts being luce delenda.

I expect not that all the Debates of the Religionary part of Presbytery should
here among all men cease, tho yet I have conjectured that they who should write
professedly of that Subject here would want Readers, and as I believe too
Discoursers of the Latitudinarian Hypothesis would likewise: and do think that
many little Religionary Speculative Notions about the meaning of some obscure
passages in Scripture may to some of our Dissenters seem great, and employ
their time in Debates, and as when the famous Ainsworth and Broughton
heretofore had before their Congregations of Dissenters who went hence to
Holland many and fierce disputes about the Controvesie, whether Aarons ephod
were blew or Seagreen, a Controversy that puzzled all the Dyers of Amsterdam,
(as Fuller says of it in his Church History) as well as it did our separatists
there, that took so much pains to be therein illuminated, and which I think the
light of a Farthing Candle brought in any night among them, might have easily
settled (or as I may say deleted) in regard that blew and yellow making a
green, the yellow of the flame of the Candle would have made what appeared blew
by day, to have seemed green at night, and prevented their further
Anathematising one another as Schismatics about the same.

And as I beforementioned it out of a late Book of a Divine of the Church of
England, that some of the Reliogionary parts of Popery he instanceth in, viz.
Invocation of Saints, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, are and will be learnedly
and voluminously defended to the Worlds end, I believe the same may be so in
Popish Countries abroad, and that the same will be believed by many Persons
here, tho yet the voluminous discussion of the same has long been (and is like
to be) out of fashion here, and reflections on the same en passant, or only in
short Treatises may be thought by our Divines sufficient to guide their
Auditors from mistakes therein, and effectually to confute: and I believe that
our English Church will never be troubled with the growth of the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation under any Prince, we may have who shall believe it, nor of
the Doctrine of Consubstantiation under any Prince of the Lutheran persuasion,
nor of Calvin's horrendum decretum relating to reprobation (as it is called)
under any Prince that may believe the Doctrine of Calvin, tho yet till the
Peace of Munster the timid People of the Lutheran and Calvinian Religions
hating one another more than they did Papists abroad in the World, were so much
imposed on by fears and jealousies in Case a Lutheran or Calvinian Prince
should by the right of Lineal Descent come to rule them.

But the Munster Peace has taught them better things: and should I ever hear
that any Roman Catholic Prince here did according to the power by Law reposed
in him, relax some of the Penalties of the Law in Case of Recusancy, that as
things now are, Recusancy would not be thereby rendered considerably prolific
with Converts.

Tho I have given my opinion as beforementioned concerning the Fact of the
increase of the number of the Papists in the Conjuncture of the Declaration of
Indulgence, and do not think fit to alter it, yet I can tell your Lordship that
a Person of great Sagacity who I believe considered the State of their Numbers*
here then very carefully, and entirely believe what he published thereof in
Print, I mean the Author of the Catholic Apology with a reply, etc. there
says, that during the Year 1672. (and which he calls a year of Peace) there
was not one Priest, one Mass one Conversion more in England, than in the Year
1663, 1666. or any other time of trouble.

I have in this Discourse spoke of such a perfect hatred against Popery as may
always consist with a perfect love to Papists, and cinge not a hair of their
heads more than a Lambent fire. I have acknowledged the great mortifications
austerities and zealous devotions, not only among many of the Religious Orders
of the Church of Rome, but of the common People, and have allowed a sober Party
to the Jesuits themselves, and have reason to believe that Bellarmine himself,
that hammer of Heretical Princes, as his Works show him, was yet of so soft and
gentle a disposition as would not permit him to hurt a Fly or tread on a Worm:
and I have reflected on no other Principles of the Jesuits, with any sharpness
than what the present Pope has done, and which the Court of Inquisition at
Rome or elsewhere would have allowed me to do: and I have been as I still am so
free from any thing of rancour or acerbity in my Principles, relating to the
usage of the Papists that an English Priest of the Church of Rome, the Author
of the remarkable Book beforementioned, called the Advocate of Conscience
Liberty, or an Apology for toleration rightly stated, published in the Year
1673. (and the most considerable Book that had for several years been writ in
favor of the Roman Catholics, and a Book our Learned Dr. Stilling fleet
refers to in a very excellent printed Sermon of his p. 43. and called, The
Reformation justified, and Preached before the Lord Mayor of London) does me
the honor there to adopt as his own several Sayings of mine, he found in a
printed Discourse of mine that was disswasive of the use of force in matters of
Religion, and gave me occasion when I read some passages in his 14th, 25th,
26th, 34th, 43d, 54th, 55th, 62d, 94th Pages there, to call to mind that I had
read them elsewhere: and much good might any thing in my Writings do that
Author, and he was as welcome to them as if they had been his own: and I am
sorry that his not citing an Author where he should have done it, was
accompanied with another misfortune of citing one where he should not, I mean
his in p. 225. citing of D' Ossat. He might have cited another passage of mine
against Hereticide as being impolitic if he had pleased to have took notice of
it among its fellows, and where I observed, that the putting of the Roman
Catholic Priests here to death, did propagate their Religion: and that that
Faith was given to the Assertors of Popish Opinions, because they were dying,
which they could not have drawn from me but by raising the dead.

I still own what in p. 93. he partly cites of mine as said by another Author,
That if it be not lawful for every man to be guided by his private Judgment in
things of Religion, 'twill be hardly possible to acquit our separation from the
Romish Church from the guilt of Schism, etc. and if any Papist shall as to any
Tenet that can properly come within the denomination of Religion tell me, that
his private Judgment guides him to receive the guidance of the Church of Rome,
and that therefore I a Protestant ought not to be inclined to bear hard upon
him on the account of such adhesion to his private Judgment, I shall own the
Argumentum ad hominem so far as to tell him that I am not inclined eo nomine to
he severe to him.

And now my Lord, because it has been so ^ust^mary in the Authors of large
Discourses to bestow on them a short REVIEW, that it would appear sullen^ess in
me not to follow them, and because it would be an irreverence to your great
Judgment in me to present any thing for you to view once, that I had not
resolved to view twice, I intend to improve some Intervals of leisure hereafter
in reviewing of this Discourse, and shall explain some passages therein on
occasion and add others: and if I doubt of any thing particularly in the
various matters of Calculation herein contained (and of many of which few or
none perhaps have written) or shall alter my opinion therein, or in any thing
else, I shall acquaint your Lordship why I do so; and do as much value my self
on my natural temper of acknowledging a quick and ready assent to any
proposition of Reason that convinces my understanding (how contradictory
soever the same may be to any former Notion of mine) as any man can value
himself on his thinking he never erred, or on his Abilities either by Eloquence
or Sophisms to make others think so, and to make them err with him: and do
still account this to be one of the best properties in the best Ship, namely,
the soonest to feel its Rudder: and do think, that as none but Cowards are
cruel, so none but Dunces are positive.

My Lord, after the Efflux of the various Intervals in which this Discourse was
written, it having happened that the Papists are to the general satisfaction of
impartial Judges of Men and Things, become as found a part of this Nation as
they were and are of the Dutch States, (and as throughout this Discourse I
always supposed them capable of being) and that the Body of them is as Loyal as
can be wished, and likely forever so to continue, and that none but the
Factious would have them now to groan under the Penal Laws as formerly, I will
not despair of many of our Dissenters improving hereafter in Principles of
Loyalty, as likewise of Conformity, but hope they will really deserve to be
thought as Loyal as they were so de facto, by many greater Judges than my self
at the time of the beginning of this Discourse, and when so many in our Loyal
Parliaments were so extravagant in their Charity to Dissenters, as to think
that St. Peter's Ship was the only Fire-Ship, and Nonconformity a quiet trading
Merchant-man, and being hared with fears and jealousies of Popery, were so
eager to have the very Laws against Protestant Recusants Repealed.

But as I hinted the distinguishing between Popish and Protestant Mathemat^cks
to be absurd, and as a gross Error about Proportion or Numbers would appear
more ridiculous in Archimedes than in an ordinary Mathematician; so true
Protestants Nonsense or true Protestants Rebellion is to be no favorable
Case: and the Name of Protestants must not more than that of the Society of
Jesus be allowed as a Charm to raise the Devil of Rebellion.

When Luther and those who of old deserved the Name of True Protestants abroad
as great Co-workers with Nature, in introducing the Reformation of Religion,
were almost deafen'd by their Papal Adversaries Outcryes of the tunica
inconsutulis, and when particularly as Sleidan tells us in his Commentarys,
Granvill the Emperors Deputy in an harangue he made to the Citizens of Worms
did so passionately conjure them, That they would not tear Christ's seamless
Coat, the Protestant Populace was so far from being awed out of their way by
those words, as that they gave their Adversaries the Name of Inconsutulistae,
or the seamless men: and as little will any of our false and jesuited
Rebellious Dissenters effect any thing but the abuse of the name and thing of
Protestancy, and the ridiculing themselves by their usurping on a pretense to
be TRVE PROTESTANTS.

It comes here in my way to observe that some of our Dissenters and other
Nominal Protestants, who are so apt without sense or reason to call others
Enemies to the King and Kingdom, have really appeared such to both, by their
having so much increased Divisions in our State as well as Church, and by their
having been the Aggressors in the dividing the Populace here by spightful
calling of Names, which yet I have not thought fit to mention in this
Discourse, and whereby the Loyal have been forced some way to retaliate, not
only out of a generous scorn, but that they might speak intelligibly: such
Aggressors have likewise notoriously contributed to the Divisions in the
Kingdom by their too much encouraging the Plot-Witnesses (and particularly that
Recorded Profligate who so desperately perjured himself in the Case of your
Lordship, and the Earl of Peterborough and a Highborn Prince) and by extreme
acerbity and rancour relating to the Persons of Papists. But their most fatal
injury to their Country has been their weakening its Reputation (a thing which
Kingdoms must necessarily subsist by, as well as private Persons) through their
studied Artifice of making a Popish Plot to be thought so long lifed, and when
England's reputation for its strength, or which is all one for its being united
within it self, was much more necessary for its well being, than in any
Conjuncture of time that perhaps ever happened.

Considering therefore that the present State of England does, and that the
probable Future State of it will call so peremptorily on all his Majesty's
Subjects to preserve their Country by the Exterminium of all Divisions, as I
think I have not brought any disreputation to my own Judgment by adventuring to
predict the necessary growth of L^yalty making all England to become in time
one Sober Party; so I am sure I have provided for the Reputation of my Country
thereby as well as I could.

I am not so angry as to think that many of our Religionary Recusants will
either on the account of the Divine Prayer of the holy Jesus for the uniting
his Flock, or of any Scripture-predictions of the more pacific temper that
Christians shall at last be blessed with, be thus inclined to endeavor to show
themselves (as I may say) honest Inconsutulists, and to forbear dividing our
Realm as formerly: but by their Interest so visibly and palpably concerned in
the strengthening the Kingdom, I suppose necessity of Nature may be
instrumental in the accomplishment of such Scripture-predictions: and just as
the Interest and Concern of the Soldiers in the Gospel who hoped to have
Christ's seamless Coat come to their share, inclined them not to rend it and to
cast Lots for the same, and whereby the Scripture was fulfilled as is said in
the Gospel.

I have mentioned it out of the Scripture that the Stork knows her appointed
times, and the Crane and the Swallow observe the time of their coming: and I
may (thinking of a great Prince abroad) add, that the sight of a numberless
Flock of Stares making somewhat like a Cloud in the Air, and safely flying
close together, while there is a Falcon towering above them, will direct the
Populace of several parts of Christendom to Loyalty and to the natural Garranty
of Union at home under their respective Governors, whereby they will be
effectually preserved.

As I have in this Discourse entertained your Lordship with somewhat like a
short Historical Account of the accidental increase and natural decrease of the
Numbers of the Papists in several Conjunctures since the Reformation, so I
shall in my intended Review with the like of those of the Non-Conformists, and
impartially take notice of the respective Conjunctures of their petulant
insolence: and whereby I shall show to what strange Principles of Out-raging
our Municipal Laws they were gradually abandoned.

As a Specimen hereof I shall observe, That Ames a Learned Dissenter of the
former Age, in the Preface of his Puritanismus Anglicanus, printed in the year
1610, speaking of the sufferings of the Clerical Dissenters, says, That the
Crime they were adjudged guilty of in England was, Quod obstinaverunt sese
contra leges: and then goes on to ask, Sed quae tandem illae quarum gratia and
vi tot fideles and alias inculpati Ministri sunt bonis omnibus sedibusque pulsi
(nam ex altari vivebant) dignitatibus and functionibus suis exuti, faedati
etiam existimatione? Sunt autem ne nescias non fundamentales Regni leges* non
vetera Majorum scita aut consulta, quorum summam brevem in Magna ( ut
appellant) Charta conscriptam habemus: haec illi Religiosissime colunt: horum
fidem implorant; sed Canones nescio qui in legum fraudem dolo malo confecti, a
Parliamentario senatu damnati, vere sontici, quos denique adversus ministros
inviti, and non sine pudore and in alios culpae trajectione, exercent Authors
ipsi, etc.

But we may with horror ask, what kind of Laws is it, that those have Outraged
since 41, and some of them since the year 60, and since a particular Law has
declared the Militia to be solely in the King?

I most humbly take my leave of your Lordship at present, and am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful Servant.

To the Right Honorable THE LORD MARQUESS OF HALIFAX.
MY LORD,
ACcording to the Common Civility of Ships paying a Salute to the Forts on the
Coasts they come near, the Course of my handling the following Subject
necessarily giving my Thoughts an approach to the Considering the great use
that Providence not long ago made use of your Lordship's great Abilities as a
Fortification for the Defense of the Hereditary Monarchy, I have held it here
but common Justice to Congratulate to your Lordship your heroical Loyalty and
great Success therein on one MEMORABLE Day.

It pleased God, in whose Book the Members of Men's Bodies, and Talents of their
Minds are written, then to call forth your Head, and Heart, and Tongue, your
flowing Elocution, your fixed Judgment, your great Presence of Mind and Thought,
your comprehensive Knowledge of the past Public Affairs at home and abroad,
and even the generous ferment in your Blood, and to put them all to signal use
in preserving the whole Body of the Kingdom.

Your Lordship's Goodness was herein the more God-like, for that as the great
benign Father of the Creation was pleased with being a Benefactor to such whose
Ingratitude he foreknew, and to some who would render him as negligent of the
Concerns of his Creatures, and to others who would represent him as unjust in
his Prescriptions, and cruel in his Designs, and taking pleasure in the
Destruction of Souls, so your Lordship was resolved on your Beneficence to your
Country in the black Conjuncture of our Fears and Iealousies, and you were then
Communicative of the brightest Beams and sweetest Influences of your serene and
great thoughts to it, when you knew that by some of the People for your so
doing you would be maligned and misrepresented as an hostis Patriae.

I shall Presume to give your Lordship no further trouble then by the sincere
Profession of my being

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Obedient Servant, P. P.

THE OBLIGATION Relating to the King's Heirs and Successors In point of
Conscience discussed, As resulting from the OATHS of ALLEGIANCE and SUPREMACY;
and the Takers of those Oaths proved to be thereupon become bound to bear Faith
and True Allegiance to those HEIRS and SUCCESSORS in the Due and Legal Course
of DESCENT.
I Shall without Proem or Passions here approach to the Great Areopagus of the
Court of Conscience, and having stated the Question of what Obligation to the
King's Heirs and Successors, results from the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy
in point of Conscience, shall deliver my judgment of the same in some
Conclusions, and answer Objections that may occur.

I shall here take Notice that the word Obligation from being Originally a Band
or Ty of the Law for Payment of Debts, has been since frequently applied to
the discharge of Moral Offices. Obligatio est juris vinculum quo necessitate
restringimur alicujus solvendae Rei. Instit. de Obligationibus. And pursuant
hereunto men may be properly said to pay their Allegiance to Princes in
discharge of their Natural Obligations and their Oaths.

But here I consider not the extent of the Obligation of the Natural Allegiance
that English Subjects owe their Monarchs, nor yet their Obligation to
Allegiance from the Divine Law positive, nor from the Lex terrae; tho yet I
account it very plain that we are on all those accounts bound to pay them
Allegiance: but do choose to confine my discussion of the Obligation to
Allegiance, as resulting from the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and as
mentioned in our Statutes in relation to our King's Heirs and Successors, and
most particularly from that CLAUSE in the Oath of Allegiance, viz. I will bear
Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his HEIRS and SUCCESSORS, and him and
them will defend to the uttermost of my power against all Conspiracies and
Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or their Persons, their
Crown and Dignity, etc. And THAT in the Oath of Supremacy, viz. And do promise
that from henceforth I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the King's
Highness, his Heirs and lawful Successors, and to my power shall assist and
defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences and Authorities granted or
belonging to the King's Highness, his Heirs and Successors, etc.

And I here enquire, how far the Obligation resulting from those Clauses in
those Oaths, in Relation to such Heirs and Successors, may be judged in point
of Conscience to extend?

As to the Question thus explained and stated I shall lay down these following
Conclusions;

First, That those Oaths (and indeed all others) do respect a Duty to be
performed in the Future time; that is, at the least some time tho perhaps a
very small one after the Obligation contracted, as is well opened by Sanderson
in his first Lecture of the Obligation of Oaths, and where he shows that this
happens in every Oath assertory as well as promissory: for whoever swears
obliges himself ipso facto to manifest the truth in that which he is about to
say, whether it be in a matter past or present by an Assertory; or in a Future
matter by a Promissory Oath.

Secondly, That by that part of an Oath Promissory contained in the
forementioned Clauses of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, as likewise by
all other Oaths Promissory, the Party swearing is bound to endeavor for the
Future as much as in him lies by his Deeds to fulfill what he has sworn in
words: and this Sanderson in his second Lecture has well asserted as to an
Oath Promissory, viz. That he who endeavors not to perform that which he has
promised is guilty of Perjury in the Court of Conscience

It Is plain that in an Assertory Oath, if I took the same with a wellcompo^ed
mind, and have given my Testimony truly, I have discharged my Duty, and have
my Quietus from my Conscience for the same. But in an Oath Promissory, and
particularly in the Promissory part of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, I
am not discharged by the sincerity of my intention in my promise. I have
engaged my self to Action, and have lanched my self into a Sea of Business from
that time forward till the end of my life, and as there is occasion and
opportunity I am to DO what in those Clauses I have promised to the King and
his Heirs and Successors. And thus the Style of DOING runs in Numbers 30. 2. If
a man swear an Oath to bind his Soul with a Bond, he shall DO according to all
that proceeds out of his mouth.

Thirdly, That those Oaths and all others are to be taken in the sense of the
Imposer. For the Oath being taken that the Imposer may be assured that the
promise of the Person swearing shall be effectually made good to him, there
would be no assurance thereof in the least, if the Oath were to be interpreted
otherwise than in the Imposers sense: and under this Conclusion it may be
properly added, that where that sense is sufficiently manifest in the words, it
is exactly to be stood to, as Sanderson has well showed in his second Lecture
of the aforesaid Subject, and where having showed how we must take heed that we
impose not on the Oath we have taken, or any part thereof other sense than that
which any other Pious and Prudent Man (and who being unconcerned in the
Business is of a freer Judgment) may easily gather out of the Words themselves,
he says, That we become without question guilty of the heinous Crime of
Perjury, if that milder interpretation which encouraged us unto the Oath chance
to deceive us. And in his 6th Lecture. 7. he says, As it is one kind of
Perjury to strain the words during the Act of Swearing unto another Sense than
that wherein they are understood by the Auditors, so it is another kind of
Perjury having sworn honestly, not to proceed sincerely, but to decline and
elude the strength of the Oath (tho the words be preserved) with some new
forged inventions, variously turning and dressing the words to cloak the guilt
of their Conscienc^s as Tacitus says of some: and he concludes that Section by
saying, That where the words of an Oath are so clear in themselves, that among
honest men there can be no qu^stion of their meaning, the Party swearing is
obliged in that sense which they apparently afford, and may not either in
swearing or when he has sworn, stretch those words upon the last of his
Interest by any studied interpretations.

There appeared nothing more detestable to the Eye of the old Civil Law then
fraud and trick, and particularly the destroying the true Sense and meaning of
a Law by a cavilling fraudulent interpretation that retains the words but
confounds the ends for which the Law was made; and accordingly it is said in the
Digests, In fraudem legis facit qui salvis verbis legis, sententiam ejus
circumvenit.

But this in the Case of an Oath was more abominated, and accordingly Cicero
tells us, that Fraus adstringit non dissolvit perjurium. And if the Civil Law
was afterward so provident for the honor of Humane Nature as to determine in
the Case of an unasked free gift, that Cum in arbitrio cujuscunque sit hoc
facere quod instituit, oportet eum vel minime ad hoc prosilire, vel cum venire
ad hoc properaverit, non quibusdam excogitatis artibus suum propositum
defraudare, tantamque indevotionem quibusdam quasi legitimis velamentis
prolegere, any one may judge how much it abhorred any thing of fraud in the
evading of the payment of a due subjection to Sovereign Power acknowledged by
what the thinking Heathens termed Sacramentum, as if the most eminent, or only
thing emphatically Sacred, and religiously to be observed.

I should not since the Extermination of the Jesuits Doctrine of Equivocating
have thought it worth while so much to dilate on this plain Conclusion, before
the publishing a Pamphlet in our Metropolis in the Year 1680, called An Account
of the New Sheriffs holding their Office, made public upon reason of
CONSCIENCE, respecting themselves and others in regard to the Act for
Corporations, and in which ACT, tho the Lawgivers meaning of the Oath thereby
imposed is most apparently manifest out of the Words, yet the Author of that
Casuistical Pamphlet makes it lawful to take the Oath and subscribe the
Declaration, and not in the literal strict Construction, but in an imaginary
sense topp'd upon the Lawgivers, and that nothing but a vitiated fancy or
injudicious mind could imagine.

I was sorry to hear that that Pamphlet was writ by a Nonconformist Divine:
and that in a Conjuncture when the Magistrates of that City were so hot against
the name of Popery, any men should be so zealous for the Thing called
Iesuitism, and that any men by attempting to rivet Equivocation into their
Model of Protestancy, should at once endeavor to rob us of the Energy of the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and of the Test it self, and to make the
sacredness of all Oaths whatsoever to evaporate.

Let any sober Person of the Dissenters Party but seriously read that Pamphlet
so scandalous to Protestancy, and it cannot but give him the Alarm of coming
out from among them, for that he must do that would come out even from the
Iesuitick Equivocation.

If there were not a Church of England- Protestancy in that Loyal City, I may
without unjust reflection say it, that Magistrates who were Accessory to the
erecting that Paper-Monument to Equivocation, and to the trying to help it to a
jus Divinum, and to be a part of pure Religion and undefiled, could bring
little honor to our Metropolis by calling it a PROTESTANT CITY on its Monument
of Stone.

As we find in the Book of Judges that all that saw that inhumane Butchering
and Quartering out into pieces of the Levites Wife by her own Husband, cried
out and said, There was no such thing done or seen since the time that the
Children of Israel came up out of the Land of Egypt until that day, I believe
it may be affirmed that never in any PROTESTANT City in the World, since the
time that it was freed from the Egyptian Servitude of the Papal Impositions,
was any such barbarous butchering of the Obligation of an Oath by Equivocation
in a printed Case sent about the Kingdom by the pretended Espousers of
Protestancy, ever done or seen. And according to the saying, that Nisi serpens
serpentem comederit non fit draco, it may be said that the most superlative and
dreadful outraging of Oaths cannot be compassed but by the Consciences of
pretended Protestants digesting the old Equivocation of the Jesuits.

When I consider this therefore that the false Protestant Discusser of that
CASE of CONSCIENCE of the SHERIFFS, does determine that, by taking up Arms
against the King mentioned in the Oath, is to be meant against HIS RIGHTFUL
GOVERNMENT, and that the Oath must be taken in the SENSE or MEANING of the
Major part of both Houses that passed it, and then makes their meaning so
opposite to their words, and do recollect what is so clearly laid down in my
Lord Chancellor Hatton's Treatise concerning Statutes, and the Expositions of
Acts of Parliament, viz. That the Assembly of Parliament being ended, functi
sunt officii and that as to all of the lower House who are by Election, their
Authority is returned to the Electors so clearly that if they were altogether
assembled again for interpretation by a voluntary Meeting, eorum non esset
interpretari, and that then the interpretation of the Statutes falls into the
hands of the Sages of the Law, and when I consider that great Caution of
Sanderson in his said Book, that where we depart from the words of an Oath to
the intent, it must be well proved that there was such a meaning, I have a
great Compassion for men that are trick't into Perjury by the artifice of any
Casuists: and as I have mentioned a Crafty Counsel at Law to be justly odious,
and a Crafty Councellor of State to be more so, do account a Crafty Casuist to
be most abominable.

What effect that Pamphlet has had in debauching the Consciences of the
Non-Conformists in thus distorting the natural sense of that Oath by a
calumnious and fraudulent interpretation, and whereby such men's tenderness of
Conscience may have become Armor of Proof against all Oaths, I know not. The
Paper mentions its being designed for the edifying of others: and that word of
edifying minds me of the saying of, Qui judicat contra conscientiam, aedificat
ad gehennam: and the which too is justly applicable to a Protestant Casuist
that gives Judgment for equivocation. And it may with a pious horror be
thought of, that if Christianity and its Morals should happen to be generally
depraved by such Sophisms and Chicanery as that Pamphlet is stuffed with, there
may be cause of fear that the Son of Man at his second coming will not find so
much as the old bona fides of the Heathens on the Earth.

That any Non-Conformists of the present Age may see how much the Casuistical
Theology of that Pamphlet has degenerated from the Rule about the
interpretation of Oaths that was in vogue among those of the former, I shall
refer them to the Learned Casuistical works of Ames a Pious and Learned
Independent Divine of that Age, printed at Amsterdam in the Year 1631, and
where in his 4th Book, Chap. 22. De Iuramento, he very learnedly inveighs
against the use of Equivocation and Mental Reservation in Oaths, and makes it
to be Equivocation, Cum verba ipsa quae usurpantur sunt ambigui sensus, and
illo sensu accipiuntur a jurante, quem audientes cupit celare ut alio sensu ab
ipsis accipiantur; and coming to determine that Question, viz. In what sense
ought the words of an Oath to be taken? he answers, viz. In that sense that we
judge they who hear us will conceive: that is, regularly in that sense that the
words have in the common use of men: because the signification of words depends
on men's use. And he there afterward coming to this Question, viz. Are the Words
of an Oath always to be taken strictly as they sound? answers, That an Oath, by
reason of the danger of Perjury, is of strict right and interpretation, so that
it may not admit those larger Explications which in other Facts and Sayings
often take place.

Fourthly, As a Humane Law forbidding a thing simply evil, or commanding a
thing in its own nature good, does induce a new Obligation in Conscience, so
does the Addition of an Oath imposed by the Law for the avoiding of that thing
so simply evil, super-induce a farther Obligation to avoid it: and therefore
the Persons who take the Oath of Allegiance invoking God as Witness and
Revenger that they do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear according to
these express words by them spoken, and according to the plain and common sense
and understanding of the same words, Without any Equivocation or mental Evasion
or secret Reservation whatsoever, and heartily, willingly, and truly upon the
TRUE FAITH of a CHRISTIAN, are under a more especial and particular Obligation
to abhor all subtle and cavilling interpretations of the sense of the said Oath.

Fifthly, As the plain and common sense and understanding of the words in the
Clauses respecting the Future time of bearing Faith and true Allegiance to his
Majesty, etc. do lay an actual Promissory Obligation on the swearer to bear the
same to him during his life, so reddendo singula singulis, they lay an actual
Promissory Obligation on the swearer to bear the same to his Heirs and
Successors afterward in the Due and Legal Course of Descent.

The Promise in the Clause of the Oath of Supremacy runs thus, viz. and DO
Promise that FROM HENCEFORTH I WILL bear Faith, etc. And words could not
express an actual Obligation incurred and to have some Operation in the next
Moment of time, both in relation to his Majesty and his Heirs and Successors,
more clearly than those have expressed the same. And the Promise sworn in the
Clause of the Oath of Allegiance, viz. I will bear Faith, etc. does likewise
after the Oath sworn immediately operate in its Obligation to the King and his
Heirs and Successors in the next Interval of Time imaginable, however the word
henceforth be not there used as in the former Oath: for the Clause of the Oath
of Allegiance binding me not only to preserve the King, but the Hereditary
Monarchy, I could not be effectually enough by the Oath obliged to the same
without being obliged in the shortest time afterward, not only to forbear
prejudicing any right that belongs to the King and his Heirs and Successors,
but to defend the same.

The pointing of men to an ordinary Lease where the Lessee at the perfecting
thereof enters into an actual Obligation both in Law and Conscience to pay his
Rent to the Lessor, his Heirs and Assigns, that is, as it shall become due to
each respectively, shows a present actual Obligation incurred of discharging
any Future Dues successively, and (as I said) reddendo singula singulis, to be
familiar enough to common thought and vulgar apprehensions, and likewise the
word Heirs to be so too.

The many who take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy have spent enough
time, and perhaps too much ventured eternity, in thinking of and providing for
their Heirs; and who commonly as landed men know that by virtue of right either
immediately or mediately derived from the Crown, they are only enabled to say,
They are seized of this or that Land in their Demesne as of Fee, and which is
as much as to say, It is their Demesne or proper Land after a sort, because it
is to them and their Heirs, and that such Fee does vi termini imply Fealty, and
Fealty sworn: and the thought of which would on the turning of the Tables make
them sufficiently apprehensive of their danger, if there could be any ambiguity
in the word Heir, or the Crown granting Land to them and their Heirs forever.

I shall here take occasion by the way to reflect on an Antimonarchical saying
I met with printed, as spoke in Parliament by a great Demagogue some years ago,
viz. That the Cottager here holds his right by the same Tenure that the Crown
holds its. For it is false that our King or the Crown owes Fealty to any
Superior, but God only. The King's Throne is the Throne of God, and the Style
of Crowned Heads is Dei gratia, and by him Kings Reign.

But to proceed. If there could be Ambiguity in the word Heirs, the worth of
our Magna Charta would soon be depretiated, and it would be but Res unius
aetatis; and particularly where it says, Concessimus Deo and hac praesenti
charta confirmavimus pro nobis and HAEREDIBVS nostris in perpetuum, quod
Ecclesia Anglicana libera sit and habeat omnia jura sua integra and libertates
suas illaesas, and whereby the British Churches are secured under a Prince of
any Religion from Foreign Arbitrary impositions But indeed the Style current in
Magna Charta is, that our Kings for themselves and their Heirs forever, did
grant the Customs and Liberties contained in that Charter to our Ancestors and
their Heirs for ever. Our Ancestors had no occasion to spend time in seeking
Knots in a Bull-rush or hidden Sense in the words HEIRS and the King's HEIRS,
when so anciently as by the Oath of Fealty (which every Person above fourteen
years old, and every Tythingman was obliged to take publicly at the Court Leet
within which he lived) they were sworn to the King and his HEIRS: and that Oath
was taken a fresh every year by all the Subjects under Edward the Confessor and
William the first, and is thus set down by Pryn in his Concordia Discors, viz.
I A. B. do swear that FROM THIS DAY FORWARDS I will be Faithful and Loyal to
our Lord the King AND HIS HEIRS, etc.

The instances are innumerable of Allegiance anciently Sworn to our Kings and
their Heirs; and this one for example occureth to me as Sworn in the time of
Edward the 4th. viz. Sovereign Lord, I Henry Percy become your Subject and
Leige-man, and promit to God and you, that hereafter, I Faith and Troth shall
bear to you as to my Sovereign, Leige-Lord, and to your Heirs, Kings of
England, of Life and Limb, and of Earthly Worship, to Live and Die against all
Earthly People, and to you, and to your Commandments, I shall be Obeysant as
God me help, and his Holy Evang^lists. 27. Oct. 9. Ed. 4. Claus. 9. Ed. 4. m.
13. in dorso.

Mr. Pryn likewise in that Book of his beforementioned says, that there was an
ancient Oath of Fealty and Allegiance, both by the Subjects of England, and
Kings, Bishops, Nobles and Subjects of Scotland, made to the Kings of England
and Their Heirs, as Supreme Lords of Scotland, in these words, viz. Ero fidelis
and legalis, fidemque and legalitatem servabo Henrico Regi Angliae and
haeredibus suis, de vita and membris and terreno honor, contra omnes qui
possunt vivere and mori: and nunquam pro aliquo portabo arma, nec ero in
consilio vel auxilio contra eum vel Haeredes suos, etc. which Oath he says,
William, King of Scots, and all his Nobles Swore to King Henry the second, and
haeredibus suis sicut ligio Domino suo, and John Balliol, John Common, with all
the Nobles of Scotland, to King Edward the first and his Heirs.

He there likewise gives an account how the Nobles of England Swore Fealty to
Richard King of England, and to his Heirs against all men, and how the Citizens
of London Swore the like Oath; and, That if King Richard should die without
Issue, they would receive Earl John his Brother for their King and Lord, and
juraverunt ei fidelitatem Contra omnes homines, salva fidelitate Richardi Regis
fratris sui, as Hoveden relates.

And he moreover cites the Record of the Writ, issued to all the Sheriffs of
England, soon after the Birth of Edward the 1 st. Son and Heir to King Henry
the 3 d. To Summon all Persons above 12 years old to Swear Fealty to him, as
Heir to the King, and to submit themselves faithfully to him, as their Liege
Lord after his Death. This form of the Oath in the Writ is there mentioned to
that effect, viz. Quod ipsi salvo homagio and fidelitate nostra, qua nobis
tenentur, and cui in vita nostra nullo modo renunciare volumus, fideles eritis
Edwardo filio nostro primogenito, ita quod si de nobis humanitus Contigerit,
eidem tanquam Haeredi nostro and domino suo ligio erunt fideliter intendentes
and eum pro domino suo ligio habentes: And he there shows how they were
Summoned and Sworn accordingly; and further how in the Parliament of H. 4. The
Lords Spiritual and Temp^ral, and Commons were Sworn to bear Faith and true
Allegiance to the King, to the Prince and his Issue, and to every one of his
Sons, severally succeeding to the Crown of England: And he there mentions more
Oaths taken to our Kings and their Heirs of the like Nature.

The Consideration hereof would make any one wonder at the Confidence of a late
Learned Lawyer, and positive pretender to Omniscience in our English
Antiquities and Records, who in his Detestable Book called The Rights of the
Kingdom, (and which contains a farrago of Impious Anti-monarchical Principles,
and Printed in London, 1649. and there to the Scandal of the English and
Protestant Name, lately Reprinted by some Factious Anti-Papists) has averred,
That our Allegiance was of old tied to the Kings Person, not unto his Heirs,
and for the Kings Heirs (says he there) I find them not in our Allegiance. And
he mentions the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, as enjoined in Queen
Elizabeth's and King James's time respectively, to be the first that were made,
to the Kings Person and his HEIRS and SVCCESSORS.

But to return to the Cause in hand; It Is sufficient for the Obligation I
press, that HEIRS and SUCCESORS are so clearly expressed in the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy.

And tho the Statute of 1^. Elizabethae, in the Clause of the Annexing
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Crown, uses the style of Your Highness,
your Heirs and Successors, Kings or Queens of this Realm shall have full Power,
etc. as the Statue of the Supremacy 26o. Henry 8th. runs in the Style of our
Sovereign Lord, his Heirs and Successors, Kings of this Realms, shall be taken,
accepted, and reputed, the only Supreme Head, and tho the Oath in the 35 th. H.
the 8 th. Cap. 1. that relates to the bearing Faith, Truth, and true Allegiance
to the Kings Majesty, and to his Heirs and Successors, etc. be further thus
expressed, viz. And that I shall accept, repute, and take the Kings Majesty,
his Heirs and Successors (when they or any of them shall enjoy his place) to be
the only Supreme Head, etc. and though the old Oath of the Mayor of London and
other Cities and Towns throughout England, and of Bailiffs, or other chief
Officers, where there are no Mayors, runs in the style of Swearing, That they
shall well and Loyally Serve the King in the Office of Mayor, in the City of L.
and the same City, shall keep surely and safely to the use of our Lord the King
of England, and of his Heirs, Kings of England, might give occasion for that
great, empty, and big-sounding Sophism of Sir W. I. in his famous Speech,
wherein he said, That we are Sworn to the King, his Heirs and Lawful
Successors, but not Obliged to any, during the Kings Life, but to himself; for
it were Treason if it were otherwise; yet let any Man lay his hand upon his
Heart and bend his Ear to the still voice of his Conscience, and will he not
find that both those Clauses in the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, do
necessarily imply the bearing such Faith and Allegiance, first entirely to the
King during his Life, and after his Demise, bearing the same to his Heirs and
Successors, when they shall become Kings or Queens of this Realm? and that
thus, Quod necessaro, subintelligitur, non deest, and that the Oath of
Supremacy begins with the Declaring, that the Kings Highness IS the only
Supreme Governor of this Realm, etc. and that of Allegiance, with declaring in
like manner, that the King IS Lawful and Rightful King of this Realm, and that
the bearing Faith and Allegiance to the King, does imply the Ius in re, as to
our Fealty and Allegiance to the King, Contra omnem hominem, during the Kings
Life; and does at present imply (as I may) jus ad rem, to his Heirs and
Successors after his Demise.

Undoubtedly it was not the design of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, to
oblige us to impossible things; for that no Oath can do. And under the notion
of things Impossible, the Civil Law has well ranged all Actions which wound
Piety Reputation and our Modesty, and which are against good manners, by that
known place, Quae facta laedunt pietatem, existimationem, verecundiam nostram,
and, ut generaliter dixerimquae contra bonos mores fiunt, nec facere nos posse
Credendum est. The Canon Law likewise has well told us, that juramentum contra
bonos mores non est obligatorium. And the Law of Nature and all Divine and
Humane Laws have taught us, that nothing does more wound Piety and Reputation,
and Common Modesty to the Heart, or is more against good Manners, than the
outraging our Oath of Obedience, or Allegiance to our Prince; and it may well
be Judged impossible for a Prince to require from his Subjects their Swearing
to pay the entire Allegiance to another, at that time while it was due only to
himself.

For as all Oaths are stricti juris in their Interpretation, so the word
Allegiance or Ligeance does vi te mini imply the strictest obligation to the
Prince imaginable; and accordingly as the expression of alligare fidem
juramento, is found in Seneca. And this Obligation is partly of the nature of
what the Feudists call Homagium ligium, distinguishing homage into ligium and
non ligium, and making ligium to be that which is done to Sovereign Princes
only, no fidelity to any one else reserved: and only to be fealty Sworn contra
omnem hominem, nullo excepto; whereupon their rule is, that none can be homo
ligius duorum, i. e. at the same time.

And any one who shall cast his Eye on our Book of the Terms of the Law, will
there find the homagium ligium got in from among the old Feudists; and the
Author making the Figure of Homage to be more Solemn than the Oath of Fealty,
in which Oath the Tenant says to his Lord, I shall be to you Faithful and
Loyal; and shall bear to you Faith for the Lands and Tenements which I claim to
hold of you, and truly shall do you the Customs and Services that I ought to do
you at the Terms Assigned: So help me God. But in Homage there is Kneeling
requi^ed; and the Tenant says on his Knees, I become your Man from this day
forward, of Life and Member, and of earthly honor, and to you shall be
Faithful and Loyal, and shall bear to you Faith for the Lands that I claim to
hold of you, saving the Faith that I owe to our Lord the King.

Sir Edward Cook likewise entertains us with somewhat of the Homagium ligium,
and he very well and usefully in his Calvin's Case explains the nature of the
Subjects ligeance and makes it to be a true and faithful Obedience of the
Subject due to his Sovereign; and there says, that Ligiance is expressed by
several terms which are Synonimous in our Books, and is sometimes called
obedientia Regi, and that Ligiance is sometimes called Faith, fides, ad fidem
Regis; and there mentioning the Homage out of Litleton, Salve le foy quod Ieo
doy a nostre sur le Roy, quotes Glanvil l. 9. c. 1. for the Salvo required in
Homage, viz. Salva fide debita Domine Regi and Haeredibus suis.

It may therefore be here said, that our Ancestors in the contexture of the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, intended no Idle words, but did with exact
care weigh every expression and word of them in aurificis Statera.

According to that trite wise saying, hominum malitiis obviandum est, they
prepared to encounter with the Clamor of some Roman Catholics, who might
possibly think to run down the Oath of Allegiance, with the cry of The New
Oath; and as they afterward tried to do, suitably to their old term of the New
Evangel: And therefore when they framed the words in the clause of these Oaths,
which runs, much as I have shown in the old style of the former Oaths used long
before the Reformation, they did stare super vias antiquas, as I may say; and
in these Oaths of ^llegiance and Supremacy, the Kings Heirs do not come in
without deep precaution, and not as Ceremonious attendants on the Kings Person
(as I may say) but in order to the Support of the Hereditary Monarchy, and as I
shall show more by and by out of the words of the Oaths. The Lawgivers ventured
no danger of answering at the day of Judgment for any idle words, and much
less for Captious ones in the Oaths: And it is a delirium to think that they
should make it Treason in some Cases, to refuse one of those Oaths, and make it
too Treason to practice it; and that the Oath of Allegiance obliging men to
endeavor to disclose to his Majesty, his HEIRS and SVCCESSORS, all TREASONS
which they shall know or hear of, to be against him or EITHER of them, the
Obligation to the Kings Heirs and Successors, in the words immediately
foregoing, could imply any thing of Treason.

We know that as to any thing written, interpretatio facienda est ex totius
Seripturae Contextu, and that pro expresso id habetur quod Colligitur ex eo
quod expressum est; and that if any one shall deliberately mind the Contexture
of those Oaths, and what is therein so liquidly expressed and asserted, that
those Oaths which were intended as all others to put an end to all Strife, do
make none between our Kings, their Heirs and Successors.

But all men of sense and thought cannot but grant, that in the Clauses as
relating to the Kings HEIRS and SUCCESSORS, we are to judge according to the
Rule of Interpretation, viz. that verba non debent esse ociosa, sed ita
intelligi d^bent ut aliquid operentur, and that verba cum effectu sunt
accipien^a: And as it is said in the Civil Law, Semper in stipulationibus and in
caeteris contractibus, id sequimur quod ACTVM est; and as actus is there taken
for a general word, sive re sive verbis quid AGATVR; here is an ACT of the
Swearer, done in relation to such HEIRS and SUCCESSORS: and he is promittendi
reus in the Civil Law Phrase, and as he is there called Reus, qui debtor est,
omninoque obligatus ex quavis Causa, and as he who has promised any thing is
said Reus debendi; and so Reus constitutus dicitur qui se obligavit. ff. Quod
met. Cause. l. 14.. Labeo.

But on the whole matter, our Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy contain in them
nothing impossible, and nothing ambiguous, and do ipso facto or in plain
English, oblige us as soon as taken to be ready to pay our Allegiance to the
King, and afterward to his Heirs and Successors as respectively due according
to the Legal Course of Descent.

And if any one be frightened with Sir W. I's. Day-Dream of Treason, viz. in
being immediately upon the taking of the Oaths under some Obligation to the
Kings Heirs and Successors, let him repair to our Statute-Book and he will
there find as good Bail provided for him in the Case as Heaven and Earth can
give: for in the Preamble of an Act of Parliament the King and three Estates
tell him of the Duty that every true and well affected Subject, not only by
BOND of Allegiance, but also by the COMMANDMENT of Almighty God, OUGHT to
perform to his Majesty, his HEIRS and SUCCESSORS, 7o Iac. c. 6.

In fine, I shall hereupon affirm, that should any English Subject, who has
taken these Oaths live to the age of Nestor, and in the course of Nature, ^ee
several of our Kings Heirs and Successors, in the due and Legal course of
Descent, Succeeding one another; and should such Subject be never called on to
reiterate those Oaths in the Reign of any of them, he would yet by these Oaths
before once taken, continue obliged to bear true Faith and Allegiance to them
all Successively.

And thus in the first faederal Oath we read of, the Father of the faithful,
obliged himself at once in relation to Abimelech and his SON, and his SONS SON:
and we know how afterward God was pleased to oblige himself at once to Abraham
and his SEED; and how after that God was pleased to oblige himself by his Oath
and Covenant made to David and his SEED, as to their Succession in the Royal
Throne of Judah: And 'twas to this the words in the Psalms, ONCE have I Sworn,
etc. refer.

And therefore this Scriptural Representation of God, after the manner of Men,
condescending in the Government of the world, to bind himself ex gratia, as
aforesaid, may well inculcate to us the reasonableness of our becoming ipso
facto bound by our Oaths to pay the debitum Iustitiae to his Viceroys and
their HEIRS and SUCCESSORS.

To proceed therefore, I shall lay down this as a 6 th Conclusion, and
genuinely deducible from the former one, viz. That by Virtue of those two
Clauses, the takers of those Oaths do particularly bind themselves not only
against the Aiding and Assisting or Abetting any Rebellion or any Usurpation of
the rights of his Majesty's Heirs and Successors that can happen; but to the
aiding and assisting of the Crown, and preserving its Inheritable Rights on all
Emergent occasions.

Sanderson in his 4th Lecture of the Obligation of Oaths, puts the Case
concerning the Person to whom an Oath was made, viz. Whether he who has Sworn
the performance of a thing to another, the Party to whom he Swear being
deceased, be bound to make it good to the Heirs and Successors of the said
Party? And his words are: I answer, ordinarily he is. It is certain that the
Party Swearing is obliged if he expressed that he would perform the Oath unto
the Heirs of the other. It may also be taken for granted, that he is bound tho
he expressed it not, if the Oath taken relates to DIGNITY, because DIGNITY
varies not with the change of Persons. Whence if any Subject or Soldier Swear
Fidelity to his King or General, the Oath is to be meant to be made unto them
also who succeed to that Dignity.

Yet Ames our Learned Nonconformist in his Case of Conscience, 4th Book,
Chapter 22. viz. De Iuramento: as to the 11th Question, and about the
Obligation of an Oath Ceasing, says, Quum aufertur ratio juramenti, juramentum
cessat ratione Eventus: qui casus est eorum, qui jurarunt se obedituro^ Domino,
aut Principi alicui, qui postea cessat esse talis.

But perhaps had the Case of so strict an Oath, as that of Allegiance to our
Prince and his HEIRS and SUCCESSORS layn before him, he would have writ
otherwise of its Obligation. For as the Conside^ation of the for^mentioned
Clauses in the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy did sufficiently prevail with
the Ejected and Persecuted Divines of the Church of England, and most of its
Lay Members, to avoid all sinful Compliance with the late Usurpation and
Usurpers; so it did likewise with many of the Presbyterians and others, to
avoid the same, and particularly to refuse the taking the ENGAGEMENT set up by
the Republicans, and even to Publish in Print their holding themselves obliged
by those Oaths so to do.

I shall instance in two that did so; Mr. Pryn in his Book before cited
mentions those OATHS as in direct words extending not only to the late King's
Person (mentioning King Charles the 1 st) but his HEIRS and SUCCESSORS, and
Inviolably binding the Swearers in perpe^uity in point of LAW and CONSCIENCE,
so long as there is any Heir of the Crown, and Royal Line in being; and that
upon many Unanswerable Scriptural Precedents and Legal Considerations, etc.

He had before charged those with apparent Perjury, who had taken those Oaths
to the King and his HEIRS, and yet repute those few Relics of the old
Parliament then sitting (forcibly secluding the Lords and Majority of their
Fellow Members) to be a lawful Parliament, within the Statute of 17* Car. Cap.
7. or submit to any Oaths, Taxes, or Edicts of theirs as Parliamentary or Legal.

I refer the Reader to the Book, and which, because somewhat Scarce, I think to
have reprinted.

The other Person of the Presbyterian Communion I shall refer to for this, is
the Author of a learned Tract in 4to printed in the year 1650 called, An
EXERCITATION concerning VSVRP'D POWERS, wherein the Author very substantially
proves that by virtue of the Obligation to the King's HEIRS and SUCCESSORS
resulting from the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, it is not lawful to give
up ones self to the ALLEGIANCE of an VSVRP'D Power: and says very well in p.
16. If I should do that, I should yield assistance to the Usurper in his wrong
Doing and Usurpation, and so become a partaker of his Sin. Obedience to one as
the Supreme Magistrate is a Comprehensive thing, and includes many duties
toward him, as a Power, viz. of receiving Commission from him for Offices, or
Acts otherwise not competible to me: maintaining and defending him in his Power
by Pay, Counsel, and Intelligence, Arms and Prayers: all which I am bound to
yield the Usurper to my power, if I resign my Allegiance up to him: and how
shall I do these things, and not. 1. Support and have Communion with him in his
wickedness. 2. Combine against betray and resist the right of the injured,
dethroned Magistrate. 3. And make my self incapable of Obedience or being a
Subject to the lawful Power hereafter?

The Author does in p. 19 and many other places in this Book, assert the
forementioned Clauses in the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy as binding
clearly, plainly, and in terminis to an Allegiance over-living his Majesty's
Person and pitched upon his HEIRS and SUCCESSORS, so that the Swearer is not
free from the Oaths at his Majesty's decease, etc. and that those Oaths intend
by his Majesty's HEIRS and SUCCESSORS the same Persons joining them together
with the Copulative (AND) and not using the Discretive (OR) and the former Oath
twice comprising both in the following Clauses, under the said Term or Pronown
( viz. THEM, THEIRS) so that according to these Oaths his HEIRS are of right
his SUCCESSORS, and none can be HIS SUCCESSOR, but HIS HEIR, while he has an
HEIR: and that if any Conspiracy or ATTEMPT be made to prevent his HEIR from
being and continuing his SVCCESSOR, or to make any one HIS SVCCESSOR that is
not HIS HEIR (if he has one) the subject is sworn by this Oath to continue his
Allegiance to HIS HEIR as the right SVCCESSOR, and to DEFEND HIM in that HIS
right to the uttermost: and that the Term LAWFUL annexed to SVCCESSORS in the
Oath of Supremacy, manifestly excludes all CAVIL of a distinction between HEIRS
and SVCCESSORS: the word LAWFVL whether you interpret it of LEGITIMATION of
BIRTH, or PROXIMITY of SVCCESSION in regard of LINE according to the Law of the
Land entailing the Crown on his Majesty's Issue, or rather both the latter
including the former, restraining SVCCESSORS from meaning any other than HIS
HEIRS: and that both these Oaths bind the Swearer to assist and defend to his
uttermost Power against all Attempts the Course of SVCCESSION in the Race of
his Majesty, expressed by many-Terms, to wit, THEIR Crown and Dignity, all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences and Authorities granted to the King's
Highness, HIS HEIRS and SVCCESSOR and united to the Imperial CROWN of this
Realm. How then can he yield Obedience to them that are not HIS HEIRS, nor
LAWFUL SVCCESSORS, etc. how can he not oppose and withstand them in the
assistance and defense of the right of his Majesty's HEIRS and LAWFVL
SVCCESSORS?

That judicious Author did like a substantial Confessor of the Obligatoriness
of those Oaths relating to the King's HEIRS and SUCCESSORS during that
Usurpation, very satisfactorily show, that the SAME Persons were meant by both,
and held himself obliged in Loyalty the rather so to do, because in that
Conjuncture the plain Sense of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy were
usurped upon, and particularly by the Book called, THE LAWFULNESS OF OBEYING
THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT, then published; and the Fallacies in which he Learnedly
Confuted, and showed how ridiculously that Book outraged the sense of the
Lawgivers in those Oaths, whose end was to support the Crown in a just Lineal
Succession, and could therefore intend by Successors, only such as were de jure
so: and that therefore that Book's taking Successors for such who were so de
facto (tho very unjustly) was; 1. Inconsistent with the nature of an Oath,
which must be taken in Righteousness. Jer. 4. 2. That is to oblige only to that
which is just. 2. With the word HEIRS, which being placed first in the Oath
must first be served. 3. With the Oath of Supremacy which binds us to the
lawful Successor. 4. With the Law of the Land which appoints Succession to
the Heir. 5. With a possibility of keeping the Oath: for if Heirs and
Successors mean diverse Persons, how can the Oath of Allegiance and defense of
the Regal Dignity be observed?

Thus it seems as the Fantome of haeres viventis has frighted many out of
their Natural Senses, and the Natural sense of their Oaths in the present
Conjuncture, the word SUCCESSORS did formerly: and when they who interpreted it
of actual Succeders (as says my Author) that it might favor the USURPERS*
forgot what was the Object of that Succession, viz. a CROWN and Regal Dignity,
wherein by virtue of that Oath those Successors are to be defended, whereas
those or the Republicans for whom the Book pleads, have not only put by the
rightful Successor, but abolished the CROWN and Regal Dignity it self.

May this instance of Heavens uncrowning the understandings of those
Republicans of common reason and sense (and when in the Course of their
injudicious minds they were abandoned to the most despicable sort of
Counterfeit Wit called Quibbling, and to the vilest sort of Quibbling and
double entendre of words, I mean in that which concerns the tremendous
Obligation of an Oath, after they had Dethroned their Prince, and excluded his
Heirs and Successors) serve in all Future times as a Monument of the Divine
Dereliction, and of Heavens scattering the Proud in their reasons and
imaginations of their hearts, and rendering them unfortunate beyond the fate of
the common saying of Eventus stultorum magister, I mean by condemning them to a
stated infatuation: and let none hereafter value any Usurpation on the Credit
of the last, as Mr. Ienkins in his famous Petition to the Usurpers did, and set
Gods Seal to it on the account of the Event, when the Event was what I have now
mentioned.

Any one who will cast an Eye on the Title de verborum significatione in the
Civil Law, will there find the word Heir to be necessarily made Comprehensive
of SUCCESSORS, viz. Haeredis significatione omnes signifi^^ri SUCCESSORES
^redendum est, etsi verbis non sint expressi; and Succession is under that
Title of the Law made a part of the definition of inheritance, viz. Nihil est
aliud haereditas quam successio in universum jus quod defunctus habuit.

And the identity of the thing in the words of Heirs and Successors does
quadrare with that saying so frequent among the Civil Law Writers that Plura
quando copulantur ad unum effectum, loco unius habentur, and with another that
the word and sometimes stat declarative inter duo idem importantia.

I should account it somewhat like Pedantry to cite any Latin Authors about
Heirs and Successors signifying as here in our Case the same thing, but that
other Seditious Books beside that impugned by the Exercitation, have
endeavored to sow Contention between the words Heirs and Successors, tho with
as little sense as was in Sir W. I's fancy of Treason, whereby he would have
set the Assertory and the Promissory Clauses in the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy at variance, nay the Promissory Clause at variance with it self.

There was a Book writ by a late Lawyer called, Historical Discourses of the
Uniformity of the Government of England, first printed in the Year 1647, and
reprinted by some Factious Anti-Papists since the Epoche of our Fears and
Iealousies of Popery, and with that former year in the Title (which was an ill
ominous sign of the fatal time such Persons would have driven us back upon if
they could) where in p. 279 of the 2d part ill reflections are made on the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which Oaths (says the Author) do make much
Parley concerning Inheritance and Heirs: but that they do not hold forth any
such Obligation to Heirs otherwise than as supposing them to be Successors, and
in that Relation only. His design is too plainly expressed, viz. to strike at
the Rights of our Hereditary Monarchy, and to invite Parliaments to interlope
in controuling the Succession of the Crown: and he says, That the Doctrine he
there insinuates does not go down well with those that do pretend to
Prerogative, aided by the Act of Recognition made to King James, and the Oaths
of Supremacy and Allegiance: and I shall say that I hope it never will: and
it is pity but a Book that in so many places of it impeacheth the old known
Rights of the Crown, should in this Conjuncture of Loyalty find some Person at
leisure ex professo to make Animadversions on it, and the rather for that the
Author does in the Vehicle of somewhat like Wit (and his affectation of which
is by People of middling Capacities, who generally make the greater part of
Mankind, judged to be Wit) dispense his Poisons.

Yet as to the signification of HEIRS and SUCCESSORS, he had before in his
first part saved any one the labor of showing their Identity: for there in p.
109 and in his Chapter of the Laws of Property of Lands and Goods under the
Saxons, he quoted Tacitus about some of the Customs of the Germans which he
judged remained here with them, and which showed that HEIRS and SUCCESSORS
passed then as current Coin for the same thing, according to the words of
Tacitus, HAEREDES and SVCCESSORES cuique liberi and nullum est testamentum, and
thus Englished by that Author, viz. the HEIRS and SVCCESSORS to every one are
his Children, and there is no Testamentary Power to DISHERIT or ALTER the
COURSE of DESCENT which by CVSTOM or Law is settled.

And as was showed, the Term of LAWFVL annexed to SUCCESSORS, has nailed the
Canon of that Sophism, and exposed the ridiculousness of any Cavilling or
Calumnious Interpretation about Heirs and Successors: tho yet without the
interposal of the word LAWFVL, the plain sense of the words Heirs and
Successors in the Oaths would clearly enough have obliged us to the same
Persons. We say, that id possumus quod jure possumus, and none are to be
construed Heirs or Successors, but such who are so in the Eye of the Law, and
with reference to Proximity of Blood, i. e. they who are meant for such by the
Law in the Due Course of their Descent.

But I hope that England's happy Future State will so far influence Loyalty, as
to incline all Conscientious Protestants to leave of all senseless Cavilling
about the sense of the plain words in those Oaths, and to agree to employ their
most serious and constant thoughts about the extent of the Moral Offices that
relate to their bearing True Faith and Allegiance to the King, his Heirs and
Successors, and other very important matters in the Promissory Clauses most
clearly expressed in order to the discharge of their Allegiance, and the duties
of Loyalty, viz. DEFENDING him and them to the uttermost of our Power against
all Conspiracies that shall be made against his or their Persons, their Crown
and Dignity, as the Oath of Allegiance runs, and to our ASSISTING and DEFENDING
to our Power all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences and Authorities
granted or belonging to the King's Highness, his Heirs and Successors.

There are no unweigh'd and idle words in the Promissory Clauses, and we are to
make it our business with the judgment of discretion to consider the sense of
the same, and to retain it in our Memories: and men's not doing which, has been
the Cause of the Ebb of Loyalty in some Conjunctures. According to the Degrees
of men's intellectual Talents, and particularly the Talent of understanding
beyond other men the Laws natural and positive, and the Lex terrae, some are
beyond others morally bound to defend the particular momentous points relating
to all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences granted or belonging to the
King and his Heirs and Successors: and therefore a disloyal Divine and a
disloyal Lawyer, are things that do particularly hear very ill.

But as there is a great part of the Moral Offices expressed in these Oaths
sufficiently plain and obvious to vulgar Capacities, and which with their
Native Light do strike common understandings, so the extent of these Offices
ought to employ the Meditations of all the Takers of these Oaths; and how low
soever their Talents lie, they are to use all the means they can, and
particularly that of the Consilium peritorum, as any occasion shall offer it
self, for their defense of any of the Privileges or Preheminences belonging to
the Crown. Our duty in this kind is very well expressed by Sanderson in his
third Lecture, where speaking of the Subjects Obligations by Oaths of this
Nature, he says, Doubtless the Subject to his Power is obliged to defend all
Rights which appear either by Law or Custom Legitimate, whether defined by the
written Law, or in force through the long use of time or Prescription, that is,
so far as they are known, or may Morally be known. But he is not equally
obliged to the Observation of all those which are controverted. Thus therefore
as to any Jurisdiction, Privilege or Pre-eminence of the Crown that might seem
doubtful, the swearer is many times bound to the use of means that it may be
Morally known to him, as Sanderson's words are.

Yet what I have urged in this sixth Conclusion as Obligatory to us by virtue
of the Oaths, is sufficiently plain, and there is no occasion for employing a
great Genius and penetrating Understanding and Wit to discover that it is one
of the Privileges of the Crown to be Hereditary, and that the Taker of the
Oaths is indissolubly bound to defend that Right.

There are several explicatory Notions of the word DEFEND and its extent, that
often occur in the Authors that treat expressly of the Ius Protectitium seu
defensorium, among whom I account Magerus de Advocatia armata or of the Right
of Protection given by Sovereign Powers, to be instar omnium, and who in the
12th Chapter there Critically descanting on the nature of the Defense granted
by Protectors, says, That verbum protegere necessitatem defendendi cum armis
importat, and that protector, si in defensionis promissione jaramentum
appositum fuerit, etiam non requisitus, clientibus succurrere tenetur: and that
defendere non videtur, qui in totum non defendit: and that effectum defensionis
non dicitur consummate implere qui non omni tempore, auxilio suo ac defensione
praesto est. He there likewise tells us, that subditi tenentur defendere
honorem Regis: and that DEFENSE is too performed by Words as well as Deeds: and
mentions how in solenni fidelitatis juramento vasallus se ad id obstringit quod
vitam and honorem famamque Domini non solum non violare, sed and contra aliorum
conatus pro viribus defendere ac propugnare velit.

But none need look abroad for the genuine importance of the word DEFEND: for
any man of common sense who has taken the Oaths knows by the Recollection of
his ordinary thoughts what it is to DEFEND himself, and how natural it is for
the hand to li^t up and expose it self to defend the head from danger, and
knows by the Call of the Magistracy when and where and how by Arms to defend
his Prince; and natural Logic tells him that he who in these Oaths has bound
himself to ASSIST, has certainly bound himself not to RESIST, and that
defendere qui tenetur offendere non debet: and that therefore whoever has
taken the Oaths, and allows the Doctrine of Resistance, is a real Heretic,
and Self-Condemned: and that according as it is neither deniable nor denied by
those who talk of haeres viventis, the Taker of these Oaths has bona fide and
in the good faith of a Christian promised the same vigorous defense of the
Rights of those Heirs and Successors in the first moment of the descent of the
Crown to them, that is to say, immediately on the King's Decease, that he is to
perform as to the Rights of the present King, and that here being a Promise of
Defense to the King and his Heirs, Promittens duobus vel pluribus, dicitur
promittere separatim and cuilibet pro virili: and that the Rights of the Prince
Regnant are not in the least prejudiced by this Promise, for that obligatus
duobus in solidum, est obligatus secundo, salvo jure primi, and that verba sunt
intelligenda habito respectu rei and personae ad quam referentur.

And the word BELONGING i. e. All Jurisdictions, Privileges, etc. Granted or
BELONGING to the King's Highness, his Heirs and Successors, as it sufficiently
ensures our Obligations of defending the same to our Kings in Case of
Usurpation made against them, how prosperous soever it may be, so it ensures
our Obligation of the defense to his Heirs in the due Course of the Descent:
and holds our hands from paying Allegiance to any Usurper. The Law of God and
the Land sufficiently show to whom those Jurisdictions, etc. BELONG, that we
have sworn to defend: and the Civil Law does here appositely tell us, that
Possessio etiam animo retinetur, and does account the very fraud that may
exclude a right Heir to be Tantamount to a Possession: Quia pro possessione
dolus est. And according to that Law, Qui actionem habet ad rem, ipsam rem
habere videtur: and habere quilibet dicitur quod jure petere potest, sive de
quo actionem habet.

And on the whole matter, if the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy are Lawful
Oaths (as all except Roman Catholics grant) it must likewise be granted, that
the Takers of them are indissolubly bound to the uttermost of their Power,
against all Usurpers and Usurpations to defend all Jurisdictions, etc.
BELONGING to the King, his Heirs and Successors as aforesaid: and the very same
Arguments that were prevalent with the Takers of those Oaths formerly not to
take the Engagement, nor to pay Allegiance to the then Usurpers, do militate,
and are very cogent and concludent for others who have took those Oaths not to
pay it to any but to the King, and to his Heirs and Successors in the Due and
Legal Course of Descent, and for the defense of all Jurisdictions, etc.
respectively belonging to them: for according to the words in the forecited
Exercitation, The manifest drift of the Oath of Allegiance being the
continuance and assurance of the Crown (upon concession of his then Majesty's
just Title) to his Heirs in Succession after Him and ONE ANOTHER lineally, and
the defense of them therein against all OTHER Corrivals and Opposers, it is
plain that the defeating the Succession in its Due and Legal Course of Descent
in any one Case, will be an Usurpation not only of the Right of the Lawful Heir
and Successor according to the Proximity of Blood, but of the Right of the
Hereditary Monarchy it self sworn to be defended as aforesaid. It is therefore
no marvel that some of the Learned and Loyal Writers of the Succession have
judged that any such defeating of the Succession as aforesaid would be Criminal
in the same kind as the late Usurpation was.

It may be well supposed that many men's so seldom and so superficially thinking
of those Oaths occasioned their Miscarriages during the former Rebellion and
Usurpation. Unthinking men generally take those Oaths as Pills only to be
swallowed down, and pro forma only, and when gilded over with an Office of
Gain. But to a loyal and rectified mind the frequent sense of the Moral Offices
resulting from those Oaths is as pleasant as any thing can be to the Taste: and
according to that saying in Job, For the Ear tries words, as the Mouth tastes
meat, a man loyal to the degree required by those Oaths, will not only nauseate
all Principles of Sedition as rank Poison, but will be able so critically to
try the words in any Sayings that sound popularly and that are used by
Demagogues, as to find out what in them is wholesome and what poisonous: and
accordingly as for example the excellent Sanderson did in the Maxim of salus
populi, suprema lex, and did make the salus populi to include that of Kings.

And to this purpose if any will by the Touchstone of this my 6th Conclusion
try that Maxim that among all Demagogues so much passes for current Coin, he
will find it not to be Sterling, viz. That People were not made for their
Kings, but their Kings for them: and this saying is partly favored by what
Tully says in his Offices, viz. Vt tutela, sic procuratio Reip. ad utilitatem
eorum qui commissi sunt, non ad eorum quibus commissa est, gerenda est. But
after any one has seriously weighed this Maxim, he will find that Kings and
their People were made for, and are under natural Obligations to one another,
and accordingly as it may be said that Parents and Children were made for one
another and to defend one another: and to this purpose the Psalmists words are,
Lo Children are an Heritage of the Lord, and the Fruit of the Womb is his
Reward; as Arrows are in the hand of a mighty man, so are Children of the
Youth; happy is the man that has his Quiver full of them: they shall not be
ashamed, but they shall speak with the Enemies in the Gate.

But in my further enquiry into the Obligation relating to his Majesty's Heirs
and Successors that results from those Oaths, my 7th Conclusion shall be, that
the Takers of these Oaths are bound thereby against attempting or endeavoring
by any new Law or Constitution to interrupt the Succession of the Crown in its
Due and Legal Course of Descent.

I do account that the foregoing Conclusion has cut the Grass under the Feet
of any who have taken those Oaths, and yet would have thus interrupted the
Succession, and makes such interruption of its Course not only unlawful, but to
be a nugatory, ridiculous and unaccountable thing.

For since by the known Rights of the Crown, the next Heir to the Crown is in
the next Minute after my King's decease actually King, and I am necessarily and
indispensably bound to pay actual Obedience or Allegiance to him then, and have
already sworn that I will then expose my lise in his defense, and the defense
of his Crown and Dignity, it is manifest folly in me to attempt the
interrupting the Succession by excluding the Right Heir, whom I have thus
indispensably bound my self to defend, and to obey, and who perhaps by the
Course of Mortality, and Kings who are nominal Gods coming to die like men, may
within a few Minutes after my having taken the Oaths, be entitled to my born
and sworn Allegiance. Dolo facit qui petit id quod mox redditurus est. But, a
sorry and pitiful trick it is and as remote from the subtility of the Serpent
as the innocence of the Dove, that any Swearer would put on himself, who
attempted to injure any Prince by going to exclude him from the Allegiance that
he is to pay him perhaps the next Moment.

We are well minded by Sanderson in his second Lecture, That simplicity becomes
an Oath, and that the Swearer is to endeavor to perform what he has promised,
without fraud, deceit, double dealing or simulation: and he elsewhere
questioning whether the words by my faith are an Oath, says, That tho by the
Custom of some Countries, or the intention of him who speaks, they may be an
Oath, yet necessarily by virtue of those words an Oath arises not, but only an
asseveration, or an ^btestation: and he had before mentioned how Soto did judge
the words by my faith to be an Oath: but the words in faith to be none.

But others have judged that when on the word fides (the which is justitiae
fundamentum) the word CHRISTIAN is built as an Addition, the complete Fabric
of an Oath is thereby raised: and with the weight of those great words before
referred to, the Oath of Allegiance concludes, viz. And I do make this
Recognition and Acknowledgment heartily, willingly, and truly upon the true
FAITH of a CHRISTIAN. So help me God: which shows that those words did not
casually nor indeed without profound deliberation there come in.

When the true faith or the bona fides of a Roman, did so much scorn to put a
trick upon a Law, does not the true faith of a Christian more abhor to put one
upon an Oath?

I have in my second Conclusion asserted it in general, that the Taker of all
Promissory Oaths is bound to endeavor for the Future, as much as in him lies,
by his Deeds to fulfill what he has sworn in words; and here applying the same
particularly to the King's Heirs and Successors, I will ask if it be congruous
to bona fides, i. e. Common honesty, if I am bound by Law to pay a Debt and
have promised and sworn to pay it, for me to endeavor by any new Law to evade
its payment? I have heard of a Will made void by Act of Parliament: but after
the Executor had sworn to execute it well and truly, and to pay the Debts and
Legacies of the deceased as far as the Estate extended, could he bona fide and
with a Salvo to Conscience, endeavor to quash it by the Legislative Power?

Nihil ita fidei congruit humanae, quam ea quae placuerant custodii. i. e.
Nothing is so suitable to common honesty, as that those things that have been
once assented to should be observed, is a known saying in the Civil Law; and so
is that of Vlpian in the Digest, Bonae fidei non congruit de apicibus juris
disputare: and it being a Rule of Law there, that Cum quid una via prohibetur
alicui, ad illud alia via non debet admitti. i. e. that which cannot be done
one way, or directly, must not be done indirectly or by another: and it being
construed, that whoever acted contrary to this, did fraudem facere legi, do I
to the uttermost of my Power, and on the true faith of a Christian, defend his
Majesty, his HEIRS and SVCCESSORS against all Attempts which shall be made
against his or their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, and assist and defend
all Jurisdictions, Privileges, etc. belonging to the King's Highness his HEIRS
and SVCCESSORS, if afterward to the uttermost of my Power I endeavor to
dis-inherit the lawful Heir, and to exclude him from the benefit of his
inherent Birthright by an extraordinary means? Is not the attempt or endeavor
to effect this, to be accounted fraud, according to that Rule of Law, viz.
Fraudis interpretatio semper in jure Civili, non ex eventu duntaxat, sed ex
consilio quoque desideratur: and which follows after the Rule, viz. Generaliter
cum de fraud disputatur, non quid habeat Actor, sed quid per adversarium
habere non potuerit, considerandum est?

It Is a true old saying, that fallacia pactorum dolum semper habet adjunctum:
and omnis calliditas, fallacia, machinatio ad circumveniendum, fallendum,
decipiendumve alterum adhibita are made to integrate the definition of dolus
malus by Labeo in the Digest. And is it not a known Rule among all the Writers
of Defense, that Defensio bona fide praestari debet, and that Promittens
aliquid facere, quod contrarium illius non sit^facturus, promittere censetur,
and that defensionem promittens, non tam laesionem illatam avertere quam
inferendam praecavere debet? And can I without outraging the true faith of a
Christian and the Christian simplicity and sincerity and singleness of heart,
and the Apostles Precept, that no man go beyond and defraud his Brother,
project any Law to exclude those from their Birthright, whom I have promised in
express words to defend?

When the Morality of Cicero extended to the inclucating it in one of his
Orations, that Est aliquid quod non oporteat, etiamsi licet, and when he in his
Offices renders it to be inhonestum, injuriam alteri non propulsare, and when
the Rules of Law could tell us that Non omne quod licet, honestum est, and when
Seneca could contemn the innocence as poor that was not more than the Law
required, and thereupon say, Qua^to latius officiorum patet quam juris Regula?
Multa pietas, humanitas, liberalitas, justitia, FIDES exigunt, quae omnia extra
publicas tabulas sunt, and when that St. Paul has ennobled the Moral Offices
of Christians by enjoining in his Epistle to the Philippians, the practice of
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report, etc. it may well be expected that the true faith of
a Christian should prevail on Christians not to attempt the compassing of any
thing by a new Law contrary to what they have by their Oaths promised to
defend, and contrary to the old Fundamental Laws of the Land.

And having thus far proceeded, my 8th Conclusion shall be, that our Obligation
thus relating both to the King and his Heirs and Successors does clearly arise
from those Oaths, without any Condition on his or their part to be performed,
and particularly without any respect had to what Religion they shall profess.
We know that Iuramentum limitate praestitum, limitatum producit consensum and
effectum: but it is likewise as notorious that there is nothing of limitation,
no IFS or ANDS in these Oaths: and therefore that known Rule of Non est
distinguendum, ubi lex non distinguit must here take place in the Court of
Conscience.

Sanderson in his 4th Lecture says, If two oblige themselves mutually in
promises of different kinds, or not at the same time, or otherwise without
mutual respect, Faith violated by the one, absolveth not the others Obligation,
but each is bound to stand to his Oath, tho the other has not performed his
part. For example, A King simply and without respect to the Allegiance of his
Subjects, swears to administer his Government Righteously and according to
Law. The Subjects at another time simply and without respect to the Duty of the
Prince, swear Allegiance and due Obedience to him. They are both bound
faithfully to perform their several Duties: nor would the King be absolved from
his Oath, if Subjects should not perform their due Obedience; nor Subjects from
theirs, tho the King should turn from the Path of Justice.

Mr. Ny does therefore in a printed Treatise of his very well for this purpose
cite Bishop Bilson, and says, That Bishop Bilson, a great Searcher into the
Doctrine of the Supremacy of Kings, gives this as the sense of the Oath, viz.
the Oath (as says the Bishop) expresses not Kings duty to God, but ours to
them: as they must be obeyed when they join with truth, so must they be endured
when they fall into Error. Which side soever they take, either Obedience to
their Wills, or Submission to their Swords is their due by God's Law. And tho
some ill Anti-Papists have ridiculed Passive Obedience, after they had given
the Cautio juratoria against their owning the Doctrine of Resistance, Mr. Ny,
does very particularly, in p. 138 of that Book, inveigh against that Doctrine,
and says, Nor if they were able (i. e. to resist) is it lawful for a Church to
compel by the Sword; more than the Magistrate may by the Keys, or what is
peculiar to the Sacred Function. Uzza erred in the latter; and Peter in the
former. The Primitive Rule and Practice was this; Being persecuted in one City
to fly into another, and pray that their flight may not be in the Winter.

I have read a Manuscript Book of Mr. Ny called, A Discourse of Ecclesiastical
Laws and Supremacy of the Kings of England in dispensing with the Penalties
thereof, where he asserts throughout the Legality of his Majesty's Declaration
of Indulgence, and the Book was writ professedly for that purpose, and he there
does very rationally inculcate the unlawfulness of Exclusion, as in his other
Book he did the unlawfulness of Resistance, and says, That Civil Rights and
Claims, and Temporal Things, are the immediate and intrinsic Concern and
Interest of all States. Dominium non fundatur in gratia. The just Claim of a
Prince may not be interrupted upon account he is of this or that Religion or
Persuasion. Nor may a Subject be justly banished, imprisoned, confiscated, or
ruined on the mere account of Religion, or because his Conscience is not cast
into the same Mould with the Prince, or present Establishment. It is POPERY to
deny Allegiance to a Prince, or Protection to a Subject upon the account of any
such difference.

It is therefore no wonder that our Ancestors framing the Oath of Allegiance
would have no Principle of Popery therein favored by a side Wind; which
according to Mr. Ny's Sense must have happened, had there been any
distinguishing reserves, or limitations or restrictions in the Oath, respecting
the Religion of our Princes.

And because many men have been in this Conjuncture of time tempted to strain
their Oaths and their Consciences, by excessive Fears and Jealousies relating
to Religion, (and as if God could not Govern the World but by Princes and their
Subjects being of the same Religion) and because Mr. Ny's judgment is of great
Authority among many of our Religionary Dissenters, I shall here insert
somewhat more out of that Manuscript of his, that falls under this
Consideration, and which is indeed writ with great Weight and Authority of
reason, and worthy the Writers great Abilities.

He having there put a Question relating to Religion and the Worship of God
being the great Concern of a Nation, and to the trust of dispensing with the
Penalties of Ecclesiastical Laws, says, In answer to it, I endeavor to
unfold, 1. In what sense Religion is the Concern of the State. 2. The nature of
this Trust: and as to the first he says, The moment and weight of a matter in
our deliberation has its proportion as either under an absolute, or resp^ctive
Consideration. Wisdom is better than Riches in it self absolutely: but not in
respect to the support of this present life. The knowledge of God and Divine
Things is better than to know the Virtue of Drugs and Plants; but not in
respect to the Study of Physic; so Religion and the Worship of God is the
chiefest and better part in it self considered: but in its respective
Considerations as to the Family of a particular Person or Community of men for
the advancement of Civil Affairs, there are OTHER qualifications and
inducements of greater Consequence, and more directly and immediately tending
to the being or well-being thereof. That there be no mistake in this great
Concernment, I further distinguish: There comes under the Notion of Religion,
the Holiness and Righteousness that is of the Moral Law, Principles whereof are
in all men's natures, and attended in their actings by a natural Conscience. 3.
Gospel Duties directed and ordered by a supernatural Light, no Principles or
Footsteps whereof are found in us. For the former, Religion in the first sense,
as the knowledge of God, Conscience of an Oath, Justice, Righteousness in our
dealings, etc. are such things wherein the well-being of Kingdoms and
Commonwealths is much concerned. But Religion as it stands in exerting
supernatural Principles, and in Duties termed the Commands of Christ (as the
other the Commandments of God, Jo. 15.) Such as Faith, Repentance, Sacraments,
Discipline, and the like Gospel Ordinances; in the Duties under this Head
considered and as distinct from Moral Duties, there is little or nothing
directly and immediately contributed by them to Men's civil interests, further
than where these supernatural Virtues are planted in Men's minds, the Moral
Duties of Piety and Honesty do more plentifully abound and are in exercise. As
these Moral Duties do more immediately concern the Commonwealth, so the Laws
thereof are principally drawn forth out of them, especially the second Table
Duties, forming and building them into Municipal Laws under Penalties and
Encouragements greater or less, as in the Wisdom of a State is judged most
conducing to the Welfare thereof. For these Gospel-mysteries it is otherwise.
For as they contribute to us in our Civil Government no otherwise than as
before mentioned, so is there little contributed by the Wisdom or Authority of
any State, advantageous to the Gospel, but Protection, or being a defense upon
the glory of it. If Adam had stood all Commonwealths, had been prosperous and
flourishing, and yet no Faith, no Christ, no Repentance, nor any Gospel Worship
known or professed. And since the fall, you have had well governed Kingdoms
among Heathens and Turks that never received Christ or Gospel Worship. It is
with States as with particular Persons in Commerce: another man's Estate or
Trade or Credit or any other Civil Concern with whom I have to do, is not
prejudiced or bettered by Omission or Practice of what is a mere Gospel Duty.
If a man I deal with be unjust, lie, steal, etc. my worldly Interest is
prejudiced hereby: but whether he repent, or exercise faith in Christ for
forgiveness of Sins, and humble himself, I am neither gainer nor loser in my
Civil Concerns. Now it is Gospel Worship, Gospel-Religion we profess in this
Nation, etc.

The Christian Religion having suffered so much by so many Pedantly and
Bigottish Writers having misrepresented it as an Invader both of the quiet and
business of Princes and Governors, and as if the necessary different Sentiments
in Religion according to men's several Capacities, were still to give the
Political Conduct of the World unnecessary trouble, and as if God who was in
Christ reconciling the World to himself, designed by any various Religionary
Notions to render Christian Princes and their People irreconcilable to one
another, and ((...) I may say) to make the World irreconcilable to it self, I
am glad when I find the Subject of Religion by falling into the hands of any
man of large and noble thoughts, to have right herein done it, as particularly
has thus been done it by Mr. Ny, who had made Religion and Politics very much
his Study: and I can refer the Curious to a Great Man of the Communion of the
Church of Rome, with some of whose Notions in this Point Mr. Ny's were partly
Co-incident, as any may find who will consult the 2d Volume of the Memoires of
Villeroy, whose great Character is Recorded by the Bishop of Rhodes in his
History of Harry the 4th of France, and to whom he was Secretary, and was so
before to Charles the 9th and Harry the 3d, and afterward to Lewis the 13th,
and the greatest part of D'Ossat's memorable printed Letters from Rome was to
him with high respect Addressed. In the beginning of that Volume we have his
Discourse de la vraye and legitime constitution de l' estat, and que l' order y
est, encore que la Religion n' y fust: and in p. 6, he discourses of this
Subject, viz. L' estat, and la Religion n' ont rien de Commun: and in p. 11.
there his Subject is, That l' estat n' est estably ny mainteny par la Religion,
ains la Religion conservee par l' estat: and in p. 16. his Theme is, That la
difference de Religion n' empesche point la paix de l' estat: and in p. 19. he
discourses of this Assertion, That Le Prince ne doit etre considere pour sa
Religion, mais pour ce qu'il est chef du peuple.

It may moreover be supposed that God in his Government of the World, and in
his care for the Church in particular Countries, when he thinks not fit to
incline a Princes mind to receive the same Religionary Sentiments that the
generality of the People owns, does yet often endow him with those Moral
Virtues and habitual inclinations whereby he is much better qualified for the
Protection of the People than any can imagine him to be by Orthodoxy in the
Speculative points of revealed Truth.

The Church we know is in Scripture represented as a helpless Minor, and Kings
are there mentioned to be its Nursing Fathers: and thus the Canon Law tells us,
that Ecclesia fungitur vice minoris, and the Canonists, that a minoribus ad
Ecclesiam valet argumentum. It is here therefore obvious to consideration that
Power and moral Honesty and Diligence and Courage and Discretion are the chief
endowments requisite for the protection of an Orphans Person and Estate. We
find these sayings commonly used by the Roman Catholic Authors who treat of
the Rights of Protection granted by Sovereign Powers, viz. Religio cum
protectionis jure nihil commune habet: and Religionis communio proprie nulla
homini cum homine, sed homini cum Deo: and Religioni cum juribus Gentium nulla
est necessaria conjunctio: and on these grounds Mager^s in his 8th Chapter of
his Advocatia armata, raising the Question whether Roman Catholic and Luther
an and Calvinist Princes may lawfully protect and defend one another,
determines that they may; and that they ought so to do, pursuant to the
agreements of the Interim and other pacta Conventa: and in his 1^th Chapter he
refers to the settlement of the Confraternities in Germany between Princes of
several Religions, and particularly of that settled between the Dukes of
Bavaria and the Count Palatines of the Rhine, Tam quoad bonorum and
principatuum, quam dignitatis Electoralis successionem, and which was not to be
dissolved by either of those Electors changing their Religion. And the same
reasons are assigned by him and other Writers of the jus Protectitium for the
lawfulness of Christian Princes protecting Jews, Turks, and Infidels: and it
passes among them as the common opinion of the Canonists and Civilians,
Infidelitatem non privare quemjure naturali, dominiove rerum aut provinciarum.

And as I have already referred to the Instance of Abraham in obliging himself
at once to Abimelech and his Son, and his Sons Son; I shall here cast my Eye on
Abimelech as an Idolater, and take notice that the aforesa^^ Father of the
Faithful, and by whose Bosom Heaven is represented, and who had the honor done
him by Holy Writ, to be called the friend of God, and by the Chronological
Writers of Memorable Things to be called Inventor foederum, (and most worthy of
him, as being the friend of God, it was, to be the Inventor of Alliances and
federal friendship with men) did make that first Alliance with an idolatrous
Prince and with his whole Race of Idolaters in Prospect.

If then it is an allowed judged point by the consent of Parties, That Religion
is out of the Case when one Prince does freely protect another, and his
Subjects of different Religions, it may be thence very well inferred, That it
is most reasonable and just, and ought not to any to seem strange that
Subjects, who owe a natural Allegiance to their Princes, are indispensably
bound to pay the same to them, and to defend all their Regal Rights without any
regard to the Religion their Princes may profess: and on the other hand that
Princes may often protect their Subjects who differ in Religion from them, in the
enjoyment of their Rights.

I grant that some Popish Princes abroad having rivetted the Inquisition into
their Politics, and being perhaps of harsh or bigoted dispositions, have out
of a regret against Heretics expelled Infidels from their Territories, and by
which expulsion such Princes have been sufficient losers in this World: and a
Case of which nature is particularly referred to by the Bishop of Rhodes in his
History of Harry the 4th of France, who accounting the Moors in Spain to be
about a Million, mentions the hard usage they there found, and that before they
were thence expulsed they applied to Harry the 4th for Protection, once when
but King of Navarre, and afterward when King of France and a Roman Catholic,
and who then did no more doubt of the lawfulness of protecting them, than while
he was a Protestant, however he forbore on Political grounds only to protect
and defend them. Nor when he forsook the Communion of the Protestant Church
were any of his Heretical Subjects used by him with any hardship on the account
of the hard word of Heresy: and I believe his Notion of the practicableness of
an orderly Political Government without reference to Religionary differences,
was the same with his great Minister Villeroy's.

I have mentioned how Cardinal D' Ossat told the Pope, that if his Holiness
were King of France at that time that Harry the 4th was, he would show the
Huguenots the same favor that Harry the 4th did; and shall observe it that in
the famous printed Oration of Cardinal Perron, made to the 3d Estate, or
Commonalty of France, tho he speaks of the LATERAN Council, and owns and
asserts it to be a general one as strenuously as the Learned Bishop of Lincoln
has since done, and faith, When that Council intended to provide for the
extirpation and rooting out of the Relics of the Albigenses, it ordained that
the Princes who should become Contemners of the Council that Condemned the
Albigenses, should be deprived of the Obligation of their Subjects fidelity to
them: yet he then adds, And this I remember not for an Example to disturb or
trouble the public Peace or Tranquillity, seeing the Heretics are here in so
great a number as that they make a notable part of the Body of the Estate, etc.

Here then I have named two Cardinals of as great real Eminence as any the
Church of Rome could ever show, who held it lawful for a Catholic Prince to
protect his Protestant Subjects, notwithstanding the Lateran Council.

But what Tacitus speaks of the Duty of common Men, namely, that they should
not penetrate Abditos Principis sensus, nay, be particularly applied to their
Religion. And the Apostles Caution of Who art thou that judge another man's
servant, may here be improved by saying, Who art thou that judge thy Natural
Liege Lord, and particularly as to matters of Religion, wherein the most
Antimonarchical Writers will allow them accountable only to God. And to any
Protestant who having followed his judgment of Discretion, has separated from
the Communion of another Church, and yet shall Censure his Prince for so doing,
those other words of the Apostle are justly applicable, Therefore thou art
inexcusable O man whosoever thou art that judge: for wherein thou judge
another thou condemnest thy self: for thou that judge do the same things.

The Christian Religion that has enjoined us not only to defraud and injure,
and offend none, and to love our Neighbor as our self, and extended that
Neighborhood to all Humane kind, has likewise commanded us to HONOR all men,
and especially to render honor to whom honor is particularly due, and not
rashly to judge another: and if men would imprint on their minds a serious
Sense of the Moral Offices to which they are obliged by Virtue of those
Expressions, they would soon be better guided in the Measures of their
Obligations relating to the King and his Heirs and Successors without being
tempted as formerly to exclude any of them from their Civil Rights on the
account of Religion.

Ames in his Cases of Conscience does well descant on those Moral Offices: and
in his Chapter of Charity to our Neighbor, he assigns some particular Cases,
in which, as to the actual exercise and effect of Charity, one is to love, his
Neighbor more than himself, and instanceth in our being in Temporal Matters
obliged to prefer public Persons to our selves, and says, That all are to be
reckoned among public Persons concerning whom it is manifest that they are
useful to the Realm: and in the Case of whom he determines it, That on their
occasionally being in danger of their lives, we are to venture ours.

Are we not then, when we may without the peril of our lives defend the Civil
Rights of an Heir of the Crown, who by the venturing his life has supported
the honor of the Realm, obliged to forbear excluding him from the benefit of
his Birthright? The Privilege of his owning the belief of Religionary
Propositions, tho differing from any other men's, was purchased for him by the
Blood of Christ, and in using it, he does but use his own Right, and
consequently injures no man: and if we slight the offering his own blood to us,
shall we too vilify, or (as I may say) endeavor to nullify in his Case the
effect of the Blood of his Savior?

Ames in his Chapter De honor proximi tells us, That Honor, according to the
common Notion of it, does denote the Testification of the excellence and worth
of any one: and that such Testification thereof cannot appear before men but by
Words and Actions: and that it likewise includes a congruous judgment and
internal affection, in the which there is a kind of inward testifying before
God: and therefore the solid Office of HONOVRING does chiefly depend on the
inward acknowledgment of any ones worth or excellence. And afterward referring
to the express Command in St. Peter of honoring all men, he says, Vix
quisquam reperitur in quo non possimus aliquid observare in quo nobis est
superior, si ex humilitate judicium feramus. Phil. 2. 3. and then speaking of
impious men, says, Quatenus boni aliquid habent, justum ejus testimonium non
est ipsis denegandum. He afterward in his Chapter concerning rash judgment,
showing that it is a Sin and how, says, 1. It Is a Sin of Levity against
Prudence. 2. It Is contrary to the Principles of Nature, Quod tibi non vis
fieri, etc. for no man is willing that his Neighbor should judge rashly of him
and his Actions. 3. It diminishes the good of ones Neighbor, and opposes his
Right: for that every man has as much right to his good Fame, as to a
depositum in any men's hands, till he himself has by his actings took it away.
4. It begets contempt of ones Neighbor, Romans 14. 3. 10. by which means it
happens that he is held unworthy of beneficial employments. 5. It Is an
Usurpation of the judgment and Authority of God, who judges of hidden things:
and in that Chapter raising the Question, Whether and how doubtful matters are
to be interpreted in the better part? he answers, 1. That what is doubtful as
to things, ought to be weighed according to reason, without inclining to either
part. 2. That what is doubtful as to Persons, wherein their good or ill repute
is concerned, is absolutely to be interpreted in the better part. 1 Cor. 3. 5.
and that at least in such a Case we are not to judge ill of our Neighbor: and
further, That we are so in common Offices or Duties to demean our selves to
him, as if he were an upright man, since the contrary does not appear to us.
This is the judgment of Charity. And in his Chapter De exemplo bono and
scandalo, he says, That there must of necessity be Sin in every Scandal,
because the ruin or Spiritual detriment of ones Neighbor is therein
concerned. He there moreover does inculcate one great point of Morality in
order to the avoiding of Scandal, and says, Damnanda and horrenda est illa
perversitas judicii qua solent multi quorundam labentium Casu aut hypocriseos
detectione, alios professionem similem facientes, hypocritas idcirco
pronunciare. Hoc est enim plane Diabolum imitari in piis accusandis and iniqua
suspicione gravandis, Job 1. 11.

And having said all this, may I not ask if he honors his Prince who does
not think him wise enough to choose his Religion? When the fate of our Princes
is usually to fix their Marriages with Relation to the welfare of the State,
and when their Favorites are so seldom permitted by the Populace to lie quiet
in their Bosoms, and that it is a Princes Lot thus not to be like others, able
to choose his Wife or his Friend, shall he not choose his God? since that Verse
in Phil. 2d referred to, says, In lowliness of mind let each esteem other
better than themselves; does he observe that Precept who esteems not his Prince
as fit to be trusted with the freedom of choosing his way to Heaven, and the
judgment of discretion as himself? since there are many qualifications of
Excellence for the discharge of the Regal Office, that claim preference of a
Princes Orthodoxy in the belief of the Mysteries of the Gospel, does he honor
all men, and particularly, give honor to whom honor is due, who when he sees
the whole World agreed in the Fact of his Princes Heir being most signally,
perhaps beyond any one of the Age, blessed with those qualifications, shall
instead of testifying by words and actions such his Excellence and intrinsic
worth (and wherewith God has honored him) try to exclude him from the Throne?
A Great Philosopher of our Nation, and one who has writ Philosophically of the
Passions, tells us, That the value or worth of a man is, as of all other
things, his price, that is to say, so much as would be given for the use of his
Power, and therefore is not absolute but a thing dependant on the need and
judgment of another: and then tells us, That an able Conductor of Souldie^s is
of great price in time of War present or imminent. And any one that will
consider what the present Warlike State of the World abroad is, and that by
necessity of Nature in the growing populous World we must expect the peremptory
noise of Wars and Rumors of Wars, to be more and more calling on our
attention, will probably be of opinion that the Highborn Lawful Princes of
great Martial Talents will be the best Heirs and Successors Heaven can send any
Countries. That Author somewhat suitably to Ames his Notion of Honoring,
says, The manifestation of the value we set on one another, is that which is
commonly called honoring and dishonouring. To value a man at a high rate is to
honor him: at a low rate is to dishonor him.

And I may add that an heroical Habit of Courage in any Prince is the more
valuable or entitled to honor, because it is by necessity of Nature
accompanied with the highest Clemency and gentleness, it being the excessive
fear of danger that puts Cowardice on Cruelty.

The Author I refer to says likewise, That to be descended from Conspicuous
Parents is honorable, because they more easily attain the Aids and Friends of
their Ancestors. On the contrary to be descended from obscure Parentage is
dishonorable. With how great an honor then and reverential awe ought we to
think of the great Claim of Birthright, the next Heir of the Crown has, which
may be lineally and successively derived from the British, Scottish, Danish,
Saxon, and Norman Princes above two thousand years, which is more ancient than
any Prince in the World can show? and when God who finished his Work-man-ship
of the World in Six days, has been two thousand years in making up the
Hereditary Glories of this Line, can we without horror think of any ones
dishonouring it, by breaking in on its Succession under pretenses of Religion
or honoring God? when so many Fountains of Royal Blood have been filling this
Sea of Honor two thousand years, will a few men by their poor Sculls project
to empty it, or with the Breath of Sophisms to turn the Great Purple Tide that
has born down the World before it so many years?

But it is not only the thought of the Aides that the next Heir of the Crown
may have from the Friends of his Ancestors, that may make his Descent from
Conspicuous Parents so justly to be honored, as was said, but the sight of all
the Lines of the Great and Honorable Actions of his numerous Ancestors, being
made by the hand of Heaven to point at him as the Center, and their being fixed
so in his Memory that we cannot well think of his thinking of any thing but
Honor, that must make other Subjects pay the greater Veneration of his High
Birth.

It is so hard a matter even for the flights of imagination with the
exquisiteness of Art to produce thoughts of Kings and Princes any way
proportionable to their real Figure, that I have observed that our old famous
Dramatists of the former Ages could hardly in any Scene give us the Character
of a King done up to the height of a Monarchs Glory: and as the Characters of
Kings in those days were expressed, it was but necessary that the Rule in
Theaters should be, that the Kings should enter there with loud Music that so
their Quality might that way be understood.

It is then no marvel if so many in the present Age who are not made e meliore
luto, and whose Education was low, and whose Souls are narrow, cannot
comprehend the honor of the great part that God calls Kings to Act on the
Stage of the World, and are especially Strangers to the great thoughts that are
to be supposed to Crown the Souls of Kings when they espouse a Religion.

But in that great particular Concern of Princes owning their Religion, we are
morally bound to think of them with all the honor we can: nor to repine at
that our Duty to them, since in the Concern of Religion, and as it is a
Principle of the Divine Life we are to honor our Inferiors, and cannot
without profanation and usurping on Gods Right judge them rashly.

We are not to think that our honoring all men, and the necessary parts of
that duty are recommended to us by way of Council in order to a more perfect
life, and as not sub peccato obliging any but those who have by Vow bound
themselves to the practice of the same: but we are to esteem them Precepts, and
properly so called, and universally binding, and as necessary parts of that
Holiness without which no man can see God. And therefore when I see any man
after much laboring of his thoughts to have changed the Profession of his
Belief of any Tenets controverted among Christians, and particularly one who
was in the Communion of the Church of England to own the belief of
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, and the Doctrine of Justification according to
the Sense of the Council of Trent, or other such points, and shall find that
most certainly that it neither was nor could be for Gain or respect to Temporal
advantages that his judgment appeared thus altered, nor yet out of levity and
natural inconstancy, and that his habitual constancy and steadiness in all
measures relating to Persons and things long by me observed, have assured me
that no such change could thence proceed, and shall further observe in such
Person a greater tenderness in his regard to second Table Duties than before,
and that his inclinations of Beneficence to all Mankind, and particularly to
his former friends now differing in judgment from him, have not been tinctured
and discolored by any alteration of his Notions, I shall think my self under
various Moral Obligations to honor such a Person, tho perhaps erroneously
opining. I will honor him for his discharge of his Duty in trying all things,
and having spent time in examining the truth of Religionary Speculations, and
taking up a Religion not by chance (as most Orthodox Religionaries do) but by
choice. I will honor him for following that which Sanderson in his Lectures of
Conscience calls the next and immediate (tho not the adequate) Rule of his
Conscience, the light of his mind for the time present, a Light that I see so
many Orthodox Religionaries playing with or endeavoring to extinguish. I will
honor him for the great Sacrifice I think that he honestly intends to truth,
(and to offer which to it I see so many Persons who erred, so reluctantly
brought to its Altars) I mean the Pride and Glory of the Humane understanding
by a Recantation of its former Sentiments, a Sacrifice that to him, who
consults with Flesh and Blood, may seem as unpleasant, as the offering up of
Isaac did to Abraham. And since to presage well of men is to honor them, I
will thus in the Case of such a Person, who has thus honored God by taking up
his ^ross and taking shame to himself, believe that God will honor him, and
judge, that tho he may in statu viatoris have mistaken Error for Truth in his
way, he will not mistake Hell for Heaven at his Journeys end. Moreover since to
speak rashly to or of any men is a dishonor to them, I will not only not
dishonor such a Person by determining that his Error is voluntary (which
whether it be so I can never know, and which if it be not, I do know it can be
no Sin) but will pay him the just honor of my judging it to be involuntary; as
knowing that neither he nor any one else can command his own understanding, and
that the nature of the understanding is such that it can no more apprehend
things otherwise than they appear to it, than the Eye see other Colors in the
Rainbow than it does, whether those Colors be really there or no. Moreover
although I know that no Law binds without a Promulgation, and that that
Promulgation of Divine positive Laws may by reason of men's diffent Abilities of
understanding be sufficient for one man that is not for another, (and so that
the erroneous opinion of one man may be a Crime, and another man's holding the
^^me opinion may be innocent) yet I will not dishonor the understanding of any
man for his not believing the Controverted points of Christian Religion, that I
observe other men of great intellectuals profess the Belief of: and do
consider, that as the Wind blows where it lists, so the influx of the Divine
Spirit on men is not confined to the excellence of their understandings, and
that God does not always reveal his mind to men according to the Proportion of
their Gifts and Graces, and that when the Book of the Law was found and read
before Josiah, Hulda the Prophetess was sent to and consulted, tho there were
Prophets in the Land at that time: and that that was Revealed sometime to
Nathan, that was not to David, who was in all points his Superior. I will
according to what was cited out of Ames, Interpret every thing of him in the
better part that is doubtful. And tho men do naturally think themselves equally
wise, I will, according to the Morality enjoined by that place in the
Philippians, Esteem him better than my self: since a great part of Wisdom
consists in the proportioning of the means to the end, I will out of the
knowledge of my own frequent Omissions in that kind, account that we both
having designed the same end of Eternal Happiness, he tho differing from me in
speculative points, yet has by his Practical Devotion proportioned his means
to that end better than I have done. Moreover because it is a dishonorable
thing for any man to receive a Religion in gross, and servilely to own all the
Religionary Sentiments that the Major part of any Church seem to do, I will not
so much as in my secret thoughts charge such a Person with owning all the
Religionary Tenets of the Church of Rome, and much less with owning any one of
the Tenets that is Irreligionary, how justly soever chargeable either on the
Papacy or any of its Adherents.

I who am a Son of the Church of England, have considered how its Constitution
has been prop'd up in various ways, and on different Hypotheses by several of
the Fathers and great Writers in that Church before Archbishop Laud's time and
since, and how some of them in some points receded from its Articles, and that
many of them did in several Doctrines of importance variously interpret its
Articles. My Conversation with several Divines of that Church who are equally
Learned and Pious, has let me see that in many Theological speculative points
they differ much from one another, and yet retain perfect Charity for one
another; and their Notions as to which points they have in prudence not
troubled the Populace with. And yet even in our very Protestant Populace in
this Conjuncture of Zeal against Popery, I have observed so much Candor
expressed to Protestant Writers who have asserted some speculative points that
seemed to agree with the Doctrines of the Church of^ Rome, that no one man has
either called them Papists, or Protestants in Masquerade for so doing.

I have not heard of any who has censured Mr. Baxter as a Papist or Popishly
affected, since Dr. Tully in his printed Letter to him, p. 21. desiring him to
take his Balance and weigh more diligently, that he might see the very small
odds, between His Justification and the Council of Trents, adds, for to me
neither of them turns the Scale upon the other. There was likewise after the
beginning of the Popular Outcries of the Danger of Popery a Learned
Metrophysical Book of Dr. Glisson (who was Professor of Physic in Cambridge,
and Fellow of the Royal Society) Printed and Dedicated to the EARL of
SHAFTSBVRY, and in the 28th Chapter there, viz. De substantiarum
penetrabilitate mutata quantitate, the Dr. says, That it is better to admit
Penetration, than a Vacuum, however we have been taught from our Childhood to
believe that there is no penetration of Bodies and Dimensions, and does Combat
those old Notions of Philosophy with which Transubstantiation was opposed
formerly; and yet was never censured so much as Popishly affected for so
writing; nor have I observed any one to blame him for it, or to have
animadverted on his Book. I have likewise observed that several Protestant
Divines have not been in the least reproached or censured as maintainers of
Purgatory, when they have professed their Beliefs that the Souls of good Men
after Death go to a good Hades, and of bad Men to a bad one, and are to stay in
those common receptacles till the day of Judgment. It is hence obvious that
there are ingenious Protestants who do not take up their Religion in gross, and
that the fear of Popery or hatred of it is not generally so much founded on the
Speculative Religionary Propositions maintained by Papists, as partly on the
Arbitrary Power claimed by the Pope to impose Creeds on men, and by which Power
he may if he pleases command them to believe that there are no Antipodes, and
excommunicate any who believe there are, as one Pope long since did, and partly
on his claiming a Power to disturb the measures of their Loyalty to their
Princes.

In such a Conjuncture therefore as this, when it is so much out of fashion to
think any one the less a Christian, or the less a Protestant for differing from
others of the Church of England, in such point as aforesaid, it would be an
aggravation of the immorality of our not acknowledging the honor due to any
Person of the Roman Catholic Communion, because supposed to own Speculative
Religionary Tenets of this Nature, and which too have no influence no Men's
Conversation with each other, or on their Actions as they are Members of any
Civil Society, and (as one says) would be still the same with all the
Consequences of them, tho there were no other Person besides one's self in the
World. And therefore as I will rashly charge no Protestant with the servile
resignation of his reason to any true Church, nor look on him as one who does,
More balantium antecedentem Ducem sequi, so I will not without just ground and
certain proof charge any Papist with the taking up his Religion in gross from
the Papal Chair, nor with the owning all the Religionary Tenets that many
Romanists do, and much less with any one of the Irreligionary Tenets imputable
to any Order of the Church of Rome, or to the Papacy. To think any Papist the
less a Christian for owning such Tenets which being held by some Protestants,
we think them not the less Christians for, does most notoriously come under the
Sin of Acceptio personarum, and is contrary to that Precept of St. James, viz.
My Brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of Glory with
respect of Persons: and by which accepting of some men's Persons the duty of
honoring all men, and valuing their real worth is manifestly outraged.

I will by no means therefore rashly charge any particular Papist with owning
the Tenet, that he is implicitly to obey the Commands of the Pope without
weighing the Justice of them: for I find the contrary Tenet owned in print by
the seven Divines of Venice, as Ames mentions it in the Preface to his
Puritanismus Anglicanus, where he says, In Tractatu illo Iudiciosissimo a
septem Theologis (meaning those of Venice) de interdicto Papae conscripto,
verbatim ponitur and nervose firmatur haec propositio, viz. Christianus
praecepto sibi facto etiam a Pontifice summo, obedientiam praestare non debet,
nisi prius praeceptum examinaverit, quantam materia subjecta requirit, an sit
conveniens, legitimum and obligatorium: and is qui si^e illo examine praecepti
sibi injuncti, caeco quodam impetu obedit, peccat.

And do not many of the Church of Rome by their being picque'z d' honneur upon
the being called Papists, give some indication thereby of their being not
obliged to pay an absolute blind Obedience to the Pope? And tho Bellarmine and
several of the Popes Parasites have called those Heretics, that believe not
the Iure-Divinity of the Popes Monarchy over the World, yet all the Gibelline
Papists of old made it HERESY to say that the Emperor was not by Divine Right
Lord of the World. Moreover tho some Papists have writ opprobriously of the
Scripture, and called it as well as made it a Nose of Wax, yet is the reverence
of others of that Church for those inspired Writings sufficiently known, and as
may appear by that great saying of Panormit^n so often cited by the Protestant
Writers, viz. Laico verum dicenti cum Evangelio, magis credendum, quam Concilio
falsum dicenti contra Evangelium. It is so easy a thing for every man of
ordinary reading and observation to expatiate on the common place of the
disagreements of the Writers of the Church of Rome, in various important
Religionary Doctrines, that I need not here do it.

It Is a common Observation that in Spain and Italy it is the common opinion
that Latreia is due to the Cross, which in France and Germany is not so: and
that at Rome no man may say that the Council is above the Pope, nor at Paris
that the Pope is above the Council: and as to the great Doctrine of
Justification, every one has heard of Bellarmin's Tutissimum, and of Stephen
Gardners laying his dead grasp on Christ's Merits as he was sinking: and as to
some Papists not believing the School Conclusions in that Church, there is a
famous instance cited by Crackanthorp in his Logic, concerning a great Roman
Catholic Writer, who said, Sic dicerem in scholis: sed tamen (maneat inter
nos) diversum sentio. Sic dicimus in scholis: sed tamen (maneat inter nos) non
potest probari ex sacris literis.

And therefore (since as was said) every man has a right to his good name till
he has justly forfeited it, I will honor such a Roman Catholic as before
described, with the reputation of his being a good Christian, and shall think
that I am Morally bound to esteem all Papists so qualified to be better
Christians than any Orthodox Protestants that want those Moral Endowments: and
according to my Obligation to honor all men and love the Brotherhood, and
consequently to be readier to do good Caeteris paribus to Christians than to
those who are strangers to Christianity, will thus love such a Papist as a part
of that Brotherhood, and by our Saviors measures in those words of the same
being his Brother, Sister and Mother whosever shall do the will of God, will
take notice of and honor, and love such a Roman Catholic as much as if the
closest Iura sanguinis united me to him, and with respect to not only the ONE
Blood that all Nations were made of, but the ONE Blood they were redeemed with,
and by virtue of those other words of our Savior, viz. That if any man will do
his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine, etc. will account that in points
necessary and essential to such a man's salvation, our blessed Lord has been as
ready to make his Doctrine known to him, as effectually as he could be supposed
to make it known to such near Relations.

They are expressions worthy of a Divine of the Church of England, in an
excellent Sermon that goes under the name of Dr. Tillotson, viz. I had rather
persuade any one to be a good man, than to be of any party or denomination of
Christians whatsoever. For I doubt not but the belief of the ancient Creed
without the addition of any other Articles, together with a good life will
certainly save a man. And since Justin Martyr when Trypho the Jew demanded his
thoughts of the Salvation of the Jews then living, and expected that he would
pronounce them damned, the Martyr answered, That he hoped they might be saved
if with their Ceremonials they did also observe (...); i. e. The Eternal and
Natural Rules of indispensable Holiness: and since he notwithstanding the
barbarous uncharitableness of the stiff-necked and narrow souled Jews, who
would not show a Traveller the way that was not of their Religion, did yet show
the invincible Charity of a Christian to them being ready (as he says) (...),
i. e. To receive them friendly and to communicate all things to them as
BRETHREN or affectionate friends, it may well be esteemed an uncouth sight see
some peevish Nominal Protestants, who observe none of those Rules, yet to
exclude Papists out of the Christian Brotherhood, and even to damn them who
with the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, do most religiously observe those
Great and Noble Rules*

And therefore tho the reconciling of Churches is by some good men hoped for,
and by all good men wished, yet since it can by no rational men be supposed
possible without a previous reconciliation of Persons first had, and that this
latter is no Project but a Moral Duty and Vital part of Christianity, and that
it is an empty Project for any one to think to deserve the name of a Christian
without being reconciled to the whole Creation of God, and being first
reconciled to his Brother as the Expression is in St. Matthew, I shall with
that this Duty of honoring all men, and as inclusive of our internal affection
and testifying before God the worth and excellence that is in any Roman
Catholics, and of the interpreting all doubtful matters relating to them in
the better part, (as was before explicated out of Ames) may more and more be
thought of by Protestants as Essential to their Christianity.

Any one who will consider that Canon of our Church, viz. It was far from the
purpose of the Church of England to forsake and reject the Churches of Italy,
France, Spain, and Germany, or any such like Churches in all things that they
held and practiced, etc. that it only departed from them in those particular
points wherein they were fallen, both from themselves in their ancient
integrity, and from the Apostolical Churches which were their first Founders,
may see the great perfection of the Principles of the Church of England in
honoring all men, and loving the whole Brotherhood of Christianity: and our
Duty wherein as necessary to Salvation is very excellently inculcated by a
great Father of that Church, I mean, My Lord Primate Bramhal in his just
Vindication of the Church of England p. 15. where having said, That the
Communion of the Christian Church Catholic is partly internal, partly
external, and made it part of this Internal Communion, to judge charitably one
of another, to exclude none from the Catholic Communion, either Eastern or
Western, Southern or Northern Christians, etc. to rejoice at their well-doing,
to sorrow for their Sins, to condole with them in their sufferings, to pray for
their constant perseverance in the true Christian Faith, for their reduction
from all their respective Errors, and their reunion to the Church in Case they
be divided from it, etc. and lastly to hold an actual external Communion with
them in votis, in our desires, and to endeavor it by all those means that are
in our Power, he tells us in plain terms that this internal Communion is of
absolute necessity among all Catholics. And in p. 26 th he declares to the
same purpose, That internal Communion is due always from all Christians to all
Christians, even to those with whom we cannot communicate externally in many
things, whether Opinions or Practices. But external Communion may sometimes be
suspended more or less, etc. and he does afterward in p. 18 assert, That
Christian Communion implies not an Unity in all Opinions: and shows, That the
Roman and African Churches held good Communion one with another, while they
differed both in Judgment and Practice about Rebaptisation.

As for any projected Universal Unity of Opinions, I look on it to be as
impracticable as our levelling Republicans EQVAL Division of Lands in the late
times by their wild Agrarian Laws: for the Birth of the next Child would
necessarily break that their Model, and the same fate might be expected to
happen the same way to this Model of Unity of Opinions, or perhaps by the birth
of the next hour. But this Internal Communion is a thing most possible, and our
Duty tho without hope of Unity in all Religionary Opinions to ensue thereby,
according to the Doctrine of this Great Primate.

If then we are Morally bound to have this Internal Communion with all Foreign
Roman Catholic Princes and their Subjects, as before described, how can we
without horror think of the excluding any Heir to the Crown (for fear of his
believing the same Religionary Notions that they do) from the Catholic
Communion, and of excluding him from his Birthright on such an account whom we
must always have this Internal Communion with, and rejoice in his good
successes, and condole with him in his ill, and to hold an external Communion
with him and any Church he is of, in votis, in our desires, and to endeavor it
by all means that are in our Power? Did any endeavor it, who would by
depriving him of his Birthright on that account, and holding the same Tenet
with Papists of Dominium fundatur in gratia, gave him such a just Cause of
Scandal, as without the Divine Spirit assisting him, might endanger his
withdrawing from the whole Christian Communion: And tho the honest Heathen
could tell us, That Cavendum est ne poena major sit quam culpa, and all
Casuists agree, That Poena non debet excedere delictum, and tho Magna Charta
tell us, That Ex quantitate poenae cognoscitur quantitas delicti, quia poena
debet esse commensurabilis delicto, yet attempted to punish him by the loss of
his Birthright of the Crown, when it could not be certain to us that he had
committed any fault at all, and when by the judgment of Charity we were bound
to believe that he had committed none?

To many of our Nominal Protestants, whose thoughts and Ideas of Christian
Communion are too narrow to extend not only to a National Church, but to a
Parochial one, this Notion of the incomparable Primate (for whose august
Charity one Christian World of Religionary differences was not enough to
overcome) about internal Communion, will I believe seem new Doctrine and Duras
Sermo; but if they would be true Christians instead of being called true
Protestants, this Duty of Internal Communion from all Christians to all
Christians, must be practiced by them: and if this Duty has a Divine Right for
it as to the Persons of Papists abroad, it must be operative as to those here
at home. He who loves not his Brother whom he has seen, I may ask, how can he
love either his God, or his Brother that he has not seen? The sham-war among
any Protestants and Papists must not only be lest off, but they must honor the
Persons of one another: and Protestants are not only to forbear robbing Papists
of their Goods, on pretense of carrying away their Images and Pictures, but are
to honor the Image of God shining in the lives of, or the Gifts of God
dispensed to any Papists.

Mr. Buroughs in his Irenicum, p. 38. says, We accounted it Tyranny and
Persecution in the Bishops, when they would not suffer such as could not
conform to their Church Discipline and Ceremonies, to teach Grammar or practice
Physic: and says, That there was no dependence between their Errors (if you
will call them so) and these things. To deny the Church and Commonwealth the
benefit of the Gifts and Graces of Men, on such a pretense that they will abuse
their Liberty, we thought it was hard dealing; yea no less than a Persecution.
Suppose a man differs from his Brethren in point of Church Discipline, must not
this man have a place in an Army therefore? Tho he sees not the reason of such
a Discipline in the Church, yet God has endued him with a Spirit of Valor,
and he understands what Military Discipline means, etc.

Ought not then Persons of his Principles to revere the Heroical Endowments of
an Heir to the Crown, which do much preponderate as to the continuance of the
being and well-being of the Kingdom, to supposed Orthodoxy in some Mysteries of
the Gospel, as was shown out of Mr. Ny? King James had great Talents in
Polemical Divinity, to prove by words, that the Pope was Antichrist; but will
not these latter Endowments necessarily prevent the Pope's being Antichrist in
Deeds, if he were inclined to hurt us by showing himself such? Ames in his
Puritanismus Anglicanus gives this as the chief Reason why the Puritans hold
the Bishop of Rome to be THE Antichrist, viz. For that he being an
Ecclesiastical Ruler does arrogate and exercise the chief Power over Kings and
Princes. And does any one fear that he can exercise such Power over a Prince of
these Endowments? And I may add, have not many Factious and Republican Nominal
Protestants here completed that Figure of Antichrist? How many Virtues must
any indifferent man overlook in this Pope, who thinks he would outrage our
Civil Government, and how many Vices must he wink at in such Persons who thinks
they would not do it?

And by Virtue of our blessed Lords having decided it that he was the better
Son who said he would not do the Will of his Father and did it, may it not be
said, That those Papists who say they will not take these Oaths, and yet
perform their Natural Allegiance, are more loyal than such Nominal Protestants,
who have took the Oaths and observe them not? As much an Abhorrer as I am of
the Principles of the Jesuits Condemned by this Pope, I shall yet think my
self bound by the Moral Offices beforementioned out of Ames, not to charge the
belief or practice of them on all Persons in that Order. For when I consider
the Devotional Books of some Jesuits, writ with such strong and lively
expressions of the Practick part of Religion, as any Person of Candor will
think to be founded on a real deep sense of all Moral Offices lying warm at
their hearts, I account it impossible for them to have believed some of those
Tenets: and as I once observing at the Anatomy of a poor Malefactor, that his
Stomach appeared not able to contain above the Quantity of a Quart, would
easily have thence inferred, had I heard him accused of being wont in his
lifetime to debauch by ingurgitating vast quantities of Liquor, that there
could be no such thing, so shall I think it not possible that this sober Party
of the Jesuits who are really devout, can swallow such Irreligionary
Principles, as too many others of them have done,

We know that not many eminent Popish Writers, but particularly Azorius the
Jesuit has writ against the Jesuits Doctrine of Equivocation, and Mental
Reservation: and Crackanthorp and Ames and other Protestant Writers in their
Writings, impeaching that Doctrine of the Jesuits, have quoted Azorius as on
their side in that point.

I doubt not but many Pious Persons of that Order are glad of this Pope's
having damned such Tenets, which they never did or could believe: and I will
now upon the Popes having condemned them, judge no particular Papist to believe
them till I find cause so to do.

And notwithstanding the hard usage our Learned Lord Bishop of Lincoln's Book
had from the Author of The Compendium saying, That the Title of the Book
confuted the whole, because it mentioned the Principles approved by the Church
of Rome pernicious when really believed and practiced, I shall still think the
Pleonasm or exuberance of the Charity in so qualifying the danger of the Tenets
he confutes, to be worthy a Prelate of the Church of England, and do think the
like of the Charity of the Bishop of Winchester expressed in his printed Sermon
of the 5th of November, where having spoke of the Doctrines of Dissenters
tending to Sedition and Rebellion, that seem to be derived from the Church of
Rome, he says, if those Doctrines are believed and practiced, they must
necessarily produce Confusion among us: and do think that if the Papists could
gain the point, namely, to be looked on by Protestants as not to believe
several parts of the Tenets of Popery that are Irreligionary, and particularly
that about the Exterminium of Heretics enjoined by the Lateran Council to be
not believed by them, it would be a point very well gained, and any one who
could gain it for them, would be a more useful friend to them than ever
Bellarmin was.

To give a man the Lie is the greatest dishonor, and therefore when any Papist
shall tell me that he believes not the Lateran Council as obliging, or other
Tenets chargeable on the Papacy, I shall not tell him that he does, but shall
pass my judgment of Charity that he does not believe the same, and shall
account him still a Roman Catholic tho perhaps erroneously denying that to be
a General Council, as I account Luther a Christian and Owner of the Authority
of the Bible, tho he erroneously denied the Divine Authority of the Epistle of
St. James. The Learned Author of The Advocate of Conscience Liberty printed in
the Year 1673. and said to be Mr. Brown a Franciscan, in his 8th Chapter, viz.
Of Roman Catholics being not guilty of Practices or Principles destructive to
Government, and reproaching the ENGLISH and Foreign Protestants with such
Principles says, Was it from any of their Books (meaning the Books of the
Papists) you have drawn those wild Maxims, That the Authority of the Magistrate
is of Humane Right? That the People are above the King? That the People can
give Power to the Prince and take it away? That if a King fail in performing
his Oath at Coronation, the People are loosened from their Allegiance? That if
Princes fall from the Grace of God, the People are loosed from their
Subjection? Do not these Doctrines proceed from Wicliff, Waldenses and other
Sectaries? And then mentioning Calvin for owning such Maxims, says, That
Calvin l. 4. c. 3. Instit. from his high Consistory gives this Absolution to
all Oaths of that Nature, Quibuscunque Evangel^i hujus lux effulgeat and ab
omnibus laqueis juramentisque absolvitur. But that Loyal Franciscan there
happened to injure Calvin by a false quotation, which I believe he had took up
on the Credit of the Romanist Author of Monarcho-machia or Jerusalem and Babel,
who had cited the 4th Book of Calvin's Institutions for that purpose, but very
falsely: for Calvin in all that Chapter has not a word of such Oaths of
Allegiance as Subjects take to their Sovereigns: but treating only of Monastic
Vows, he says, Nunc postquam veritatis notitia sunt illuminati, simul Christi
gratia liberos esse dico, etc. i. e. from those Monkish unwarrantable Vows that
they had made, and out of Error and Ignorance held themselves obliged by.

But I doubt not if Parsons alias Doleman, and the Book of The Prelate and the
Prince had been showed to this Franciscan, he would have answered to this
effect, viz. These men and many Roman Catholic Authors by them cited, held
those disloyal Traiterous Principles beforementioned, but I fall will a
Sacrifice rather than hold such. I honor the spirit of Zeal against Disloyalty
that runs through his Book, and in p. 204, 205, 206, 207, 208. he very
learnedly endeavors to answer the objection about the Lateran Council, and
says thereupon what the matter will bear: and he and many other Roman
Catholic Writers have disowned the Authority of that Council as obligatory:
and therefore the judgment of Charity will incline any one to think that such
Roman Catholics would not disorder the World by it.

Moreover some Protestant Writers have judged that Council to be invalid, and
Dr. Done, who was very well studied in the Learning that relates to the Canon
Law and General Councils, does particularly in his Pseudo-Martyr p. 377, 378,
379, 380. take a great deal of pains to show the invalidity of that Council:
and that it was never meant to oblige Sovereign Princes.

But the Author of The Prelate and the Prince does in p. 228, 229, 230, 231,
232, 233, 234, 235, 236. with much Learning statuminate the Authority of that
Council: and asserts it to have been a General one, as the Cardinal Perron and
the Bishop of Lincoln have done: yet what I have mentioned of that Famous
Cardinal's not believing the Principle of the Church of Rome founded on that
Council for Princes exterminating their Heretical Subjects as always
Obligatory, nor promoting the practice thereof in France, where the Huguenots
were then about a 7th part of the whole People, has justified the
reasonableness of the Charity of our Bishops in qualifying the danger of some
Papal Principles with the restriction of their being really believed and
practiced: and the same Rule in my Notion of their danger shall always guide
me, that is to say, when the Poison of such Principles is really swallowed, it
must then be pernicious. The poison may lie in the Boxes of the Canon Law or a
General Council, and yet not poison the minds of pious Catholics, nor foul
their fingers. I having found just cause so far to honor all the Roman
Catholics of my Acquaintance, as to judge them free from any Complication of
the belief and practice of any irreligious Principles with the Principles of
their Religion, and particularly from the owning any Principle of Disloyalty or
the Jesuits Doctrine of Calumny, or the Obligatoriness of the Lateran Council,
will not rashly pronounce any other particular Papist guilty of the belief or
practice of such Principles.

Nor is it any great honor that I have done to any men of extraordinary Virtue
in thus judging, that they cannot believe or practice such Principles: for that
it being true in the Course of Nature what Machiavel said, that next to the
being perfectly good, it is the most difficult thing to be perfectly bad, the
World has had thereby some Garranty against the belief and practice of such
Principles, and by necessity of Nature must still have.

But since Mankind in general may expect to find in our esteem the benefit of
the presumption of Law, viz. That every man is presumed to be good, and that
the high Births and Educations of Princes and the great Examples of their
Magnanimous Ancestors, may well pass as strong presumptions of Nature against
their doing any low ungenerous Acts of Cruelty, and since in Gods great
Ordinance of Magistracy an especial Divine presence may by Virtue of Holy Writ
be presumed to accompany the very Magistrates appointed by Sovereign Prin^es,
according to that in 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. where after it was said to the Judges,
Take heed what you do, for ye judge not for man but for the Lord, the
following words are, Who is with you in the Judgment? and that therefore as
Christ is said to be present with those Officers he appointed in the Church,
because there is a special Virtue and Efficacy of Christ manifest in their
Ministry, there may likewise be expected a special presence Divine in the
Administration of Magistracy from the like manifestation of God in his Wisdom,
Power, Goodness, etc. for the Welfare of Societies, (as Mr. Ny observes) and
since Kings and Princes are an O^dinance of God or Medium by which in a more
special and peculiar way he communicates his Goodness to Christians according
to the Style of the 13th of the Romans (the great Seeds mater^ae of Loyalty)
for he is the Minister of God to THEE for good, it may well be thought
profaneness and Sacrilege for men to bode* and presume ill of the future Acting
of any Heirs to Crowns: and particularly as to their believing or practicing
any thing pernicious to their Realms.

What Roman Catholic Prince does not deride Innocent the 3d (under whom the
Lateran Council was held) for telling it in the Canon Law that the Papal Power
is as much greater than the Imperial, as the Sun is greater than the Moon, and
at the Marginal Note there for saying That the Papal Power exceeds the Imperial
no less than 7744? There is a Prince whose Emblem is the Su^, and whose Power
exceeds the Papal in every ones account to more than that Proportion. And is it
not therefore but according to reason and common sense that we should believe
that of all men in any Realm, the Prince will be the latest brought to the
belief of that Papal Power so categorically asserted by that Council, That
Kings may be Excommunicated by their own Bishops for not obeying the Pope, and
their Subjects in such Case be absolved from their Oaths of Allegiance? Do not
all the French Kings, notwithstanding that Council, claim the liberty of so
much freedom from the Papal Power, that Popes can neither directly nor
indirectly command or ordain any thing concerning Temporal Matters within their
Dominions, and that neither the French King, nor his Realm, nor his Officers
can be Excommunicated or interdicted by the Pope, nor his Subjects absolved
from their Oath of Allegiance?

As I have therefore in my Writing to a Noble Lord, one of his Majesty's
Ministers, who was barbarously accused by one of the Plot-Witnesses for being a
Papist, and designing to advance the Papal Power, said that I would be the last
man in England, who would believe he could be a Papist, meaning it as
impossible that he could believe or practice any irreligionary Tenet of Popery,
I will account it more impossible that any Roman Catholic Prince now living in
the World should favor the Usurpation of the Papal Power, however any of the
Popish Clergy or Layety in his Realms might perhaps be addicted to favor the
same.

That great Affair of the Munster P^ace wherein so many great Roman Catholic
Crowned Heads, agreeing perhaps in the Lateran Council being a General one, did
yet certainly agree together in the Year 1648 for Lutheran and Calvinistick
Princes and States and their Subjects quietly possessing forever their
Properties both in their Religions and Estates, has afforded the World an
important Instance of Heavens so far influencing the understandings of those
Crowned Heads, that they thought not themselves obliged to put the Decree of
that Council in practice by exterminating Heretics, but to the contrary. And
because the Affair of that Peace and the great Pacta Conventa therein for the
effect aforesaid, have been scarce more taken Notice of here than the
Transactions in China, and that the notification of the same may advance the
measures of our Duty by Internal Communion, and help to un-blunder some of our
Nominal Protestants in their fancying it so necessary for the quiet of
Christendom, that Christian Princes and their Subjects should agree in the
belief of the Speculative points of Religion, I intend to take an opportunity
to publish some Account of the same.

I account my having thus largely dilated on the Moral Offices as aforesaid,
has tended to corroborate this my 8th Conclusion. I am here conversants in the
great Court of Conscience, the Court whose Seat is in the Practical and not
Speculative intellect, and the great things of which it holds Plea are, as
Sanderson tells us, Actus morales particulares proprii: and therefore
particular urging of Records, against which lies no averment, is not more
pertinent in Courts of Law than of Moral Offices in this. And moreover I
observing in this Conjuncture when many men's zeal has been so hot against the
Speculative points of Popery, which disturb not Civil Society, that yet they
have believed the more pernicious Tenet of it, and would have practiced the
same, viz. The founding Dominion in Grace, and that tho they have been
altogether neglect^ul of their Actus morales particulares proprii, they have
both presumed to judge dishonourably and rashly of the Actings of others, and
to trouble the World not only with their Anxiety about the Acts of Kings and
Princes, but the Actus Dei, and his illuminating Princes understandings with
the Heavenly Mysteries, I have thought this discoursing of our Moral Offices as
aforesaid, the more a Propos and seasonable, as tending to fortify the
rationality of this 8th Conclusion, by exposing the absurdity of a respective
or conditional Loyalty, a Loyalty that any Christian who has taken these Oaths
shall think sufficient, does most certainly take the name of Loyalty and
Protestancy and of Christianity, and even of God in vain: and as the Scripture
implies that there is a Repentance to be repented of, I shall say that such a
man's Protestancy is to be protested against. And when we consider that the
Presbyterian Author of the EXERCITATION beforementioned, has in p. 41. with so
much Loyalty and Reason told us in terms, That Obedience is owing to Princes
without condition of Religion, or Justice on their part performed, and the
Scripture is clear for an irrespective and (in regard of the Rulers Demeanor)
absolute subjection. Exodus 20. 12. 21. 25. Romans 13. 1, 2, etc. Tit. 3. 1. 1
Pet. 2. 13. 1 Samuel 24. 6, 7. 26. 9, 10, 11. Jer. 27. 12. 29. 7. Matthew. 22. 21.
and has told us in p. 56. That our Oaths put no condition on the Prince, but
are all absolute and irrespective, and run without ifs or ands in like manner
as the Obligation of Subjects Allegiance to their Sovereign is irrespective
according to Divine Institution, methinks it should make any Son of the Church
of England to start at the thought of his being outdone in Loyalty, and sworn
Allegiance by a Covenanting Presbyterian (for such that Author was) and at the
thought of any ones having taken those Oaths relating to the King, his Heirs
and Successors, and afterward interlining the interpretation of them with ifs
and ands, and at the thought of such an interlineation not appearing as ill in
the Court of Conscience, as any would do in a Court of Law.

But the truth is the Church of England appearing in this late Religionary
Fermentation, to have so incorporated this Doctrine of absolute and
irrespective Loyalty into its Constitution beyond any other Church in the
World, and likewise the Doctrine of Charity and Moderation toward all
Christians, whether Foreigners or Domestics, whether whole Churches or single
Persons (as Primate Bramhal's words are) that the same does now (as I may say)
strike the Eyes of all indifferent men and enforce it self on the thoughts of
any who do but for Curiosity walk about this Sion and go round about her and
tell the Towers thereof, I mean do consider its Prayers, Homilies, Articles,
Canons and Ecclesiastical Constitutions, it has hereby been necessarily made
like the Eagle to renew its youth, and to be invigorated as with a new Soul
after its Enemies thought it dead or asleep, and after Mr. Hooker's shrewd
guessing that after the Year 1677. That what followed would be likely to be
small joy to them who should behold it. For the Doctrine of absolute and
irrespective Loyalty being Essential to the Peace of Kingdoms, and likely to be
so more and more to the Worlds end, and the Church of England appearing as by
consent of Parties to be THE Church that overtowers all others in the
Principles for THAT Sort of Loyalty, as well as in the august Principles of
Charity for all Christians; according to the saying of Magnes amoris amor, it
must naturally attract the love of those in other Churches, and supposing that
any Church or People love themselves and cannot be preserved but by Loyalty,
Nature will direct the World to a growing love for the Church of England: and
therefore I am no Visionaire in predicting from natural Causes, That what shall
follow to the Church of England will be great joy to those who shall behold it,
to the very end of time. And nothing could possibly in my opinion have brought
it to this firm State of its Glory, but the disloyal Principles and Practices
of some of its Competitors, and particularly the just and dreadful
apprehensions given to considerate men upon some Nominal Protestants and
Nominal Propertymen, having founded Dominion in Grace, and yet having
reproached the Church of England and its Divines with Popery, and invited the
Protestant Mobile to make a Schism from it on such an account, and printed many
Seditious Pamphlets for the Establishing the IF, or AND-Loyalty, or indeed
which is all one, an absolute Disloyalty, and in such a Conjuncture, when it
would have been not more pernicious to the particular Souls of the Disloyal
than to the Body of the whole Nation, and to the State of Christendom.

Thus through the Divine Omnipotence, which can bring good out of evil, has
our late Fermentation been made perfective to our Church, as well as the
Hereditary Monarchy, and the Rule of God's governing the World by the Prayers
of his Church and Lusts of his Enemies, been here exemplified: and as the Air
that is the Steem of the dull Earth, or the Textura halituum terrae, as
Gassendus calls it, is made by nature to be the Vehicle of those Beams of the
Sun that dazzle our Eyes; thus have the Fumes, exhaled by such men's Lusts of
Disloyalty and Malice that darkened their own understandings (and would have
obscured the glory of the Church of England) been made instrumental in
dispersing its brightness through the World, and even in the opening of the
Eyes of many to behold it with amazement; and that service has been done our
Church thereby, which by all the Pens of its Jewel and Hooker and Sanderson
could never be effected.

England that had so much the Carriage and the Trade of the World till the
Munster Peace of 48, could bear the Civil War after 41, and breathe under it
and flourish after it; but as the State of the World abroad and at home now is
and likely to be, our ALL must depend upon the Principles and Practice of
Loyalty, and therefore this new Soul I spoke of as now animating the Church of
England must be immortal, and it may well say to it self under any Prince that
can come, Soul take thy ease, thou have Loyalty and the Principles of it laid
up for many years, and England did not before 48 more excel other Realms in
Trade, than its Church does now other Churches in absolute and irrespective
Loyalty.

That great Judge of Churches and their Principles, Archbishop Laud, having in
p. 36. of his famous Star Chamber Speech remarked the dangerous Consequence of
avowing, That the Popish Relig^ion is Rebellion, says, That some Principles of
theirs teach Rebellion, is apparently true, etc. and I shall add, that some
Principles of our late Covenanting Dissente^s have taught it, is apparently
true; and for such of the latter who believed and practiced these Principles,
to reproach any Papists with Dis^oyalty, is as apparently ridiculous as was Mr.
Prynn's, writing two Voluminous Tractates of The Disloyalty of Papists at the
time when he was making so great a Figure in the late Rebellion. But however,
suitably to the Moral Offices urged by Ames of not condemning whole Parties of
men on the account of the guilt of some Persons, I have under this Conclusion
cited the loyal Principles of some Recusants of all sorts pertinent to my
Scope: and because the irrespective Loyalty that I affirm therein we have
obliged our selves to by our Oaths, is so incomparably asserted in a long
Speech of that Great Man of the Church of Rome, Reginaldus Belnensis,
Archbishop of Bourges in France, I shall refer any one to it as printed in
^huanus. The Speech was spoke in a Famous Assembly and on a great occasion, for
to make way for the quiet Reception of Harry the 4th of France while a
Protestant into the Throne; and it was framed with such profound thoughts of
Loyalty, and with such extraordinary Learning referring both to the old and new
Testament, and to Fathers and Church History, and Civil and Canon Law, and with
such close and nervous argumentation to evince the Divine Right of Allegiance
due to Princes, and particularly without any respect had to their Religion,
that it may pass for one of the best Bullwarks of absolute Loyalty I know of
next to the 13th of the Romans and other things contained in Holy Writ. And
because I think no serious Christian who reads ^t will ever find in his heart
afterward to ridicule passive o^edience, or make ridiculous Platforms of
Conditional Loyalty, I do intend to Translate and Publish it. Moreover because
there is in that Speech one Noble peculiar Character of the Moral Offices of
Loyalty, wherein it is pity that the proverbial English good nature should in
any men come short of that of the French Civility, and any Protestants Loyalty
of a Roman Catholics, I mean that Archbishops honoring the Mind and Soul of
his Prince, who was not of the Communion of his Church, and even then
vindicating him from Heresy, and saying, That he ought not to be thought a
Heretic, and propping up his honorable thoughts of his Prince with a
Quotation out of St. Austin, viz. That he was not to be reckoned among
Heretics who without pertinacy defended his opinion tho erroneous, etc I think
the hanging up so great a Picture in public view, wherein that Man of God did
with such exquisite draught, design, and color thus paint his Princes
Character and that of his own Loyalty to Eternity, may be variously useful: and
the very sight of the great Colors in which cannot methinks but raise the
little ones of Blushes in any Nominal Protestants who do with such foul and
hard hands handle the Religionary Concernments of Kings who are Nominal Gods,
and make no difference between the danger of Heterodoxy in Subjects and in
Princes.

I have mentioned it that there is less danger of any Princes believing or
practicing what may favor the Papal Usurpation than of such Belief or Practice
in a Subject, and it were an easy matter to instance in many erroneous
Religionary Tenets, which as held by Parties among Subjects may cause general
apprehensions of danger, but from which as held by a Prince it would be
ridiculous to fear any ill, or to imagine that the Prince can imbibe the dregs
of those Tenets as they discriminate discontented Parties: as for example, how
can any one fear that a Prince by believing that Personal Reign of Christ on
Earth for a thousand years would hurt his own Government? or that a Prince* by
^eing a Socinian, ^ould hold the Tenet of the unlawfulness of Defensi^e War? or
that a Prince, who favored the Order of the Jesuits, would approve of their
Te^ets of Calumny and Equivocation, etc. and several of their vile Casuistical
Tenets? or that any Magistracy would permit some of their Apologies, and
particularly that of Guymenius, to be so much as published in the Language of
the Country?

But the truth is, we are Morally bound to make a great difference in our
Demeanor toward our Princes, when supposed to err in opinions about Religion,
from the Measures we are allowed to take in relation to our ^ellow Subjects so
erring. Error is a part of Humane frailty, and Subjects are Morally bound to
conceal the frailties of their Kings, and not to censure or publish them to
their dishonor, and are to be more ready to Apol^gize for their Princes on all
occasions, than for their Parents. S^. Peter in that Verse, where the Duty of
honoring all Men and loving the Brotherhood, is mentioned, subjoyns a
particular Precept of honoring the King. We are never to think of the hearts
of Kings, but as being in the h^nds of God, nor of any Mists of Errors that may
be in their heads without thinking of the Rays of the Divine Power that like a
Glory surrounds theirs, and which in the usual Concourse of Providence do
dissipate all danger from any Errors within them. Tho in men's beliefs who are
Subjects, Religionary Errors are often complicated with Irreligionary ones, yet
we are to think of the Oil of the Lords Anointed as uppermost and appearing
above such latter Errors, and suppressing the Fumes of them in the minds of
Princes, and are to fear no more harm from the Persons of our Princes than from
our Guardian Angels differing from us in many great Religionary Speculations,
and are to think with honor of our King, as an Angel of God to discern between
good and bad, Religion and Irreligion: and it is an absurd thing for any not to
imitate the Popish Archbishop aforesaid in clearing his Prince, tho of another
Communion, from Pertinacy, since such a Moral defect is a humor of
positiveness, that of all men Kings are most naturally free from, and whose
becoming dissidence of their own understandings how great soever, is
Conspicuous by the wearing away so much of their lives in hearing the advice of
their Council. And when ever Passive Obedience is called for by Princes and
must be readily paid as a due Debt, we are even then to strain our most
improved thoughts to find an honorable Interpretation of our Princes Actions,
in like manner as some of the Loyal Non-Conformists to the Gallican Church have
done, as appears by a Great Observation in their Book called the Policy of the
Clergy of France, a Book that Maimbourg in print has acknowledged to be the
best lately published by their Party, viz. That their Princes never made any
great Assault on the Papal Power, but what cost their Protestant Subjects dear.

This, This is Loyalty worthy the name of Christian; and after all if yet any
men will make wanton Suppositions of the beliefs or practices of Sovereigns
being never so contrary to Religion, let those know that an absolute and
irrespective Loyalty is that which by these Oaths they have obliged themselves
to: and that therefore it is an absurd thing to attempt to exclude any Heir of
the Crown from his Birthright on any pretense of his Religion or other
pretense whatsoever, since we must pay an absolute Obedience and Allegiance to
him immediately on the Descent of the Crown to him, and accordingly as by these
Oaths we have obliged our selves to do.

Having thus in these Conclusions asserted the Obligation relating to our Kings
Heirs and Successors, as resulting from the plain and genuine Sense of the
words in the Oaths, although it is a common, sure Rule, That Verba ubi sunt
expressa, voluntatis supervacanea est quaestio, yet I shall ex superabundanti
choose to corroborate such my Assertion by laying down this as my 9th and last
Conclusion, that it is manifest that it was the Lawgivers intention to bind
the Takers of these Oaths, not only to bear true Faith and Allegiance to his
Majesty, but to his Heirs and Successors in the Due and Legal Course of
Descent, as I have before expressed.

It need not be much dilated on, that Relations are Minimae entitatis, but
Maximae efficaciae: and that, Liberi sunt quasi parts and appendices parentum,
not only Fictione Iuris, but Natura and ^ei veritate, and that in the framing
of the Oath of Allegiance and the designing the Obligations to arise thence,
the King had a necessary regard to natural affection, and to the preservation
of the Hereditary Monarchy in the Line of his Heirs and Successors: and
suitably to what is expressed in the Preamble of the Statute of 25 H. 8. c. 22.
viz. That since it is the natural inclination of every man gladly and willingly
to provide for the surety of both his Title and Succession, although it touch his
only private Cause, we therefore reckon our selves much more bound to beseech
and instant your Highness to foresee and provide for the PRESENT surety of both
you and of your most lawful Succession and Heirs.

Nor need it be much insisted on, that it is natural for every Government to
defend and preserve it self: and to this purpose the Author of the Exercitation
cites Alsted a Lutheran Divine, and likewise Grotius and Dudley Fenner, for
maintaining the lawfulness of what the old Athenian famous Oath enjoined for
the preservation of its Polity, namely, of any private Person killing any
Usurper, or one who without a lawful Title forcibly invaded the Government. The
Athenians had several Oaths of a high nature, by the Religion of which they
tied themselves to defend their Government: and one was the Iusjurandum
epheborum, which they took when 20 years old, and which is set down in Petitus
his Noble Commentary on the Athenian Laws, and part of which as rendered by him
into Latin, is, Patriam liberis non relinquam in deteriore sed potius in
meliore statu. Navigabo ad terram eamque colam, quantulacunque illa sit quae
habenda mihi tradetur. Parebo legibus quae obtinent, etc. quod si quis leges
abrogare velit, populo non sciscente, minime feram. Vindicabo autem sive solus,
sive cum aliis omnibus. Patria sacra colam, etc. ad mortem usque pro nutricia
terra dimicabo. But this Oath, tho famous enough, was not THE famous one I
referred to: but it is the other of which the formula is set down in Petitus
there, p. 232, 233. and which begins with Occidam mea ipsius manu si possim
eum qui everterit Rempublicam Atheniensium, aut e^ eversa Magistratum gesserit
in posterum, etc. That Oath of so high and strange a nature was made shortly
after the driving out the thirty Tyrants and the Law made, that Si quis
Atheniensium Rempublicam evertat, aut ea everse Magistratum gerat, Atheniensium
hostis esto, impuneque occiditor, etc.

To secure their Government forever from future Usurpation was the intent of
that terrible Oath: and to secure the Government of the Hereditary Monarchy
here was the intent of our gentle ones, and sufficiently favoring of the
Mansuetudo Evangelii, and which Oaths, however binding the Loyal to defend the
Government with their lives, do yet strictly bind to the defense of the Rights
and Privileges of the Crown, one of which is both by the 13th of the Romans,
and the Lex terrae, to be a terror to the Evil, and to bear the Sword.

But Sir E. Coke having told us in his Commentaries, That the true Scope and
design of our Statute Laws are oftentimes not to be understood without the
knowledge of the Hist^ry of the Age when the particular Statute was made, I
shall (looking back on the Conjuncture when the Act for the Oath of Allegiance
was made) take notice, that by many particular matters then obvious to all men's
thoughts, it appeared worthy of the wisdom of the Government then to provide
for the security both of his Majesty and of the Succession

Any who shall read D' Ossat's Letters will find the various deep designs there
opened, that related to several Foreign Princes and Potentates Jealousies of
the Power that England would have in the balance of the World, by the uniting
of the strength of Scotland to it upon the rightful Succession of King James to
the Monarchy: and perhaps rather out of a design to amuse them than out of an
humor to put by the thoughts of Mortality, Queen Elizabeth did show so much
unwillingness sometimes to hear and speak of her Successor. And during the
constrained Altum silentium of the Succession then here, a Book of the
Succession was writ by Father Parsons, and which made noise enough in the
World, as those Letters mention, and by which Book the Author intended that our
Hereditary Monarchy should be Thunder struck, especially with the help of the
Papal Breves that came here to obstruct the Succession. King James at the end
of his Premonition to all Christian Monarchs, printing a Catalogue of the Lies
of Tortus ( i. e. Bellarmin) with a brief Confutation of them, refers to one
Lie of Tortus, p. 47, viz. In which words [of the Breves of Clement the 8th]
not only King James of Scotland was not EXCLVDED, but included rather: and the
Confutation is thus, viz. If the Breves of Clement did not exclude me from the
Kingdom, but rather did include me, why did Garnet burn them? Why would he not
reserve them that I might have seen them, that so he might have obtained more
favor at my hands for him and his Catholics? And that King in his Apology for
the Oath of Allegiance, p. 29. refers to the two Breves which Clemens Octavus
sent to England immediately before Queen Elizabeth's Death, debarring him from
the Crown, or any other that either would profess or any ways tolerate the
Professors of his Religion: contrary to the Pope's Manifold Vows and
Protestations Simul and eodem tempore and, as it were, delivered uno and eodem
spiritu to diverse of his Majesty's Ministers abroad, professing such kindness
and showing such forwardness to advance his Majesty to the English Crown.

Any one who reads in D' Ossat the inclination of that Pope to Principles and
Practices of this kind, will not wonder at his Majesty's thus exposing his
Vn-holyness: and the nature of the Breves is sufficiently there explained, and
proved to be according to his Majesty's measures published of them.

That Great King was sufficiently acquainted with the Principles and Practices
of the Papacy, that had been so injurious to Hereditary Monarchs. He knew that
a Popish Parliament in England had showed their Abhorrence of the Pope's being
somewhat like an Excluder-General of Kings, and an Arbitrary one too, as
appeared by the Words in the Statute of 25 H. 8. viz. The Pope contrary to the
inviolable Grants of Jurisdictions by God immediately to Emperors and Kings,
has presumed to invest who should please him to inherit in other men's Kingdoms
and Dominions, which we your Loyal Subjects Spiritual and Temporal abhor and
detest: and the practices at Rome for King James's Exclusion had made deep
impressions in his thoughts. As he was a Prince of great Reading he could not
but know particularly the many Anti-Monarchical Tenets that were published by
many Popish Commentators, positive Writers, Schoolmen, Canonists, and never
censured by any Index Expurgatorius, tho yet several Popish Authors who
asserted the Power of Kings were so censured, and particularly Bodin de
Republica: and he could not be ignorant of Popes having required several
Crowned Heads to swear Fidelity to them and their Successors, and that
particularly the Pope sent Hubertus to require William the Conqueror ^o swear
Allegiance and Fidelity to Him and his Successors, and who magnanimously
refused so to do: and that the Papacy endeavored to root its Power in the
World by obliging men in their Oaths of Fidelity to any particular Pope, to
swear the same likewise to his Successors, according to the common Style in
those Oaths, viz. Fidelis and obediens ero Domino Papae, etc. and suis
successoribus: and that thus too the Oath of all Popish Bishops at their
Consecration runs; and that the Great Austrian Family had not more carefully
secured to it self the Scepters of the Empire by the Constitution of a King of
the Romans, than the Papacy had made Provision of that King's being sworn that
he would from that time be a Protector and Defender of the Pope and Church of
Rome, according to those words in the Oath as I find it set down* in Magerus,
viz. Ego N. Rex Romanorum FVTVRVS Imperator, promitto, spondeo, and polliceor,
atque juro Deo and leato Petro me de caetero protectorem, atque desensorem fore
summi Pontisicis and sanctae Ecclesiae Romanae, etc.

He had moreover considered the great Fermentation in the minds of so many
Loyal People in England, by Queen Elizabeth's being so reserved as She was in
the business of the Succession, and which as Dr. Matthew Hulton Archbishop of
York mentioned in a memorable Sermon he preached before her at White Hall, Gave
hopes to Foreigners to attempt fresh Invasions, and bred fears in many of her
Subjects of a new Conquest, and who thereupon very loyally said then, The only
way in Policy left to quell those hopes and assuage those fears were to
Establish the Succession, and at last intimating as far as he durst (says my
Author) the nearness of Blood of our present Sovereign, he said plainly, That
the expectations and presages of all Writers went Northward, naming without any
Circumlocution Scotland. There is an Abstract of this Loyal and Learned Sermon
(and which throughout pointed at the Succession) in the History of some of the
Bishops of England in the time of Queen Elizabeth, printed in the Year 1653:
and the fate of the Sermon was such that tho perhaps it tickled not the Ears of
that Queen, it so far touched her Conscience that the Historian says, She
opened the Window of her Closet and gave the Archbishop thanks for it.

No doubt but Parsons saying in his Book of the Succession, That he thought the
Affair about it could not be ended, without some War, did much heighten the
Popular Fears of War happening thereupon: and it is most probable the long fear
of War in that Fermentation did variously weaken the Kingdom. Nor is it a new
thought for the long fears of War to be held to bear some proportion to the
mischief of War it self, in obstructing Trade and Commerce; insomuch that
several Writers of the Regalia and fiscal matters among the Tractatus
Illustrium, have told us, That Quando timor belli idem operatur quod ipsum
bellum, remissio sit conductoribus, (i. e. of the Revenue) and has Entitled
them to defalcations. We may imagine by the just effects of our late
Fermentation, what the state of the Body Politic was in that, namely, like the
state of long tormenting anguish in the Body natural upon the pricking of an
Artery, and importing often more trouble and danger than the cutting of one.
And by the great triumphant Flame of joy appearing in the Act of Recognition in
King James's time, (and which appears in our Statute-Book, as I may say, l^ke a
Pyramid of the Fire of Zealous Loyalty, and greater and higher than any former
Act of that nature) we may judge how overjoyed all the Loyal People of England
were on his coming to the Crown: and as Pliny in his Panegyric, says of
Nerva's adopting Trajan, It was impossible it should have pleased all when it
was done, except it had pleased all before it was done, the same might be
applied to the Case of King James's Succession to the Crown. The very Title of
the Act speaks the Triumph of the Hereditary Monarchy, viz. A Recognition, that
the Crown of England is lawfully descended to King James, his Progeny, and
Posterity. There was an end of all the dreadful inconveniences of the
uncertainty of the Succession, and of the fears of the People of what was worse
than being torn in pieces by wild H^rses, I mean the rending their Consciences
by contrary Oaths about the Succession, as in Harry the 8th's time. There was
an end of the ^ears from the growing greatness of France, and fears of any
Foreign Fremuerunt gentes. England was restored to it self, and Scotland added
to it: and tho Boccaline like an airy I^genioso in his Politic Touchstone
makes England weigh less on the throwing Scotland into the Scales, any one will
find that in him but grave Romancery, who shall consider what with Oracular
Wisdom another-guess Statos-man than Boccaline told Harry the 4th, I mean
D'Ossat in his long Letter to him from Rome, Book 7th, and Anno 1601. where he
says, That the Pope desisted not to hope that his Majesty might be persuaded
by reason of State to endeavor that the Kingdoms of England and Scotland may
not be joined in the Person of one King, considering the great mischiefs that
the English alone have done to the French more than all other Nations put
together, etc.

And indeed that England is at this day preserved not only from the danger of
being overbalanced by France, but from the loss of its ancient figure of
balancing the World, must highly be attributed to the Hereditary Monarchy being
fixed in the Line of King James, and to Scotland being thrown into the Scales as
was said: and if any one shall tell me by the way, that the weight of Scotland
was prejudicial to Loyalty in 41, I shall answer him, that its weight has in
this present Conjuncture of 81 afforded Loyalty so great a Compensation by that
late Act of Parliament there acknowledging and asserting the Right of the
Succession, etc. and which begins thus, viz. The Estates of Parliament
considering that the Kings of this Realm deriving their Royal Power from God
Almighty alone, do succeed lineally thereunto according to the known Degrees of
Proximity in Blood, etc. that as Historians tell us how in the dark barbarous
times many hundreds of years since men repaired from all Countries to Ireland,
to learn the Liberal Arts and Sciences, I shall say that they may now
profitably go to Scotland to learn Loyalty: and I doubt not but that Kingdom
which is so notorious for its mortal, or immortal hatred of Popery (call it
which you will) and even of that very part of it which I call the Religionary
one of it, having thus by the Exterminium of that irreligionary part of it,
viz. That Dominion is founded in Grace, taught us Loyalty in the establishing
the Hereditary Lineal Succession, may be as instrumental in giving Loyalty in
the Body of the People here, its temperamentum ad pondus, as it was formerly in
oppressing us with its weight, as a gravamen, and be an occasion of blessing
our Land with such a joyful Conjuncture of time as ensued after King James's
Succession, as I have before mentioned, and to the Consideration of which I
shall return.

England that had formerly, by reason of the uncertainty of the Succession,
being like the Erratica Delos, a floating Island, and that too in Seas of
Blood, and did then appear like it afterward, fixed and blessed with a Pacifick
and Oracular King, and as strong a Foundation for the Hereditary Monarchy as
could be wished, was shortly after in danger of being again unfixed by the
Outrage of the Gunpowder Treason, and the Principles that legitimated that
practice, being really believed and practiced; and an account of the practice
of which Treason we have in the Statute of 3o Iacobi c. 2. as likewise of the
fiery Principles that animated the Actors to it in Thuanus; and in King James
his Premonition to all Christian Monarchs, p. 10. a general reference is made
to the violent bloody Maxims that the Powder-Traytors maintained: and by
occasion whereof after the designed outrage against the Lineal Succession of
the Prince and the Hereditary Monarchy being in danger while such bloody
Principles and Maxims were not exterminated, it was in ordinary prudence
requisite to apply the extraordinary Remedy of the Oath of Allegiance, to rivet
that Fundamental Maxim of the Crown the stronger in Nature, viz. That the King
never dies. And the Addition of those words in the Promissory Clause of the
Oath of Allegiance, viz. HIS or THEIR Persons, THEIR Crown and Dignity, and
which words were not in the Oath of Supremacy, was a plain indication of the
intention of the Lawgivers to tie Men's Souls to the Hereditary Monarchy in the
Due and Legal Course of Descent.

And moreover with a prospect to men's having a conscientious regard to the
King's Heirs and Successors, the Fathers of our Church then probably in the
Preface of the Collect in the Common Prayer for the Prince and the King's
Children, as overjoyed with the sight of King James 's being enriched with a
most Royal Progeny (as the words in the Act of the Recognition are) did cause
these words to be inserted, Who art the Father of thine Elect and of their SEED.

The Preface to the Act requiring the Oath of Allegiance, has in it the
expression of Loyalty and Allegiance unto the King's Majesty and the CROWN of
England, and mentions the design of the Gunpowder Treason as tending to the
subversion of the whole State: and therefore if in the ancient times of Popery
(and when the Pope was generally revered here as a 13th Apostle) upon any
emergent Papal Usurpations which gave just cause of apprehending future ones
intended, and particularly in the Case of the Pope's Mandates or Bulls, which
were called Gratiae expectativae or provisiones, and pretendedly issued out of
the Pope's pious care to see a Church provided of a Successor before it needed,
our Kings did think themselves obliged to provide Statutes against Provisors,
whereby the Ius patronatus was secured to them and their Subjects, and by
Statutes of Praemunire did as it were build Forts before the Enemies coming,
the Premuniment of the Hereditary Monarchy by the Oath of Allegiance, was most
necessary to prevent any Papal Gratiae expectativae of the Crown, and the Popes
impious care to provide a Successor to its Hereditary Rights. The Premuniment
of some Laws by others is no new thing nor yet a new word, however some idle
Critics have accounted the word praemunire in our Statutes to be barbarous;
for Grotius in his De jure belli, etc. l. 2. c. 5.. 14. speaking of some Laws
of the Jews says, In quarum (...), and ut Hebraei loq^untur praemunimentum
additae sunt leges caeterae: and according to the sense of some taking
praemunire for praemonere, the constant premonition of Heavens great Monitor
called Conscience, (and which is the pulse of the Soul, and like the Pulse is
Fidelis nuncius vitae aut mortis) to warn men by this Oath to defend the Lineal
Succession of the Crown, was no less necessary: and King James's settling the
Premonition in the minds of his own Subjects, was but naturally previous to his
Premonition sent abroad to Foreign Princes and States.

And how far Harry the 7th's Statute by which no Person who should serve the
King for the time being, etc. should therefore be attainted or impeached, might
induce the Government to secure the undoubted Rights of Succession, by the Oath
of Allegiance being framed as it was, and rooting our Loyalty thereby the
deeper into our Consciences, and by the fear of our being justly impeached in
the Court of Conscience in omnem eventum, if we defended not those Rights of
Succession, is obvious to Consideration.

As I have thus in this Conclusion showed that it was the Lawgivers intention,
particularly in the Oath of Allegiance to oblige us to pay our Allegiance not
only to the King, but to his Heirs and Successors in the Legal Course of
Descent, so I might here further Ex superabundanti dilate on such intention
being to secure the same without any respect to the Religion of such Heirs and
Successors. A Prince of such profound Learning and Observation as King James
could not be ignorant of what has been since, by the Loyal Writers of the
Succession, so clearly and strongly asserted, viz. That the Succession to the
Crown is inseparably annexed to the Proximity of Blood by the Laws of GOD and
NATVRE, and That Statute-Laws contrariant to those are null and void, and That
the Hereditary Monarchy was indisputably founded on inherent Birthright
according to the Style of the Act of Recognition, and not any Religionary
Regeneration, and That the accession of the Crown purges all Obstructions.

And that that Prince did by the Oath of Allegiance design only to twist the
Band of our natural Allegiance the stronger (an Allegiance tied not to Princes
Faith of the Cross, but to their Crown) appears throughout his Apology for the
Oath of Allegiance. He likewise in his Premonition to all Christian Monarchs,
p. 9. does with some warmth of words reflect on the Malice of some who
impudently affirm, That the Oath of Allegiance was devised for deceiving and
entrapping of Papists in point of Conscience: and says, That tho the House of
Commons at the first framing of the Oath made it to contain, That the Pope had
no Power to excommunicate me, which I caused them to reform, only making it to
conclude that no Excommunication of the Popes can warrant my Subjects to
practice against my Person or State, etc. so careful was I that nothing should
be contained in this Oath except the profession of Natural Allegiance, and
Civil and Temporal Obedience, with a promise to resist to all contrary uncivil
violence. From thence it appears that what looked like the Religionary part of
Popery, namely, the Pope's exercising a Spiritual Power against him, or the
Notion as Aquinas delivers it, That there is Potestas in summo Pontifice
puniendi omnes mortales ratione delicti, he intended not to whet the sharpness
of the Oath against, but only against the Irreligionary part of Popery
beforementioned, and as to which he might rationally depend on the Zeal of any
Heir or Successor tho Roman Catholic concurring with his therein.

He having in the foregoing Page mentioned how that Parliament that was to have
been blown up, made some new Laws against Papists, says, So far has my Heart
and Government been from any bitterness as almost never one of those sharp
Additions to the former Laws have ever yet been put in Execution. The Execution
of some Laws of pecuniary Mulcts on Papists who in that Conjuncture believed
the irreligionary part of the Papal Power, might seem to carry such a Face of
Justice with it, as the practice of the Custom-house does pursuant to the 13th
and 14th of Harry the 8th, c. 4. Whereby any English man or born Subject of
England, who shall swear Obeisance or live as Subjects to any Foreign Prince
shall pay Aliens Customs: but it is a madness to think of any Prince's
abdicating his Temporal Power, and swearing Temporal Obeisance to any one, and
no man but he who has Laesa principia, can suppose that King James, who avowed
in his Premonition, That no man in his time or the late Queens ever died for
his Religion* nor yet any Priests after their taking Orders beyond Sea, without
some other guilt in them than their bare coming home, and who p. 16. of his
Apology avows and maintains to his own knowledge, that Queen Elizabeth never
punished any Papists for Religion, but that their punishment was ever extorted
out of her hands against her will by their own mis-behaviour, could ever intend
that by the withdrawing of Allegiance from any of his Heirs in the Course of
their Lineal Succession, on the pretense of any of their Religionary Notions or
other pretense or ground whatsoever, there should be a solutio continui or
political death inflicted on the Hereditary Monarchy, by the preserving of
which the lives of all the People of England could only be preserved.

He in his Premonition and Apology discharged the Moral Offices of honoring
all men, with relation to Papists his Subjects, and judges some of them to be
of quiet dispositions and good Subjects, and in p. 3, 4. 46, 47* 48. of his
Apology, he makes a difference between many of his Popish Subjects who retained
in their hearts the print of their nature l Duty to their Sovereign, and those
who were carried away with that Fanatical Zeal the Powder-Traytors were, and
uses the expression of quietly minded Papists, and Papists, tho peradventure
zealous in their Religion, yet otherwise civilly honest and good Subjects: and
acknowledges, That his Mother, although she continued in that Religion wherein
she was nourished, yet was so far from being superstitious or jesuited therein,
that at his baptism (tho he was baptized by a Popish Archbishop) she sent him
word to forbear to use the spittle in his Baptism, which was obeyed: and in his
Premonition speaking to Roman Catholic Princes and wishing them to search the
Scriptures, and ground their Faith upon their own certain knowledge, and not on
the Report of others, since every man must be safe by his own Faith: but
leaving this to God his Merciful Providence in his due time, he further wishes
them to imitate their Noble Predecessors, who in the days of greatest
blindness, did diverse times courageously oppose themselves to the encroaching
Ambition of Popes: and acknowledges, That some of their Kingdoms have in all
Ages maintained, and without interruption enjoyed their liberty against the
most ambitious Popes, etc. and says, That some of those Princes have
constantly defended and maintained their lawful freedom to their immortal
honor: and concludes his Premonition with earnest Prayers to the Almighty for
their prosperities, and that after their happy Temporal Reigns on Earth, they
may live and Reign in Heaven with him forever.

This Learned King did sufficiently thereby Proclaim himself an Enemy to the
Papal Tenet of founding Dominion in Grace, as to those Foreign Popish Princes,
and could not therefore but more abhor the effects of it in the Case of his
Hereditary Successors; and he having judged that those Foreign Princes who
owned the Religionary Tenets of Popery, did yet constantly defend and maintain
their lawful freedom from all Papal Usurpations to their immortal honor, and
with so devout a Charity prayed for their happy Temporal Reigns on Earth, and
that they may live and reign in Heaven afterward, could not but suppose that
any of his Heirs who might be of the Roman Catholic Communion would yet disown
any Tenet of Popery that was irreligionary, and would Exterminate all Papal
Usurpation, and that they might here expect a happy Reign on Earth, and a
happier in Heaven hereafter, leaving it to God to open their Eyes (as
aforesaid) in matters Religionary, and to render them fafe by their own Faith.

King James in his Apology for the Oath of Allegiance does incidenter, prop up
the Justice of the Oath of Supremacy, and in p. 49, 50, 51. does insert 14
contrary Conclusions to all the Points and Articles of which the Oath of
Supremacy consists, to denote the absurdity of the opposing that Oath: and
which Conclusions tho many Clerical and Lay-Papists among his Subjects might
maintain, yet he might well think it Morally impossible for a Roman Catholic
Prince here to do so: and he gives a very good reason for the inducing any one
so to judge of his measures, viz. That those Conclusions were never concluded
and defined by any complete General Council to belong to the Pope's Authority:
and their own School Doctors are at irreconcilable odds and jarrs about them.
He had then his Eye on the Lateran Council as appears by the other words there
in the Margent, viz. Touching the PRETENDED Council of LATERAN, See Plat. in
vita Innocen. 3. and by which Council the King knew that all except two or
three of those Conclusions were concluded and defined. If therefore many of the
poor petty School-Doctors were so searless of the Papal Thunder, as in Cases
when they were perhaps unconcerned to impeach the Papal Usurpation, there was
no cause of apprehension in that our wise Monarch that any of his Highborn
Heirs and Successors would ever favor the Usurpations of that Authority.

When Queen Elizabeth was so firmly satisfied concerning the Loyalty of the
Roman Catholic Lords Temporal, and of their great Quota in the balance of the
Kingdom securing their abhorrence of all Papal Usurpations, as not to impose
the Oath of Supremacy on them, (tho yet She took care to have it imposed on the
Popish Bishops) can we imagine that the great Interest of an Heir of the Crown
in the Hereditary Monarchy, did not give a Pleropho^y of satisfaction to that
Great Monarch, that such an Heir would never permit any Usurpation to prejudice
his Crown Imperial?

Moreover if in the Case of the device of an Inheritance by Will on the
Condition of the Legatees not holding this or that Philosophical or Religionary
Tenet, the absurdity of such Condition would not frustrate the device, but
would be taken as Pro non adjecta, and that thus in that known Case in the
Digest, viz. Of an Heir made on an absurd Condition, namely, On Condition he
should throw the Testators ashes into the Sea, the Heir was rather to be
commended than any way questioned who forbore to do so, how can we think in the
Inheritance of the Crown (which is from God and by inherent Birthright) any
such supposed absurd Condition of a Prince's not believing this or that
Speculative Religionary Tenet, (and for his professing of which he has a dear
bought Liberty by the (...), or the New Testament of Jesus Christ) should be
intended to operate to his prejudice?

But that I may in a word perimere litem about that Kings never intending the
least prejudice to the Succession, by any of his Successors being Roman
Catholics, I shall observe that that King who was so great and skillful an
Agonist, for the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, did yet in
the Articles of the proposed Match with Spain, and afterward with that of
France, agree that the Children of such Marriage should no way be compelled or
constrained in point of Conscience or Religion, and that their Title to the
Crown should not be prejudiced, in Case it should please God they should prove
Roman Catholics: and that the Laws against Catholics should not in the least
touch them. And that the sense of the Government then was likewise to that
effect avowedly declared, is manifest from the Passages of those times: and the
needless quarrel therefore that our late Excluders would have exposed us to
with France, was a thing worthy their considering.

But enough of this Conclusion, if not too much: for where the Tide of the
Words of any Oath runs strong and clear, we need not to regard the Wind of any
Lawgivers intention: however yet I have made it appear for the redundant
satisfaction of the scrupulous, that while they have embarked their
Consciences in th^se Oaths they have had such Wind and Tide both together on
their side: and that therefore any Storms which the Takers of these Oaths
relating to the Lineal Succession of the Crown may have raised either in their
Consciences or the State, must be supposed to be very unnatural.

Having thus in the foregoing Conclusions asserted and proved the Obligation
relating to the Kings Heirs and Successors, as resulting from the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, I shall briefly answer such objections thereunto or
rather Scruples, (for they deserve not the name of Objections) as some noisy
Nominal Protestants have troubled themselves and others with, and so end this
Casuistical Discussion.

The first Objection or Scruple then I shall take notice of that some have
raised against the Obligation of these Oaths as above asserted, is that they
were made in relation to Papists only, and were enjoined to be taken for the
discovery of those that were suspected to be so.

As to which it will be sufficient to say, that it is most plain that all
Persons who have taken these or any other lawful Oaths, are bound by Deeds to
fulfill what they have sworn in Words: and it is an absurd thing to doubt
whether the Law intended that those Persons should observe the Oaths, whom it
has enjoined to take them. And to this purpose we are well taught by Bishop
Sanderson in his 6th Lecture of Oaths* That tho Papal Usurpation was the cause
of the Oath of Supremacy, (the arrogating to himself the exercise of Supreme
Jurisdiction in spiritualibus, throughout this Kingdom) yet the Oath is
Obligatory according to the express words in the utmost Latitude: the reason
is, that the intention of a Law is general to provide against all Future
inconveniences of the like kind or nature, etc. I refer the Reader to him there
at large.

By the Measures of that Bishop as to the Oath of Supremacy, we likewise may
direct our selves in the Oath of Allegiance being Obligatory according to the
express words in the utmost Latitude, tho that Oath was made by occasion of the
Gunpowder Treason.

And as to the intent of the Oath of Supremacy, King James tells us in his
Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, p. 108. That it was to prop up the Power of
Christian Kings as Custodes utr^usque tab^ae, by commanding Obedience to be
given to the word of God, and by reforming Religion according to his prescribed
Will, by assisting the spiritual Power with the Temporal Sword, etc. by
procuring due Obedience to the Church, by judging and cutting off all frivolous
Questions and Schisms as Constantine did, and finally by making Decorum to be
observed in every thing, and Esta^lishing Orders to be observed in all
indifferent things, etc. whereby his Majesty does clearly denote the intention
of that Oath to have been to extend against any Non-Conformists continuing
their Schism in the Church.

And as to the Oath of Allegiance being intended against Protestants as well as
Papists making a Faction in the State, the Book called God and the King,
compiled and printed by King James's Authority, sufficiently shows throughout,
by the Notification of the particular Moral Offices required by the Oath of
Allegiance, and likewise by his Subjects natural Allegiance, and which Moral
Offices are there strengthened with passages out of the Scriptures and Fathers:
and the Doctrine of absolute Loyalty is there well Established, and likewise
the Doctrine of Resistance overthrown, and the Scope of the Book is to plant
Loyalty throughout the Kingdom: and to make the Oath of Allegiance be re v^ra a
Premuniment in all men's Consciences against Faction and Rebellion.

The Sect of King James's old Enemies in Scotland the Puritans, and whom he
said he found there more dishonest than the Highlanders and Border Thieves, is
not named in that Book; and he having cleared them from being participants in
the Gunpowder Treason, did with Justice as well as perhaps with hopes of their
emendation after the Tenets of Loyalty that had been then lately published by
the English Non-Conformists, order that Sect not to be in that Book marked
Nigro carbone. But he could not but know their former Principles as well as
Practices here as exactly as any one: and in his Canons here published a Year
before the Gunpowder Treason, The impugners of the Rites and Ceremonies in the
Church of England were variously censured; the Authors of Schism in the Church
of England were censured by the 9th Canon, and the maintainers of Schismatics
by the 10th, and by the 27th Schismatics were not to be admitted to the
Communion. The maintainers of Conventicles were censured by the 11th, and the
maintainers of Constitutions made in C^nventicles censured by the 12th: and it
refers to the wicked and Anabaptistical Errors of some who outraged the King's
Supremacy and Regal Rights, and who did meet and make Rules and Orders in
Causes Ecclesiastical without the King's Authority: and therefore as the King
knew that such Persons who had made Schisms in the Church had thereby made
Factions in the State, and would make more (the Church being necessarily
included in the State) and would be as dry Ti^der ready to take the Fire of
Rebellion from such Republican Tenets as were in Parson's Book of the
Succession, and the Writings of Bellarmine and other Romanists, and being
justly apprehensive that such Antimonarchical Principles as had infected the
Scotch Puritans might in time infect the English ones, as well as that the
Principles of the Powder-Traitors might infect other Loyal Papists, he applied
the Oath of Allegiance as a general necessary Antidote to the Consciences of
his Subjects to prevent such infection.

In p. 109. of his Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, he cited Bellarmine for
the Tenets, That Kings have not their Authority nor Office immediately from
God, and that Kings may be deposed by their People for diverse respects; and
when such Writers did so spitefully with the Papal Power endeavor likewise to
bring in the Sea of the People to overwhelm Kings, it was time to raise the
Bank of that Oath the higher against the same, and for the Takers of that Oath
to be obliged to bear Faith and True Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs, etc.
and him and them to defend, etc. against all Conspiracies, etc. which shall be
made against his or their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color
of any such Sentence or Declaration or OTHERWISE, and to declare that neither
the Pope, NOR ANY PERSON WHATSOEVER has Power to absolve them of this Oath.

When therefore I see any serious man disloyal, who has took the Oath of
Allegiance, and whom Necessity (as we say) does not draw to Turpitude, I still
attribute much of his disloyalty to his not with intense and recollected
thought dwelling on the view of his Moral Obligations in the clear Mirror of
that Oath, but to his cursory viewing them, and, as St. James's words are like
a man beholding his natural face in a Glass, but beholds himself and goes
his way, and straitway forgets what manner of man he was. How many
outrageous Acts of Disloyalty after 41 had been avoided if the Law of the Oath
had been writ in the hearts of the Takers of it as it ought to have been? As
for Example, since to Prorogue or Dissolve Parliaments was ever a known Right
and Privilege belonging to the Crown, could any Person who had sworn to defend
its Rights and Privileges endeavor to retrench that particular one by the Act
for the perpetuating the Parliament of 40? How easy would Princes find their
Reigns, and Subjects their Consciences, if these would think of all the Royal
Rights they have sworn to defend, and how they are to defend them?

I have mentioned the great Law of Athens against any ones bearing Office under
an Usurpt Power, and the terrible Oath for the confirmation of that Law, and I
have likewise mentioned the Author of the EXERCITATION, and Mr. Prynn as
asserting the unlawfulness of bearing Office under our late usurped Powers by
reason of the Oath of Allegiance having before obliged them to the King, his
Heirs and Successors. The Author of the Exercitation does very appositely to
strengthen that his Loyal Assertion cite an excellent passage out of Tully's
Epistles ad Atticum, viz. of his doubting the lawfulness of his bearing the
Office of a Councellor of State in such a Case: Ec magnum sit (...),
veniendumne sit in Consilium Tyranni, si is aliqu^ de re bona deliberaturus
sit. Quare si quid ejusmodi evenerit ut accersamur, quid censeas mihi faciendum
utique scribito. Nihil enim mihi adhuc accidit quod majoris Consilii est. And
the truth is, the great thing that inclines so many to desire Changes in
Governments, being the hopes of the Acquest of Offices, it was but natural for
the Athenian Wisdom to fence with sharp precaution against the lusciousness of
Authority under an Usurper, and to let every man know (as I may say) in
terrorem, that in the day of his eating the forbidden fruit, he would die the
death by the hand of every man* and for the wisdom of the Government in King
James's time by the effect and necessary Consequences of the Clauses in the
Oath of Allegiance to tie men's Consciences from supporting any Usurpation by
bearing Office under it.

That Law and Oath of Athens were no doubt as almost all other matters of
Learning known to King James; and could he have foreseen how the guest after
Offices occasioned the Demagogues to promote the ^ebellion of 41, (for it is
known they were then mighty Nimrods after mighty Offices in the State and after
what particular ones) and how the several Usurpations supported themselves here
afterward through men's supporting themselves by Offices under them, and how in
this present Fermentation men have been tempted to Faction by hopes of Offices
(and in pursuit of which men were never generally so wary as i^ this
Conjuncture) I am apt to think that in uber^orem cautelam for Loyalty, and the
making men appear perjured even to all of the grossest understandings, who
should bear Office under any Usurper, and consequently deterring them from
projecting to alt^r the Hereditary Government, he would have inserted into the
Oath a particular express Clause of not bearing Office here under any other.

But further to illustrate the intent of the Government in King James's time
for making the Oath of Allegiance a Praemuniment in our Consciences against
Popular as well as Papal Usurpations, I shall here call in, Testimonium
adversarii, I mean the publisher of Cardinal Perron's long Oration made in the
Chamber of the 3d Estate, or Commonalty of France upon the Oath of Allegiance
exhibited in the General Assembly of the three Estates of that Kingdom* and in
his long Preface to which he calls our Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance
detestable; but says, That the greater number of the Deputies of the 3d
Chamber did frame the form of an Oath which they wished might be ministered in
that Kingdom, as that which bears the name of ALLEGIANCE in ours, whereby the
same principal Article is abjured, namely, That no French King can be deposed
for any Cause whatsoever, and that the contrary Opinion is Heretical, and
repugnant to the Doctrine of the Scriptures. But this difference is found
between the two Oaths: that whereas the English one in one of the Clauses,
seems to exclude not only the Authority of the CHVRCH over Kings, but even of
the COMMONWEALTH also (yea tho it should be accompanied even with that of the
Church) that of France shoots only at the abnegation of the Churches Authority.

The Author however in that Preface (and which was Permiss^ superiorum)
contrary to the Loyal Sentiments of the Majority of that 3d Chamber, inserts
very impiously and disloyally, That Kingly Authority cannot come immediately
from God to any man, but by Miracle: and that all the Kings whom we know, do
either rule by force of Conquest, and in that Case the Authority of the
Commonwealth, if it be Usurped, may be resumed, or by Donation, Election,
Marriage, or Succession of Blood, in which Cases Kings forfeit by not
performing the Conditions, under which either they or their first Ancestors did
enter, whether they were expressed or necessarily employed.

But neither that Author nor any other Roman Catholic Writer has writ with
greater Contempt of and Spite against the Power of Kings, than some Nominal
Protestant Authors have to the scandal of Christianity done: and that I may
show how necessary it was that the Oath of Allegiance should be levelled at the
outrageous Principles of Disloyalty in Protestants as well as Papists, I shall
conclude my Answer to this Objection with a reference to a Book of some vile
Nominal Protestants, who having according to the Bishop of Winchester's
Expression aforesaid, derived Doctrines of Sedition and Rebellion from the
Church of Rome 's Writers, were (I may add) grown therein perhaps more learned
than their Masters. It was printed in 8o beyond Sea in the Year 1556. and
called, A short Treatise of Politic Power, and of the true Obedience which
Subjects owe to Kings and other Civil Governors, with an Exhortation to all
true English men, Compiled by

D. I. P. B. R. W.
Who the Authors of it were, I know not, nor the meaning of those initial
Letters of Names: but do judge it to be in Principles of Sedition and Treason
as bad as Doleman of the Succession or Mariana, and to have startled King
Philip and Queen Mary as much as the Book of Killing no Murder did Cromwell. I
never in the Course of my viewing Books saw but one of them, and the Reader
will quickly see why no Library durst in the Reign of those Princes harbor it.
It Is there asserted, That the Body of every State may redress and correct the
Vices of their Governors, and ought so to do. And the Book endeavors to prove
the lawfulness of killing Tyrants by the Law of Nature, and prophaneth the Book
of God by citing for a desperate use some extraordinary Acts of private Persons
there recorded: and indeed a loyal man cannot read the Book without horror; and
especially when he shall consider what were the effects of this detestable
Book. It helped to provoke the fury of Philip and Mary to fly out into the
Arbitrary Proclamation several Months before her death, for the declaring of
any one a Rebel, and being without delay executed by Martial Law, with whom
that and other Books of that Nature printed beyond Sea should here be found.
And another effect of the publication of that and those other Books was to
irritate the Government against those poor Innocents who were here martyred,
and who sufficiently abhorred such Treasonable Books: for this Book was
published beyond Sea, and probably imported here about two years before her
death. But for the honor of our English Exiles then, I judge that none of them
had a hand therein: I having observed many Words, and Idioms and Phrases there
to have been Scottish.

It is probable that King James and his Ministers had heard of this execrable
Book, wherein some Nominal Protestants trumpetted out their Principles of real
Rebellion; and no wonder then if the Oath of Allegiance was therefore framed
with Clauses to secure the Government from all irreligionary Principles of
Protestants as well as Papists.

It has been objected in the second place against our being become bound to
the Kings Heirs and Successors by Virtue of those Oaths, that it is by all
Casuists agreed that among the Tacit Conditions that are presumed to be in all
Oaths (and which are to be regarded as much as if they were expressed) Rebus
sic stantibus is one: and that that therefore as none of the King's Heirs was
then excluded from the Privilege or Right of his Lineal Succession by the
Legislative Power, so if things thus stood with him at the time of the Descent
of the Crown, that is, at the time of the Kings decease, the Oath obliged to
the payment of absolute and irrespective Loyalty to him then: and that thus
when the King's Heirs and Successors were Kings and Queens of this Realm
according to the Style of some old Oaths, they would be Entitled to our
Allegiance, and not otherwise.

In Answer to this Objection, I shall say first, that if we should admit that
which is not true, that the Rebus sic stantibus were so to be applied in this
Case, yet it is most clear that the Takers of these Oaths who were any Members
of the Three Estates in Parliament were thereby ipso facto, and actually bound
(as I have said in the 7t^ Conclusion) not to do any Act there to exclude the
Succession according to proximity of Blood: and moreover any of the People who
took these Oaths were thereby Morally bound not to choose any to represent them
in Parliament from whom they might fear their endeavoring of such Exclusion.

Secondly, Premising that there was somewhat of irreverence in supposing that
the Legislative Power would ever afterward make a Solutio conti^ui, (as I
called it) in the Hereditary Monarchy, yet it must be said that any supposed
Act of that kind would be Null and Void, as the Loyal and Learned late Writers
of the Succession have showed, and to whose Writers of that Subject I refer:
and therefore our Obligations to the King's Heirs and lawful Successors by
Virtue of these Oaths must remain uncancelled in the Court of Conscience: and
however any Act of Parliament supposed to be made against the Law of God, may a
while be de facto received in any Courts of Law, yet is it in the Court of
Conscience to be looked on as a poor Escrole, and as not worthy the name of a
Law.

It is most manifest that by these Oaths, there is jus alteri acquisitum, I
mean to the King's Heirs and Successors, as well as to the King; and that
therefore any supposed relaxation of the Oaths without the consent of all
Parties for whose behoof they were made, is a thing Nugatory and not allowable
in the Court of Conscience.

And as I have speaking cum vulgo called some Anti-Papists, whose Principles
tend to Faction in the State and Schism in the Church, Nominal Protestants (tho
yet I should be still as much content with any Law that made it Penal to call
them Protestants, as with one that should be so to call Quacks Physicians) so I
should in the Court of Conscience call any Acts of Parliament that are contrary
to the Eternal and Natural Rules of indispensable Justice, only Nominal Laws,
suitably to what is said in the admirable Preface of Aerodius his Rerum
Iudicatarum Pandect: viz. Quod si quid inique, malo more, sordibus, and
adversus ill^m sempiternam legem atque immutabilem, hic aut illic judicatum,
trana^ctum sit, qualis fuit apud Graecos Socratis, Phocionis, apud Romanos
M^telli Numidici, Rutil^i Rufi, M. Ciceronis damnatio; in ecclesia Flaviani,
Johannis Chrysostomi: contra absolutio P. and Sexti Clodiorum, atque adeo
Gabinii, quam propterea legem impunitatis appellarunt, non magis judicata aut
decreta debent appellari, quam Seiae, Apule^ae, and Liviae leges. Leges non
sunt inquit Cicero.

But Thirdly, The just allowance of the Rebus sic stantibus that can be in this
Case is this, there being nothing of pretense of relaxation from all Parties
supposeable, these Oaths bind us to the King's Heirs and Successors, as long as
there is any ONE of them remaining in the World: and without the insertion of
the words in the Oath of Allegiance, viz. I do believe and in Conscience am
resolved that neither the Pope NOR ANY PERSON WHATSOEVER has Power to absolve
me of this Oath or any part thereof, its indispensableness to those who know
the Obligation of Oaths to be jure Divino naturali, would have sufficiently
appeared. In fine, there are Rations boni and mali aeternae and
indispensabiles, and to stand to promises is one of the things that are simply
and in their own nature good, and it is impossible (as the Scripture says)
That God should lie, and therefore man made after God's image, must therein
answer the Archetype: and hereby our Princes have the Garranty of our
Allegiance sworn to them, their Heirs and Successors being indispensable by
Popes, or Acts of Parliament, or by God himself: for he cannot dispense with
the Law of Nature, Humana natura manente eadem.

Lastly, It is most manifest from what I have already said, that any such Tacit
Condition in these Oaths as before mentioned, was contrary to the sense of the
Imposer as well as to the Words, and was therefore not allowable in the Court
of Conscience in this Case: and I believe that the Consciences of such who have
made this Objection, must tell them, that when they took these Oaths, their
sense of them was then contrary to any such condition being allowed. And
therefore any such Afterbirth of a strained Interpretation being so contrary
to the Law of God and the Land, and the sense of the Imposer, as well as the
words of the Oaths, and to the sense in which they actually took them, must be
thrown away.

There has been a third Objection, if it may be called one, or if yet it may
be called a Scruple, for I think it hardly deserves the name of that. However
it having got under some men's feet, or into their heads, it has made them so
uneasy as frowardly to trample on the Rights of Crowned Heads, and it has
troubled us by the name of Haeres viventis, and as if that were a Chymaera,
when as indeed the Objection is altogether Chymerical.

When Sir L. I. had with so much clear reason showed much to this purpose, viz.
That the Exclusion-Bill was against the Fundamental Justice as likewise the
wisdom of the Nation, and that it would induce a CHANGE in the Government: and
that was likewise against the Religion of the Nation which teaches us, That
Dominion is not founded in Grace, and that we are to pay Obedience to Princes
whether good or bad, as accordingly the Primitive Christians did, and that it
was against the Oaths of the Nation, namely, of Allegiance and Supremacy: and
that his R. H. is the King's lawful Heir, if he has no Child, and in the Eye
of the Law we are sworn to him, and when he had further signalized the weight
of his Political Remarks, and Learning in that Speech as well of as his
Loyalty, so as on the account of both to merit a place for it in the English
Story, and had instanced in some Princes and their Subjects of different
Religions living very happily together, it may perhaps be a blot in that Story,
that Sir W. I. in an answer to that Speech granting, That we are sworn to the
King, his Heirs and Successors, said further, That we are not obliged to any
during the King's life, but to himself: for it were Treason if it were
otherwise. The King has no Heirs nor Successors during his life: for according
to his Law (meaning Sir L. I's) and ours, Nemo est haeres viventis.

In answer to which, I shall say that that Proverbial Latin saying in the Law
Books does amount to no more in nature, and has no more influence on Humane
Affairs, nor particularly on Moral Offices, than that kind of Proverbial
Sayings in the New Testament, viz. For where a Testament is, there must also of
necessity be the death of the Testator, or a Testament is of no strength while
the Testator lives. Every one knows that a Will is in its own nature
revocable, and Legatees and Executors may be altered by the Testator: and for
any one to quote it as a Maxim, Nemo est Executor viventis (and for a Legatee,
or in effect an Executor in a Will, the word haeres i^ often used in the Civil
Law and by the Writers of it) will be no more significant, than the telling the
Legatee or Executor is, that they must not meddle in the Testators Goods till
he be dead: and it may usefully operate to divert People from the slothful
Omissions of making their Wills in due time, out of a fond imagination that
their Legatees or Executors would have a Title to any thing before the
Testators death.

But after what has been said of the revocableness of Wills, if I have
lawfully sworn to continue such a man my Heir, or Executor of my Will or
Legatee therein, can I then at my pleasure with a Salvo to Conscience alter it
therein? And if a Father has sworn to give his Children such a part of his
Estate by his Will, as by the Civil Law is due to them out of his Estate when
he dies, shall he then be allowed in the Court of Conscience to alter such
bequest Ad libitum? This comes a little home to our Case: for we have before
hand sworn to pay the King's Heirs at the Descent of the Crown the Allegiance
that will be due to them then by inherent Birthright.

St. Paul writing to the Romans alludes to that Custom of the Roman Laws, and
which is yet retained in Germany and many other places, viz. And if Children,
then Heirs, and makes them certainly Haeredes viventis: and when any by the
Civil Law were Haeredes ab intestato, or Heirs at Law, that Law as it made no
difference between Land and Goods, so neither did it between Eldest and
Youngest, nor Male and Female, but divided the whole Estate real and personal,
equally among the Children; and the Law tying Parents to leave a Quota in their
Wills to their Children, St. Paul's Consequence was good, i. e. if Children,
then Heirs. We know that the Heirs of our Kings are not such as that Law called
Haeredes Testamentarii, but they succeeding by the right Divine and Inherent
Birthright, may be said to be Haeredes legitimi, and when in the King's
Lifetime the Law has enjoined men by a Liquid Oath to defend all Privileges,
Preheminences belonging to the King's Heirs and Successors, can it be either
Law or Sense to say they are now no Heirs, and that any who have taken that
Oath may actually exclude such Heirs because they are not actual Successors,
and as if too none could be a Successor but an actual one, according to that
old Dicterium, That no Prince ever put to death his Successor?

But to show further how grossly Sir W. I. was mistaken in his interpretation,
and applying of the saying out of the Civil Law, viz. Nemo est haeres viventis,
I shall refer to Paulus de Castro (as Eminent a Commentator on the Civil Law as
any one whatsoever) who does on the Digest De liberis and Posthumis. l. Gallus.
etiam n. 3o and 4to discuss the point of Haeres viventis, and where he says,
Nota quod filius vel alius descendens in potestate patris, qui tenet primum
locum dicitur esse suus haeres etiam vivente patre; and then objects the
saying, That Vivens non habet haeredem, ergo non suum haeredem: and he answers,
That istud verbum HAERES idem significat quod DOMINVS, etc. and potest sumi
duobus modis 1o proprie prout est Successor in Vniversum jus quod defunctus
habuit (meaning haeres as the same with an Executor by the Law of England) and
isto modo vivens non potest habere haeredem. 2do Sumitur stricte, etc. and
improprie pro filio vel nepote, vel alio descendente qui teneat primum locum in
suitate and isto modo vivens potest habere haeredem; sicut enim filius VIVENTE
patre dicitur DOMINVS bonorum paternorum licet improprie, it a potest dici
HAERES prout istud verbum sumitur pro Domino. He had before spoke of the
General Rule, That Haeres suus dicitur quem nemo praecedit, and he there
mentions what likewise all the Books agree in, That Haeredes sui and necessarii
dicuntur liberi qui in familia proximum a patre gradem obtinent: sui, quia
haereditatem tanquam suam, necessarii quia jure antiquo retinere cogebantur. He
intends there (I suppose) by the jus antiquum that Law of the 12 Tables, viz.
Intestatorum haeredes primo suorum haeredum velint nolintve sunto.

We find in the New Testament such Heir judged to be Lord of all, Gal. 4. 1.
And thus Grotius on that place in the Hebrews, whom he has appointed Heir of
all things says, That by Heir is meant Lord, Nam and Latinis Haeres idem quod
herus. Christus in coelum evectus, rerum omnium est Dominus; a patre scilicet
hoc jure accepto. The very Institutes likewise tell us. ult. De haered. qualit.
That pro haerede gerere, est pro Domino gerere: veteres enim haeredes pro
Dominis appellabant. And such Lords of all then were the Heirs, that tho
ordinarily they could not have their Legitima pars in their Fathers lifetime
(and so we find it but in the Parable in St. Luke that the Prodigal Son said,
Father give me the Portion of Goods that falls to me, and he divided unto
them his Living) yet if the Father were re vera a Prodigal, the Son might by
imploring the Office of the Judge obtain in the Fathers lifetime somewhat like
the legitima to be allowed for his subsistence. And moreover Grotius on the
other place of Scripture, Si autem filii and haeredes, says, Sententia est
conveniens non tantum Israelitico Numerorum 28. sed etiam Gentium juri. Nam lex
quaedam tacita liberis haereditatem parentum addicit. L. Cum initio. ff. De
bonis damnatorum. Sed magis est ut jus Hebraeum respexerit Paulus, ideoque
(...) hic sunt (...) filii, non quod non utrique sexui Christianorum aptari
possint quae dicit, sed quod jure Mosis filii necessario hae^edes, filiae non
nisi filiis deficientibus.

None need therefore wonder at De Castro's having pronounced the Heir to be the
same thing with Dominus, and at his leaving it out of doubt that direct
Descendants are a man's Heirs in his lifetime, because they are such as are
called Heirs at Law. And there is little room for doubting here in England who
are Heirs at Law to private Persons, for Sir Edward Coke has to this purpose
said that throughout his time, viz. Ne duas quidem quaestiones adverti de jure
haereditatum: but God be thanked there can be no room for any in the Case of
the Crown.

King James when he Erected the Monument for his Mother on the Northside of her
Grandfather Harry the 7th's Tomb, and put these words in the Inscription, viz.
Coronae Angliae dum vixit certae and indubitatae haeredis, necessarily implied
that there was another Sovereign living while She was thus Heir to the Crown.

Let any one consider how many real Solecisms Sir. W. I's. imagined one must
occasion. Is it not a Solecism to say, I cannot now promise a future lawful
thing, viz. Allegiance to the King's Heirs at the time of the Descent of the
Crown, since nothing can be promised but what is Future? In the Body of the
Civil Law matters of right are sometimes founded on trite Philosophical Axioms
and such as Non entis, nulla sunt accidentia: but it were a Solecism to deny,
that the Takers of these Oaths have become bound at that time to the Haeredes
viventis, who were then nondum vivi, or that a Lessee is bound at the
perfecting of his Lease, to pay his Rent to the Heirs of the Lessor tho then
not in nature. If the Style of the King of the Romans, can in an Elective
Government, and during the Emperors life be, Ego N. Rex Romanorum futurus
Imperator, is not the next Heir of the Crown in an Hereditary Monarchy to be
styled the certain and undoubted Heir of the Crown as long as he lives?

I find not the term of apparent joined to Heir in any Books of Law or History
but of our Country: but God making Heirs, and especially the Heirs of Crowns,
the inherent Birthright by Proximity of Blood is the id ipsum to be regarded:
and if Haeres viventis QVATENVS such must be a Solecis^^ according to Sir W.
I's. insinuation, then the Quotation usually brought out of Sir E. Coke by
Writers of this Subject, That the Heir apparent is Heir before the death of his
Ancestor, must be a Solecism too, according to the known Rule in Logic of A
quatenus ad omne, etc.

I shall studiously avoid the embarassing the Question with needless Points of
Law: and do consider, that i^ in Courts of Law we are above the Apices
verborum, we are much more above them in the Court of Conscience. And here I
must say it, that if in the interpretation of Princes savours and Concessions
we are allowed to go by the Rule that in them Exuberantior fides requiritur,
and that therefore promissio in dignitate Regali facta, aequipollet juramento,
and that a Sovereign Prince appealed to about the Rights of Subjects is Morally
bound to proceed therein Vt DEVS qui soli veritati innititur, and according to
the Style of the Judges delegated by Sovereign Princes, Sola rei veritate
inspecta, and throwing off the Formal Rules and Solemnities even of positive
Laws themselves; it may be well inferred that the Divine Law of Nature obliging
us to Gratitude, we are Morally bound in the preservations of the Lives and
Rights of Princes (tho we had not been sworn to them, yet) to regard them as
God, and not to obscure their Rights with Formalities and subtilties of Law,
and much less with tricks of words, but especially in the interpretation of our
Oaths to them to use the greatest simplicity therein that is suitable to the Law
of Nations, Nature and Christianity, and to abhor what the Lawyers call a
Subdola juris interpretatio, and what may be called, as the expression is in
Job, a darkening of Council by words without knowledge, and a gloss that
corrupts the Text, and is directly contrary to the Right of Kings and Princes;
for the securing of which and removing all doubts or strife about the same
these Oaths were made.

And should any one tell me of the effect of that saying Nemo est haeres
viventis in our Common Law, and that Land being given to A. for life and the
remainder to the Heirs of B. and that A. dying while B. lives who has at that
time a Son, that Son shall never have the Land because of Non est haeres
viventis, but it shall go back to the Donor if alive, or if dead to his Heirs,
I will ask him if the Donor should be bound in Justice and Equity by a certain
future time to Let the Heirs of B. have the Land, and had voluntarily sworn
that B's Heirs should then have the same, whether the Donor then could with a
Salvo to Conscience keep the Son or other Heir from the same by Virtue of the
Non est haeres viventis? But we are to be tender how we compare the
Inheritances of private Persons with that of the Crown, which is of a higher
Nature, and without a Metaphor differs from them Toto Coelo, and is so much
above them. And how regardless were they then of the Birthright of the oldest
Monarchy in the World, and particularly of the present Glorious Royal Line,
that would not allow it the Privilege of being plainly understood as they do to
private Inheritances, and as to which William the Conqueror in that part of his
Charter to London is allowed to speak intelligibly enough, viz. And I will that
ich Child be his Faders Eyer.

But I am weary of this Wild-goose chase of the Haeres viventis among old
Books: and my pointing back any one to my 3d and 5th Conclusions may save my
labor of speaking here much more of it, It is sufficiently set forth in the
third, in what sense the words of Oaths are to be taken, and where I mentioned
Ames saying, That they are regularly to be taken in that sense that the words
have in the COMMON use of men. And to this purpose we are well told by Vaughan
in Shepbard and Gosnald's Case, That were the penning of a Statute is dubious,
long usage is a just Medium to expound it by: for jus and norma loquendi is
governed by usage, and the meaning of things spoke or writ must be as it has
constantly been received to be by common acceptance. But I have showed the
word Heir to be no doubtful word: and as I have mentioned it to be a word that
the Glory and Power of our Savior is expressed by, I may add that our Noble
Privilege as we are Christians being so often represented in Scripture by the
word Heirs, etc. we are Morally bound to guard the word from the Assault of any
new interpretation that would outrage it with doubt and ambiguity.

I have showed that as our Oath is part of a Statute Law, if there could be any
doubt of it, the Judges are to interpret it: and our Ancestors were so far from
trusting private men to interpret Statutes, that they have not allowed the
Court Christian judicially interpret the very Statutes that concern the things
there conusable. And as some Papists do vainly sometime tell us, That we by our
Religion damn all our Popish Ancestors, it may here with truth be said, that
any by finding out a new sense of the word Heirs do condemn the understandings
of those and their Morals in not observing the Oath by the measures of that
interpretation; and I may as truly say, that we venture on damning our selves
by Perjury, if while we venture on a new sense of the Oaths both contrary to
the common sense of the words and of the Imposer, we do not particularly take
the Oaths with our Protestation of that new sense, and much more if reserving
that new sense in our minds we shall further in one of these Oaths, viz. That
of Allegiance declare, That we have sworn every thing therein according to the
PLAIN and COMMON sense and UNDERSTANDING of the same words without ANY
Equivocation, or Mental Evasion, or secret Reservation whatsoever.

It is a certain Rule about Oaths, That Iuramentum non extenditur ad ea de
quibus cogitatum non est: and so is this other, viz. Non licet nobis
interpretatione taci^a comminisci conditiones, nisi quae vel publico jure
receptae sunt, vel ex re ipsa, aut verbis quibusdam manifest colliguntur: and
I may add another, That Minime mutanda sunt quae interpretationem certam semper
habuerunt. But as it has appeared to all a superfluous thing ever to have the
Judges consulted about any being Heirs to the King in his lifetime, and
wherein there is no Dignus vindice nodus, so likewise tho Contra captiones ex
actu ambiguo nascentes, remedio est protestatio, quae declaratione intentionis
actum madificatur, jusque in posterum competens conservat, yet no man was ever
found so ridiculous as to make any Protestation at the time of his taking these
Oaths concerning this new sense of the word Heirs: and what is a greater
reflection on our Excluders as to their Non-observance of the Promissory Clause
relating to the King's Heirs, is that the Excluders were embarked in their
Exclusion, and half-Sea over in their prosecution of it, and had thrown away
their Compass of the common sense of the Oaths, before the new one of Haeres
viventis was found or heard of, an interpretation that I believe the very
Author of the Sheriffs Case would have held scandalous, and which indeed
amounts not to so much as a Scruple of Conscience, or to more than a Quirk of
Law. It has long been the Custom of Spain not to make any men Judges who have
been Advocates, as supposing that their straining the Law as Practitioners for
their Clients, might make them the less Candid in their Judgment of the Law on
the Tribunal: but the truth is, the giving Judgment in the Court of Conscience,
that this newfound interpretation of the word Heirs would in that Court
indemnify the Takers of the Oaths, may well seem unworthy of the dignity of any
Judge or Counselor or conscientious Attorney, and any one of those whom the
old Comaedian calls the Leguleiorum faeces decemdrachmari^, not wholly steered
by Trick.

As great a Judge in that Court as ever our Nation, or perhaps Christendom
bred, I mean our Bishop Sanderson, having in his 2d Lecture of Oaths said, That
we become guilty of the heinous Crime of Perjury, if a milder interpretation of
an Oath chance to deceive us, does well mind us of the profitable Rule which in
doubtful matters commands the choice of the safer part. And thus the Casuists
generally giving us that Rule, that in all doubtful matters we are to incline
to the safer side, and that therein it is safer to think a thing to be Sin than
not, and in order to the great EXCLVSION of Perjury telling us, That Cum de
ancipiti perjurio in futurum quaeritur, illa est benignior sententia quae
Conscientiae tutior, atque ita quae crimen interpretatur ut excludat, and that
when ever we recede from the literal sense of an Oath to the intention of the
Lawgiver, we ought to be very sure of that intention, if we will be sa^e from
the danger of Perjury, I think that new interpretation so clearly contrary both
to the literal sense of the Oath and the intention of the Lawgiver (as I have
shown) was a very unsafe trick for men to put upon their Consciences.

But as the word Heir is a plain word, so it is likewise as plain, that some
men by the Haeres viventis would put a Trick on the State: for let any one go
to dissect all the meaning that can be in the Haeres viventis in plain English,
and it will be neither better nor worse than to make the sense of the Imposer
of the Oaths be, that men should observe the Promissory Clauses relating to the
King's Heirs and Successors only on the terms of the Objection of Rebus sic
stantibus, which I have before mentioned and fully answered.

Nor can any men evade their being by the Oaths obliged to defend the Rights of
the Hereditary Monarchy, and thus prop up such their new interpretation of
Heirs by Virtue of the expired Statute of the 13th of Elizabeth (which some
have raised such dust with) that made it Treason to affirm, That the Laws and
Statutes do not bind the Right of the Crown and its Descent, Limitation,
Inheritance, or Governance. It is not an expired Statute, nor any one in being
can make the Obligation of our Oaths to the King's Heirs and Successors to
expire. We were in Conscience, and by the Law (which is by some termed Communis
sponsio Regni) obliged before our Oaths taken to defend the Rights of the
King's Heirs and Successors in all just ways: but if any men should be so vain
as to think that we were not before obliged to them on the account of the
Hereditary Monarchy, yet it is most certain that an Oath does often induce an
Obligation where there was none before: and we are not now considering what WAS
Treason, but what IS Perjury. An Act of Parliament may inflict the Vltimum
supplicium, on that which perhaps is not Malum in se, as for example, The
Exportation of Wool, tho when we have a glut of it; nay, by the 28th of Harry
the 8th, c. 7. touching the Succession of the Crown, the not taking of the
contrary Oaths is made Treason. But I need not here say more than that if any
in the 13th Year of Queen Elizabeth had took the Oath of Supremacy enjoined in
the first Year of her Reign, and did not observe the Promissory Clause therein,
they did offend God and their Consciences thereby. But I have mentioned it that
Archbishop Hutton notwithstanding that 13th of Elizabeth made it a Praemunire
to speak of any Person being her Heir and Successor, except the same were the
natural Issue of her Body, did publicly in his Sermon before her, discharge
that Promissory part of the Oath by asserting King James his Right to succeed
her, and was publicly by her thanked for it.

On the whole matter, we are not bound by these Oaths to look backward on other
men's actings, but to look forward on our own. Enough has been said of too much
that was done to oppose King James's Succession, and of the necessity of the
Oath of All^giance to secure England to the Royal Line and by it: and the
providing of the fortius vinculum on the emergency of the Gunpowder Treason,
was but suitable to the general prudence of all States* and the expression of
Allegiance to be paid to the King's Heirs and Successors, when Kings and Queens
of this Realm, which was in some former Oaths, was not in this necessary, nor
yet in the Oath of Supremacy, because of the great Fundamental Clause in both
before mentioned, viz. The King IS the only Supreme Governor, etc. he IS ONLY
Supreme, and so none coordinate, or equal to him; our Sov^reign Lord the King,
IS lawful and rightful King, etc. and so the word IS must necessarily hinder
any Heirs or Successors forestalling the Market if they should presume before
their time to come for our actual Allegiance, however sworn to them to be paid
in future time.

Our Law-Book of Oaths mentions a long Promissory Oath made voluntarily to
Harry the 6th, by 2 Archbishops, 16 Bishops, 3 Dukes, 5 Earls, 2 Viscounts, 14
Abbots, 2 Priors, and 7 Barons, and but part of which I shall here set down,
viz. I A. B. knowledge you most High and Mighty and most Christian Prince King
Henry 6. to be my most redoubted, and rightwise by Succession born to Reign
upon me, and all your Liege People, whereupon I voluntarily without Coercion,
promise and oblige me by the faith and truth that I owe to God, and by the
faith, truth and ligeance that I owe to you my most redoubted Sovereign Lord,
that I shall be without any variance, true, faithful, humble, and obeysant
Subject and Liege man, to you my most redoubted Sovereign Lord, etc. and swear
to endeavor to do all that may be to the weal and surety of your most Royal
Person, etc. to the weal, surety, and preserving of the Person and benign
Princess, Margaret Queen, my Sovereign Lady, and of her High most Noble Estate,
She being your Wife, and also the weal, surety, and honor of the Person of the
right High and Mighty Prince Edward, my right redoubted Lord the Prince your
first begotten Son, and of the Right High and Noble Estate, and faithfully,
truly, and obeysantly, etc. First, my Allegiance to you my most redoubted
Sovereign Lord, during your life, etc. and if God of his infinite Power take
you from this Transitory Life, me bearing life in this World, that I shall then
take and accept my said redoubted Lord, the Prince Edward your said first born
Son for my Sovereign Lord, and bear my true Faith and Ligeance to him, as by
nature born for my Sovereign Lord, and after him to his Succession of his Body
lawfully begotten, etc. and in default of his Succession, etc. unto any other
Succession of your Body lawfully coming.

But the wisdom of any Nation making Laws (and especially about Oaths) as short
as may be, I account that those of Supremacy and Allegiance have much better
that Multi-loquious one (as I may call it) provided for the security of our
Allegiance to the King Regnant, and afterward to his Heirs and Successors, by
plain and liquid words as far as Humane Prudence could provide for the same.
And because what is made by Humane Art is in danger of being by Humane Art
eluded, and for that we see that Nature it self has been made a Term of Art (a
word that St. Paul thought plain enough when he said does not Nature teach us
that, etc. yet of which word a late Lawyer and Kinsman of the Great Grotius
has in his Book, De Principiis juris Naturalis told us of seven
significations) and for that it is as easy for a captious versatil Wit to turn
the word Heir or most words into as many or more, the Oath of Allegiance was
further with deep precaution made to exterminate all cavilling senses and
calumnious interpretations, and such as that of the haeres viventis, by that
Final Clause which Crowns that Oath, and that which alone as I partly hinted
before amounts to an Oath, viz. And I do make this Recognition and
Acknowledgment heartily, willingly and truly upon THE TRVE FAITH OF A
CHRISTIAN, and after which it follows, So help me God. That the Faith of a
Christian alone amounts to an Oath, I shall cite the opinion of Tuldenus the
Regius Professor of Law at Lovain, when writing De interpretatione Iuramenti,
he says, Affirmatio perfidem tunc demum jusjurandum est, cum additum fuit
Christianam. Alciat. in l. 41. c. De transact.

I conclude therefore that what Christian soever has taken this Oath, has by
Virtue of the words of The faith of a Christian obliged himself thereby as much
as if he had said, That Great Privilege of Birthright belonging to the King's
Heirs, a Privilege so great that the despising of it, as in the Case of Esau is
applied in Scripture to men's profaneness in despising their Inheritance of
Bliss by Christianity, I do as sincerely promise to defend according to my
Oath, and without any Fraud or Mental Reservation or the least cavilling,
capricious or calumnious interpretation, as I value the great Privilege that
Christianity has ennobled Humane Nature with in being Heirs of God and joint
Heirs with Christ as St. Paul's words are, and of being Heirs according to the
Promise; and may all the Divine Promises be so Yea and Amen to me, and
interpreted with not only a plain but a full and fair interpretation, and so
likewise the very Oath of God, mentioned in the Epistle to the Hebrews, As I do
plainly, and fully, and fairly, and with the exuberant honesty and simplicity
enjoined by the Christian Religion, and so much transcending the Bona fides of
the Heathen Morality, perform my Promissory Oath of Allegiance to the King and
his Heirs and Successors.

I shall in the last place take notice of what I have not without horror
observed, namely, that some disloyal Authors have presumed in Print to pretend
the lawfulness of Exclusion of Heirs and Successors on the account of their
Religion, by color of the punishment of Idolaters according to the Judicial
Law: and as to which it will be sufficient here to say, that that Law was given
only to the Jewish Nation, and that it did never bind any else or does, and
that the Divine Law natural and positive bind us to the Observation of our
Oaths, and that Christianity does not found Dominion in Grace, and that the
Patriarchs, and Joshua, and the Princes of the People of Israel made Leagues
with Idolaters, and on both sides there was mutual Faith confirmed with solemn
Oaths, and that an Oath Promissory to pay Allegiance to the Heirs of the Crown
at the time of its Descent is much more lawful.

And I might urge that the Jewish Kings tho often idolatrous, yet as the Lord's
Anointed had De jure and de facto Obedience paid them without respect to
their Religion, or Irreligion.

And by Virtue of the Moral Offices of honoring all men, and of the Internal
Communion due from all Christians to all Christians, I shall without offending
the Church I hold External Communion with, venture to go as far in my Measures
of Charity as some of its great Ornaments, Dr. Hammond and Bishop Tailor and
likewise Bishop Gunning have done in freeing many Roman Catholics from the
guilt of Formal Idolatry. Innumerable Acts of Idolatry may be charged on many
Persons of that Communion, and particularly on all such as do worship the Cross
or Saints and Angels Cul^^ latriae, and on such as in the Eucharist determine
the thoughts of their worship to the Consecrated Bread. But I believe there are
others who do not intentionally direct their adoration to any Creature in that
Sacrament, and only to the Person of Christ our Lord: and as when Abimel^^h
mistook Sara from her Husband, being informed by Abraham that She was his
Sister, God was pleased to acknowledge, That he did it in the simplicity of his
heart, so I shall leave such to their Master, and without particular ground
charge no particular Person of them with the guilt of Formal Idolatry: and
should much rather choose to absolve a Church from approving Idolatry than to
render the Persons in it liable as Idolaters, to be in a Christian State dealt
with according to the rigor (or as some Calvinsts call it) the Equity of the
Jewish Law.

As we justly remember the Bigottish Cruelty of the Marian days, so we must be
so just to our selves as not to forget how some Nominal Protestants (and such
too as were magni nominis) did long ago (and as they do still) accu^e the
Discipline of the Church of England, and its decent Ceremonies with the guilt
of Idolatry: and how fatal both to our Church and State so false and base and
spightful an Accusation has proved. Mr. Hobs in his History of our late Civil
Wars attributes somewhat of the success of the disloyal Enemies of our Church
to the natural Cause of their fighting with spite.

We know that not only Mr. H. Jacob in his Exposition of the 2d Commandment,
printed in the Year 1610. has thus charged our Church with Idolatry in express
words, but that Ames himself did so in effect in his Puritanismus Anglicanus
that Year printed: and as Learned and Pious a Man as he was, his Cases of
Conscience showing him tainted with the Tenet of Monk Gratian and Calvin and
our Assembly-men about the Judicial Law (for he says there, That that Law tho
not appertaining to Christistians, Sub ratione legis sperialiter obligantis,
yet is so sub ratione doctrinae, quatenus vel generali sua natura vel
proportionis aequit^te exhibet sempe^ nobis optimam juris noturalis
determinationem) one might easily gue^s from such a Principle when believed and
practiced, what quarter the Church of England, or any Church accused of
Idolatry could expect.

The truth is, that on the Division of the World by some into 30 parts and
rendering 19 thereof to be downright Idolaters, and 6 Mahumetans and 5
Christians, it may well seem a deplorable absurdity that the Christian Quota
should be so much addicted both to call one another Idolaters, and to Sacrifice
one another as such, beyond the superstitious rage of the Heathen (...).

Mr. Jacob in his said Exposition calls the Lutherans Idolaters for having
Images in their Churches: and what may well seem strange is, that when Cromwell
the Usurper being inclined to tolerate the Jews, and appointing a Meeting of
his Ministers of State and his Divines, to debate the lawfulness of it, at that
time Fiennes his Lord Keeper declared it then unlawful, for that the Jews were
Idolaters, as worshipping God out of Christ, and whereby he implied in effect
that Adam was an Idolater. Thus apt have Enthusiasts been to play with
Idolatry: but a shameful thing it is to our English understandings, not to have
a just general apprehension of the aim of some factious Anti-Papists to set up
new real Idolatry in the State, while they are vexing us with their old Nominal
Idolatry in the Church; I here refer to all that would outrage the Hereditary
Monarchy, and I call any Crime of that Nature by the name of Idolatry, as our
judicious Sanderson has done in his Learned Lecture, De legum humanarum causa
efficiente. 15. where having shown how Kings are called Gods, Psalm 82. 6. Quod
ipsius Dei in terris vices gerant, idque Deo ipsis Conferente hanc potestatem,
non populi suffragiis, EGO dixi Dii estis, he thus goes on to ask very
properly, Poteritne populus aliquis sine turpis idololatriae crimine sibi Deos
constituere, cum sit uniuscujusque hominis, ei qui ipsius vicem gerat,
potestatem vicariam sua authoritate demandare, non alieno arbitratu? Audebitne
quisquam mortalium id Iuris sibi arr^gare ut qui Dei in terris Minister and
Vice-Deus futurus sit, omnem illam suam authoritatem and potestatem ab ipso
sibi collatam agnoscat?

Let all such then who did AVDERE thus in the Affair of our Hereditary
Monarchy, and to have the Vice-Deus futurus molded by their fancies, consider
how great a Casuist has loaded them with Idolatry: and moreover remember how
the inspired Prophet did make Rebellion as the Sin of Witchcraft, and contumacy
or stubborness as Idolatry.

I was contented with finding one thing asked by the ingenious Author of the
Compendium, because I supposed, and that then even by Calculation, I might
resolve the doubt (and which I have held my self obliged to do) viz. Can it be
said that the Monarchy of England has gotten by the Reformation (and what
desperate Enemies that has created us may be easily imagined) that nothing but
Popery, or at least its Principles can make it again emerge or lasting? but was
sorry and ashamed to find that Authors had cause to cite the disloyal Pamphlet
of Pereat Papa, as asserting the lawfulness of proceeding against Idolaters as
is there mentioned, and that he likewise had so much reason to make so great a
Remark on the Exclusion in the foregoing Page: viz. He who believes he can
disinherit a lawful Successor on the account of Religion, will hardly find
Arguments of force to keep the Prince in being on his Throne whenever this
happens to be imputed to him.

Moreover I was ashamed after the effort of the Idolatry in the Exclusion, and
of the Mobile's worshipping a Plot-Witness with the name of (...), that the
Nonconformist Author of the Book called The peaceable Design, printed in the
year 1675. speaking so tenderly of the Papists then in the words of, The Papist
in our account is but one sort of Recusants, and the conscientious and
peaceable among them must be held in the same predicament with those among our
selves that likewise refuse to come to Common Prayer, yet reprinting his Book
in the year 1680. does thus alter the former passage, and say, The Papist is
one whose worship to us is Idolatry, and we cannot therefore allow them the
liberty of public assembling themselves as others of the Separation.

When the Non-Conformists had a while after the Declaration of Indulgence
idolized both it and the Papists for being supposed to have had some hand in
the procuring it, and were as soon weary of it as Children of their Images, yet
it seems that presently after the noise of the Popish Plot, the Non-Conformists
Censure of Transubstantiation was transubstantiated, and their Religion grew to
be Idolatry: as if the ill actings or shams of either a few or many indigent or
dissolute Persons ought to be turned on the whole Body of Papists, or
especially on their Religion it self and their Religionary Tenets. But many of
the Non-Conformists then being abandoned to sham the very Church of England and
its Discipline with Idolatry, and with a participating in the PLOT to bring in
POPERY, according to what Archbishop Land's Star Chamber Speech mentions as
the Style of the Libels in those days, That there were then great Plots in
hand, and dangerous Plots to change the Religion established, and to bring in
Romish Superstition, the sagacious Loyal began to see that they made but a
Stalking-horse of the Plot of the Church of Rome to shoot at the Hereditary
Monarchy, and by outcries against the Church of Rome to bring in a Roman
Republic, and to make themselves the Idols of the People in a popular State,
while they complained of the Idolatries of Churches.

But there remains somewhat else to be said as to this point of calling, or
thinking every particular Papist an Idolater, and that is what I shall further
urge out of the great Speech aforesaid of the Archbishop of Bourges, who knew
well enough that Papists had in their Writings frequently called Heretics
Idolaters (and as accordingly the Author of a Popish Pamphlet printed in London
in the Year 1663, Entitled Miracles not ceased, has done, and where his words
are, The Protestant Religion is a Cheat and Heathenism, the Protestant Bishops
are Cheaters and Priests of Baal, the Protestant Religion is ridiculous and
idolatrous) yet this Archbishop in that Speech having (as I said) cleared his
Prince tho a Protestant from the guilt of Heresy and Pertinacy, does likewise
there particularly say, he is no Idolater, and where he likewise has with
great judgment and loyalty taught us, that as to those Constitutions in the
Civil Law whereby Manichees and Arrians are excluded from Magistracy and
public Office, It was to be understood to be only in the Case of Inferior
Magistrates and not of Sovereign Princes, who cannot be disinherited of their
Rights without the destruction of the whole Government and People: and to
decree any thing of whom did only belong to the Jurisdiction of God Almighty.

There is another thing that inclines me to think my self Morally bound not to
call all Papists Idolaters, and to wipe off the stain of Idolatry from the
Church of Rome as much as any of the Fathers of our Church have done, and that
is the Conversion of England from Heathenish Idolatry, that Gregory the Great
was God's Great Instrument in many hundred of years ago.

HAving thus Finished my Casuistical Discussion, I shall be glad if the Result
thereof may by the Blessing of God ( whose both the Deceived and the Deceiver
are, according to the words of Job 12. 16.) be in all such Protestants who have
been deceived into a belief and practice of the Irreligionary Tenet of Popery,
viz. Of Dominion being founded in Grace, a more exuberant Compassion to all
Loyal Papists who have not believed and practiced that Tenet, and may have
erred in Popish Tenets Religionary. It Is both visible and palpable that such
Excluders and Nominal Protestants while they accused Papists of being deluded
into a Plot to destroy the King, were themselves deluded into a Practice that
would ipso facto have destroyed the Hereditary Monarchy. It Is most plain that
by being so deceived they have given occasion to Papists to reproach
Protestants by saying to this effect, You see how vain your attempts are to
leave Popery and its Tenets: and as he who would by running or riding or
sailing to any remote places, imagine to be able to get from being under the
Covering of the Heavens, would give any one occasion to upbraid his vanity, by
telling him he could not do it, for that the further he went from being under
one part of the Heavens, he would but Compass the being nearer to another part
thereof; so while you would get from being under the Predominance of one part
of Popery, you obtain but to be the nearer to another part of it: You have run
from the belief of Purgatory to the Tenet of founding dominion in Grace; and
there being no steady hand among you to hold the balance, that Tenet practiced
by you would instead of a Purgatory hereafter, make a present Hell upon Earth.
You are got from the Council of Trent, and yet the odiosa materia in the very
Council of Lateran, which you charge upon us as a general one, is approved,
believed and practiced by you: And you would Exterminate the King's Heirs and
Successors as Heterodox in Religion; and have in effect obsolved your selves
from your Oaths Promissory in their behalfs. Thus therefore does the
Universality of our Catholic and Heavenly Religion seem to be naturally made
like that of the Heavens, from which there is no escaping. Thou who abhorrest
Idols do thou commit Sacrilege, and abhor the Sacredness of the Regal Power,
and of thy own Oaths? And thou who abhorrest Superstition in things, will thou
idolize words, and imagine there can be Sacredness in letters? Does not every
one know that even literae significantes Sacras sententias non significant eas
in quantum sacrae sunt, sed in quantum sunt res; ergo literae non sunt Sacrae?
Does not the very word Sacred likewise signify accursed? Can therefore the
name of true Protestant Legitimate a Calumnious interpretation of Oaths, more
than the name of the Society of Jesus Legitimate the Doctrine of Calumny, or
more than the world Catholic Monopolized formerly by the Donatists and
Arrians, could justify or Sanctify their Tenets? Will your name of
Reformation weigh any thing, if while you are come out from among the
Religionary Tenets of our Church, you remain in the Babel of the Irreligionary
ones, approv^d by some of our Popes and Doctors and Schoolmen; and which we
grant, that if believed and practiced would bring every Kingdom to confusion,
and not only into a diversity of Languages, but into an alteration of the
Hereditary Government, and Transubstantiate even that? If you are angry with us
for mistaking Saint Peter' s Successors ( as you think) will you not be angry
with your selves for mistaking the Successors of your Kings, so easily to be
known? Since you may think him a wise Child who knows his true Spiritual
Father, as well as his true Natural one; will you reproach our understandings
for not knowing that true Spiritual one, and what is the true Church, when you
seem thus not to know your true Political Father, or who is to be in the course
of the descent the true King? Will not you pity us for our Implicit Faith in
the Guides of the Church, in things wherein we cannot hurt you, when your
selves do by Implicit Faith follow the Demagogues in the State in matters that
would destroy us all? When Brutus after he had given the blow to Caesar, found
cause to exclaim of Virtues being an empty Name; will not you after you have
thrown off the Papal Power of Excluding Kings make your Reformation an empty
Name, if you at last reform your selves into Popery, and after all your
imagined Conversions from Popery, we shall see your natural Conversion to it,
and as Natural as the Common Hieroglyphick of the year shows us, and how in se
convertitur annus?

The truth is, that as to the Case of many of our Nominal Protestants, and some
real ones, being thus deceived as aforesaid in the business of the Excl^sion,
there lies a Pudet haec opprobri^ nobis, etc. and a worse opprobrium than that
of another common Latin saying, Stulti dum vitant vitia, etc. for here they
have run but from Popery to Popery, from a Popery more genteely clad to a
second-ha^d Popery, and even into a frippery of Antimonarchial notions; and
they have run into the Substance of the worst part of Popery, and what I
account worse then Transubstantiation, while they have been pursuing the magni
nominis umbria, I mean the shadow of the Great Name of Protestant. And I will
still call it a great and noble name, however abused by Schismatics, and tho
not used in our Canons and Articles, etc. and wherein we soar above the
dictates of Luther and Calvin, and the distinctions of Names they occasioned;
and for which purpose our great-Souled Bramhall in the title page of his Just
Vindication of the Church of England, has the quotation of My Name is
Christian, my Surname is Catholic, by the one I am known from Infidels, by the
other from Heretics and Schismatics; but yet does often in that Book and his
other writings use the word Protestants, for such who have laudably opposed the
Papal Usurpations and Impositions. And in the mentioning of the Protestant
Churches beyond Sea, that word is justly and properly applicable. Moreover our
Great Chillingwor^h's writing of, The Religion of Protestants a safe way to
Salvation, has endeared that Name as well as his own to us thereby. The
adherents likewise of the Church of England are often put to it to use the
distinction of Protestant Recusants, to speak Intelligibly. But it is the Church
of England-Protestant that the Orthodox and Loyal generally mean by that name,
when they speak of Protestants alone here, according to the Rule of analogum
per se positum, etc. It is for the honor of these Protestants who have not so
learned Christ and Christianity as to be untaught their unnatural Allegiance
and natural obligation of their Oaths, that it may be observed of them, that
tho many within the pale of that Church, have been tempted a while to
extravagant thoughts and actings in the point of Exclusion, yet they have
through the Divine influences on their understandings soon come to themselves
again; and tho the Loyalty of some of these like Steel has been bent, yet it
has not like lead stood and continued bent: And notwithstanding that being
Transported a while with the Passion of Anger against Papists and Plots, they
said in their haste, that Dominion was founded in Grace, I observed so many of
them by their second thoughts so averse from the second-hand Popery (as I
called it) that they might merit an exemption from being censured by Papists as
aforesaid; and that by virtue of the Rule of Law, viz. Quidquid calore
iracundiae vel fit vel dicitur, non prius ratum est quam si perseverantia
apparuit judicium animi fuisse; ideoque brevi reversa uxor, nec divertisse
videtur.

And here I am likewise to observe that tho many who have been members of the
Church of England, because it was by Law Established, and have for fashion-sake
gone to our Common Prayer with no more concernment than the Monk went to Mass
who said Eamus ad communem errorem, yet such of this Church whose Devotion has
been deep rooted in their heads and hearts, and who have seriously thought of
those words in the Collect, viz. So rule the Heart of THY Chosen Servant
Charles our King and Governor, etc. did not long say Amen, to any men's thoughts
or motions of Choosing their King.

Let Rome and the Conventicles thus like lead stand bent (as I said) but the
Doctrine of the Church of England and its Prayers have sufficiently told us
whose chosen Servant our King is. I have here occasion to refer to an
Illustrious Son of this Church, and whose whole life has been as perfect a
Comment on the Oath and Moral Offices of Allegiance and of absolute and
unconditional Loyalty as any could be, and more useful to the World than any
Written one, I mean the Duke of Ormond, and therefore it is but Justice to him
and the Subject I have been treating of for me here to cite him in what was
published by the Loyal and Learned Father Walsh, in Answer to what was by the
Nuntio's Party pretended as a Scandal, namely, That one of a different Religion
from those Irish Papists should be MADE CHOICE OF to Govern them: and that that
Party did fear the Scourges of War and Plague to have justly fal^ so heavy on
them, and some Evidence of God's Anger against them for putting God's Cause and
the Churches under such a hand, whereas the trust might have been managed in a
Catholic hand under the Kings Authority, but to which the Answer was thus with
great Loyalty and Judgment, viz. Now at length they are come plainly to show
the true ground of their Exception to us, which they have endeavored all the
whole to disguise under the Personal Scandals they have endeavored to cast
upon us. They are afraid of Scandal at Rome for MAKING CHOICE as they call it (
as if they might CHOOSE their Governor) of one of a different Religion. If this
be allowed them, why they might not next pretend to the same fear of Scandal
for having a King of a different Religion, and so the Power of CHOOSING one of
their own Religion, we know not: and concludes with an Observation of that
Party's having infamously practiced the Doctrine of Calumny in relation to the
then Queen.

And all Papists therefore owning the Disloyal Principles of that Party have
thereby the Pudet haec opprobria, etc. put on them. Nor can it be by any
Impartial Relaters of News either told at Gath or published in Ascalon, that
any Sons of the Church of England were actually (...) in thinking they might
choose their future King, but it must likewise there be said, how the Fathers
and Divines of that Church did in that Conjuncture so universally, and with
such an Impetus of Reason and Scripture propagate the Doctrine of Passive
Obedience, and of the Loyalty that the 13th of the Romans, and our Oaths
require, whereby the Popery of founding Dominion in Grace has been so much
Exterminated from that Church and the Realm, that the very sense and reason and
humor of the People of England is bent against it, and is likely to be so more
and more.

And it was natural for our Divines in this Conjuncture thus to do, when so
many factious counterfeit Protestants were by their outcries making Papists of
them, and publishing infamous Pamphlets that expressly shook the Rights of the
Hereditary Monarchy, and of the Church by Law Established, and with an intent
to shake the same in that time when the Exclusion was designed; and as appeared
particularly by the reprinting for that purpose the Pamphlet of the Rights of
the Kingdom, and in which the Author did endeavor to prove the Peoples Right
to choose their Bishops. The Clergy therefore seeing such Nominal Protestants
by that real part of Popery of founding Dominion in Grace, thus bent on the
ruin of Church and State, were concerned to bend all their forces of reason in
permonishing People of their danger from that part of Popery.

Thus as when a Light-house is set up to warn Navigators of a Bank of Sand, if
yet by the force of the Sea and Wind such Bank happens to be removed, the
Light-house must be removed likewise, the same thing was accordingly done by
the Justice and Prudence of our Divines giving us a notification of the Sands
of Popery having shifted their place.

The late Experience that our Church had of its usage under the Great Usurper,
and of his putting it out of his Protection as knowing the born and sworn
Allegiance of its Churchmen, and likewise its Doctrine must necessarily make
them true Adherents to the King's Heirs and Successors, has necessarily taught
them that they cannot externally flourish under any Usurper whatsoever. They
know that the Oath that Cromwell's Parliament Enacted to be taken by him was a
Canting Oath, and to which he was sworn to the uttermost of his Power to
uphold, and maintain the true reformed Protestant Christian Religion in the
Purity thereof, as it is contained in the Holy Scriptures of the old and new
Testament to the uttermost of his Power and his understanding. The Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church of England was not to expect to be upheld and
maintained by him, nor can it be upheld or maintained by any Usurper.

Dr. Gibbon the Author of the Theological SCHEME averred to me, that Mr. Nigh
and he attending a Committee of Parliament in the times of the Usurpation, that
Mr. Nigh being desired by the Committee to give them a definition or description
of a Minister of the Gospel, then answered, A Minister of the Gospel is one
sent forth by the State to preach the Gospel, receiving protection from them
and maintenance under them, and all others restrained; and we know that he and
others then treated the Church of England in words and things like an Ecclesia
maligrantium; and how they were then RESTRAINED ab Officio, etc. and just as
the Faction and Schism of many Nominal Protestants began about 41 to call our
Divines Names, as I have observed, so lately the Popish Plot was made the
Vehicle of the Poison of some Men's Calumny, and neither Machiavel nor Jesuit
did ever more sledfastly practice the Divide and Impera, than such men in that
Conjuncture did, that by weakening us with our Divisions they might at once
destroy the Lineal Succession of our Hereditary Monarchs in the Realm, and the
Succession of Bishops in the Church: and our Kings in their Coronation Oaths
swearing to keep Peace and Agreement to the Holy Church, the Clergy and People,
Factious and Schismatical Persons having broke their own Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy may be said to have endeavored to break the King's Oath,
according to the old known form of the Indictment of some of our Judges for
Bribery in which it was said, that our Kings being bound by their Oath to do
Justice to their People, such Judges did Violare Sacramentum Domini Regis.

It has pleased God by the fierce Zeal of several Non-Conformists for the
Exclusion, to open the Eyes of many Conscientious and Loyal People among them,
and to bring them thereby to the Bosom of the Holy Church of England; for they
seeing such Doubts and Objections as some had raised against the Obligations of
our Oaths, to be but Scruples, and that considerate, serious, and devout
Persons of the Church of England had soon thrown the Scruples away, were
naturally thereby induced to throw off other Scruples; and it was likewise but
natural to them to think that their very Doubts and Objections for their having
separated from the Church of England were but Scruples. And as to doubts, tho
the Rule is, Quod dubitas ne feceris, yet not only Sanderson but Ames has told
us, that Scruples are not to be regarded: for Ames in his Cases of Conscience
l. 1. c. 16. viz. Of a scrupulous Conscience, having said, That a Scruple is a
fear of the Mind about what one is to do which vexes the Conscience, as a
little Stone in ones shoe troubles the foot, he wisely concludes, That Multi
scrupuli cum non possint commode tolli contraria ratione, deponi debent quasi
violentia quadam, dum excluduntur ab omni consultatione: and that, Scrupulus
est formido temeraria, and sine fundamento, atque adeo non potest obligare. He
there mentions, A man being said to be scrupulous in discussing his past
Actions, or in ordering his futu^e ones: and I am confident that many of the
Loyal late Non-Conformists when they consider their past Actings will now
accord to say, that many of the clamorous pretenses they were tempted to urge
for Liberty of Conscience, ought to have been (as Ames's words are) laid aside
with violence: and I do likewise believe that many of the Pious Members of the
Church of England who while the Formido temeraria and sine fundamento carried
them to incline to think it lawful to shake the Foundation of the Hereditary
Monarchy, and the super-structures of their Oaths by new interpretations, do
with a pious horror think of the poor Vapors pent in their Imaginations that
made such Temporary Earthquakes in their Moral Offices of Loyalty, and might
have made perpetual ones in the Kingdom.

And that because some of our English Princes long ago, whose Titles were
cloudy, did de facto make use of the Legislative Power to render them clear to
the People, for any to think that therefore the Monarchy was not then de jure
and jure C^ronae Hereditary, and that therefore after the Liquid Oath of
Allegiance made to statuminate the most clear Title of a Crown that can be
supposed, it could since be lawful for any Parliamentary Power to disturb the
Succession and dispense with our Oaths, can appear to the Considerate to be
nothing but a Scruple unworthy their thoughts. And moreover because some of our
Princes heretofore desired their Parliaments to intermeddle in settling the
Succession, for any therefore after the Oaths to think it might be lawful to
disturb their Prince with renewed importunities again and again to alter the
Course of the Descent after his various Declarations of his Mind that he would
never consent to any such thing, must necessarily appear to the considerate, a
Scruple fit to be thrown off. Much more then must it appear to such to have
been a vile Scruple to have fancied it lawful to pronounce men Enemies to the
Kingdom, because they so loyally defended the Hereditary Monarchy according to
their Oaths in that HOT Conjuncture, wherein the Air of men's fancies was so
generally infected.

And as in any long Intervals of extreme hot or cold weather not to participate
with the generality of men's bodies in some sensible effects of it, would argue
somewhat of distemper in ones Constitution, so in the late heat of the Populace
against Popery, it was inconsistent with the soundness of Loyalty not some way
to partake of the effects of that heat, and as I have sometimes perhaps too
much with many other Loyal Persons done. I remember to have read it somewhere
in a Print full of Wit and Loyalty said with gayety of humor to this purpose,
viz. That while a whole Nation was drunk (meaning I suppose intoxicated with
the belief of Witnesses telling incredible things, and the Populace being
thereupon drunk with Anger and Rage against the Persons of the Papists) it was
to little purpose for any one man to be sober. The Notions that men, had of a
Plot were very various. Some then were so far gone in Credulity as, like the
Fool that Solomon says, believes every word, they were resolved to believe
every thing the Witnesses had said or would say. The Loyal generally acquiesced
in the Notification of it as published by the Government, and thereby
discharged part of the Moral Obligations of the Oaths I have discoursed of,
whereby they were to defend all the RIGHTS and Privileges belonging to the
King, his Heirs, etc. and one of those Rights and Privileges is what is allowed
by the Law of Nations to all Sovereign Princes, namely, To have faith given to
their public attestation of any Fact. Yet Religion allowing men the use of the
judicium discretionis about the sense and importance of the Writ divinely
inspired, they modestly employed their Discretion in considering what by the
Dii nominales was published, and if any thing therein seemed above their reason
and not contrary to it, their faith rested therein. But the Loyal soon found
that the fears and jealousies of Popery began more and more to turn into fears
and jealousies relating to the Witnesses Veracity, and they could not without a
profound horror and astonishment reflect on the intoxication of a gaeat Body of
Men, believing some incarnate Devils in accusing one that had appeared to
Christendom, as great a Saint of her Sex as the steady practice of all Moral
Virtues glorifying a heavenly mind on Earth could render her, and who with such
a Character must shine as a Star in the History of the Age.

That many of the Popish Clergy about that time vainly endeavored to have
their Religion Paramount, and had hopes to get their Lands again, none will
think impossible who have since seen some of our Schismatical Pastors so
infatuated as to think it practicable for them again to thrive by their old
Religion-Trade. And that such particular Persons as were by the late Earl of
Clarendon in his Book against Cressy printed in the Year 1673. remarked for the
petulant and unruly Spirit that sw^yed too much among them, might continue in
the year 1673. no wise man doubted: for the said Earl there said, The wisest
and soberest Catholics of England did all they could to restrain that petulant
and unruly Spirit.

Many sagacious Protestants who knew the irreligious Principles that the
Jesuits Writings swarmed with, were apt to fear that there were then endeavors
to have some of them practiced by some ill men who were Bigots, or Paupers, and
whom necessity might prompt to be merc^nary in making disorders in the State.
The Judicious and Learned Bishop Morly was observed then to have some Notion or
Idea of a Popish Plot, peculiar to himself. And as then many had their various
Conceptions of the noised Plot, so many loyal and serious thinking Persons
supposing it to be very unreasonable and barbarous to involve the whole Body of
a Religion in the guilt of some particular Persons, and on any pretense to
bereave them of that freedom in the profession of their Religion, that both the
Law of the Land and of God allowed them, did employ their thoughts and fancies
for the reclaiming the Age from the humor of severity then showed to the
Persons of Papists in general.

The Earl of Anglesy one of his Majesty's Great Ministers publicly moved him
in the hot Conjuncture to release all Papists and even Priests out of Prison,
who were not charged with any thing of a Plot. And the Disloyalty of many
Nominal Protestants then appearing in their many published Prints, it seemed
very horrid to all ingenious men that the lives and liberties of Loyal innocent
Papists should be sacrificed to feed the humors or appetites of any Beasts of
Prey in the Ark of the Protestant Church; I speak with Allusion to those
thousands of harmless Sheep in Noah's Ark employed in feeding about 20 pair of
Carnivorous Beasts there.

I thank God, that while I was a sharer With many of the Loyal, in the hatred
of the Irreligionary Principles formerly maintained by the Court of Rome, and
many of its Churchmen, and particularly of those of the Jesuits (which that
Court has lately disclaimed,) I have likewise shared with them in the
Disclaiming of hatred or enmity to any men's Persons, whether Jesuits, or
Iesuited Protestants; and I desire to live no longer than I shall with the most
perfect hatred abhor the Popery of founding Dominion in Grace, and endeavor to
persuade all pretended Protestants, (but real half-Papists) so to hate the
same, but likewise with a perfect Love to love the Persons of their
Brethren-Papists. And it is with Justice to be by all men to our Popish
Fellow Subjects acknowledged, that whatever petulance some of them were
formerly guilty of, or of any ambitious design of making too great a Figure in
the internal Government of the Nation, yet that the deportment of the
generality of them has of late appeared with such a face, not only of Loyalty
but Modesty, and Complaisance with his Majesty's measures in employing the
hands and heads of Protestants of the Church of England in the Management of
the great matters of State, as is necessarily attractive of our Christian Love
and Compassion; and the rather for that we have seen at the same time many
Factious Anti-Papists to have made a greater Figure in the internal Government
of the Kingdom, than ever any Papists did in the Reigns of King James and the
Royal Martyr, and to have thereby given disturbance both to the External
Government and the Hereditary Monarchy. I did observe for some Considerable
time after the Plot-epoche somewhat of a becoming Humanity and Gentleness in
many Anti-Papists relating to the Persons of the Papists, and likewise of the
Divines of our Church, but was afterward sufficiently sensible of their
intolerable rancour and animosities against both, and of the infamous use and
application they made of the Jesuits Doctrine of Calumny, and of the Weapons
they borrowed from Parson's of the Succession, to promote the detestable
Exclusion, and of their borrowing from Athens and old Rome, the Thunderbolts of
their old REPVBLICAN Curses, viz. of ENEMY, etc. and throwing them at the most
Loyal of our Patriots, and absurdly calling them Enemies to the King and
Kingdom, because they asse^ted the Rights of the Hereditary Monarchy in
opposing the Exclusion. By that kind of Republican Curses they gave us the omen
of what they would have been at. And so extravagant was the use of that
anathema in the late Conjuncture, that when one in a great Assembly moved
against Sir G. I. (a Person that all the Loyal must own for his steadiness to
the Hereditary Monarchy, and for his having first kindled that great Zeal for
Loyalty which does now like a wall of Fire defend our Metropolis, that he might
be voted such an Enemy as aforesaid, a Burgess for that City (as I was info
m'd) did Ridiculously and Presumtuously move that he might be voted an Enemy to
Mankind. But it was easy for such as had took Gods name in vain, so to take
Mankinds.

I shall not degenerate from the Moral Offices of Charity to men's Persons, if I
call the Ex^lusion that would have broke the Balance of the Monarchy that was
the old Balance of the World, enmity to Mankind; but shall without my here
calling any men names leave it to the soft voice of God's Herald called
Conscience to suggest it that tho a man who was deluded a while by the error of
the Exclusion that would have been so fatal to the Realm, might by reason of
any good intentions so for a while ill guided, not deserve perhaps to be judged
to be an enemy to the King and Kingdom formaliter, yet that if after
Consideration and all thoughts made about his Sworn Allegiance, he does not
make a stand, but shall at any time again endeavor the going over the Rubicon
of the Blood Royal in its Line of Succession stated by God and Nature, and the
defending his false-steps beyond it, by Association or Arms: ^I say I shall
leave it to Conscience to tell him or warn him by the indeleble Characters of
natural right there so legibly Engraved, how much he will deserve the censure
of such an enemy as has been mentioned; and shall be glad he may be thereby to
better effect warned then Caesar was from his Vsurpatio^ by the great Senatus
Consultum, which Rivallius in his History of the Civil Law, Printed in the year
1530. says that he saw remaining Engraved on a Marble Pillar by the River
Rubicon, viz. Iussu mandatuve P. R. Commilito, armate quisquis es,
Manipularisve, Centuriove, turmaeve legionarie hic sistito, vexillumve sinito,
nec citra hunc amnem Rubiconem signa, ductum, commeatumve traducito. Si quis
hujusce jussionis ergo ad^ersus praecepta ierit fueritve, adjudicatus esto P.
R. H. ac si contra patriam arma tulerit, penatesque e sacris penetralibus
asportaverit. S. P. Q. R. Sanctio Plebisciti. S^. ve C. He likewise says that
In Portu Arimini alterum est adhuc ejusdem sententiae senatusconsultum, and
which appearing to be a Noble piece of Curiosity, and expressive of the same
sense wi^h the former, tho with some difference of words, I shall here
entertain the Reader with, viz.

Imp. Mil. Tiro. armate quisquis es, hic sistito, vexillumve sinito, arma
deponito, nec citra hunc amnem Rubiconem, signa, arma, exercitumve traducito.
Si quis ergo adversus praecepta ierit, feceritve, adjudicatus esto Hostis P. R.
ac si contra patriam arma tulerit, sacrosve penates e penetralibus
asportaverit. Sanctio plebisciti, senatusconsulti, ultra hos fines arma
proferre liceat nemini.

Rivallius having cited these Senatusconsulta, says that Quibus
senatusconsultis Caesar fortassis territus cum e Gallia rediens ad Rubiconem
usque pervenisset and adversus Pompeium populumque Romanum bellum gesturus
esset militibus dixisse fertur, et etiam nunc regredi possimus, quod si
Ponticulum transierimus, omnia armis agenda erunt. And thus let all members of
the^ true Church Militant in these Realms by what name or title soever known,
who have been tempted to think the Exclusion lawful, thank Heaven that they
have lived to repent of the same, and that even now they may go back from the
sinfullness of such thought, and consider that if they had passed over this
Rubicon, they were to expect beside the fate of their Involving their Country
in War, the other tremendous one of being found fighters against God, to whom
they were sworn.

I have little further to add but to acquaint the Judicious READER, that I
desire if he finds any thing here-said, that he may reasonably think to be
not according to the Theological measures of the Church of England, or the
Political ones of the State, or against the moral Offices of Charity toward the
Persons of (...) men, or against the Internal Communion due from all Christians
to all Christians, (tho I know of no such thing here said) it may by him be
taken as non dictum. There is no keeping of Passion in number, weight and
measure, and particularly of that of Anger. The Excellent Bishop of Down that
was, Doctor Jeremy Tailor, has often told me, That when he was to return an
answer to a Friends Letter that had Anger in it, he never concerned himself to
return an answer to the angry part of it, because he considered that the anger
of his Friend was over before the Letters arrival. But against all the
Irreligionary Principles of the Jesuits, and particularly that of the Founding
Dominion in Grace, I would crave aid from Posterity for the continuance of my
Indignation in the known words of, O me prope lassum, juvate Posteri, but that
the Pope has saved me the labor; and so I hope those Principles in them are
retiring to the^r Eternal rest, and I desire not to hinder their (...). And
that no pious Roman Catholic may labor under the weight of being Censured as
one who is necessarily to believe and practice some Principles beforementioned
out of the LATERAN Council: I have mentioned various things that may be of use
to that effect, and perhaps more satisfactory than what has by any of their
Church been said, who have denied it to be a General Council. Such denial will
not effectually do their work, since Cardinal Perron has (as I said) showed it
to be a general one: and his reputation for his profound Judgment and Learning
being so great and such that the late Learned Lord Faulkland, the Secretary of
State, was wont to say, That Baronius and Bellarmine were but fit to serve him
as amanuenses, or by gathering for him the quotati^ns out of Authors he had
occasion to consult) it would be in vain for any Learned writer of the Church
of Rome, to think by his Authority to outweigh that of Perron the Cardinal.
But by my citing likewise that Cardinals not holding himself obliged to proceed
in France according to the measures of that Council: I have showed the vanity
of men's Fears of any ill effect of it annoying us here, and as (I hope) I shall
be able further to do in my remarks on the Munster Treaty; and that since all
things with God are possible, we may conclude that tho neither Iesuited Papists
or Protestants should ever recant any of their former Irreligionary Principles,
the voice of Nature may in effect do it for them, and render such Principles
absolete, and as insignificant as the Stings of dead Animals.

Several Learned Prints published by Protestant Authors in this Fermentation
have urged the Council of Lateran for Princes exterminating Heretics, and
every one knows that in the barbarous old times of Popery that Council did
operate barbarously to that purpose; and it is possible that in a certain
Country in the World I will not name, Heretics (so called) have been treated
partly after the Mode of that Council by some, with an intent to increase our
Divisions, and the ferment of the popular hatred against Papists and Popery
here. But the Great Perron having declared himself not obliged by that Council
to show that severity to the Heretics in France, has sufficiently instructed
the World that Roman Catholic Princes are not by that Council bound always so
to do; and the Constellation of the Great Roman Catholic Kings shining in the
Munster Treaty has likewise given us light therein.

To Conclude; we are not from the old former Omissions or Commissions of
Princes, and People, necessarily to infer future ones. The Prudential Rule is,
De futuris semper meliora speranda sunt. It is likewise a saying often applied
by Magerus, De futuro statuere ex praeteritis, prudentis non est.

Seneca having spoke of the continual Changes of things, and how that Bis in
idem flumen non descendimus, etc. says, Ego ipse dum haec loquor mutari,
mutatus sum. We have had instances in former times, and in the late Conjucture,
of the Sands of Popery often shifting as I called it. The Lord Keeper Puckering
in his famous Speech, observed that in one Conjuncture, the Puritans did then
join and concur with the Jesuits: and the Doctrinal Measures of the Jesuits and
our Nominal Protestants about the lawfulness of Exclusion have lately been the
same. And I think that such Protestants may reasonably conclude, That it was
not for nothing, and not without some end that Divine Providence permitted so
many of them to err therein, and that probably it might be to the end to
produce in their minds so great a degree of Compassion and Charity toward the
Persons of all Roman Catholic Christians, as may not only last in this
Conjuncture, but be operative in them by all Moral Offices of Humanity and
Christianity during their Lives.

FINIS.
As for most of the (...) which do not endanger the Sense, they are (...) of
the Reader as they shall occurr to him. But (...) remarkable, he may please to
take Notice of as follows,
In the PREFACE.
PAge 2. Lin. 10. after give, add it* ib. l. 32. for belief, read believe. p.
3. l. 4. outrage there and generally throughout the following work Printed
wrong. p. 5. l. 43. for great Truth, r. great thing. p. 13. l. 3 dele but* p.
15. l. 9. for But, r. And. ib. l. 30. dele But* p. 14. the Word Independent,
there and generally throughout the following work Printed false. p. 18. l. 9.
dele by p. 19. for Vilitigation R. Vitilitigation. p. 20. l. 38. for thinks, r.
think ib. l. 45 for Iustifications, r. Justification, p. 21. l. 11. for
Articles, r. Homilies. ib. l. 24. dele or Romes to ours. ib. l. 49. for as of,
r. as to. p. 23. l. 3. for Divines, r. Princes. ib. l. 30. after commodabunt,
end the parenthesis p. 25. l. 18. for the Signing, r. the making. p. 36. l. 6.
for warming, r. warning, p. 47. l. 38. for naturally, r. natural. p. 62. l. 28.
for I had, r. had I. p. 69. l. 2. for Resolution, r. Religion. ib. l. 24. for
Maximinian, r. Maximin. p. 70. l. 5. after Library, add that I have seen.

In the INDEX.
PAge 3. Line 1. for being an ill, r. being in an ill. p. 3. l. 4. for time of
David, r. the line of David. ib. for ten, r. nineteen.

In the DISCOURSE.
PAge 4. Line 11. for othea, r. other. p. 7. l. 13. for Lovure, r. Louvre. p.
7. l. 36. for Voughe, r. Vogue. ib. l. 51. for Summonarily, r. Summarily. p.
10. l. 37. for Apostasy, r. perversion. ib. l. 39. for Apostasy, r. perversion.
p. 12. l. 28. for Course, r. ours. p. 13. l. 47. after being, r. now. p. 16. l.
37. after since, r. originally. p. 17. l. 20. for thus for, r. thus far. ib. l.
48. after so is, dele it with. p. 27. l. 24. for the Principles, r. those
Principles. p. 28. l. 1. and 4. for Cannonise, r. Canonise. ib. l. 32. for have
been, r. have been thought. ib. l. 42. for the Papists, r. some Papists. p. 29.
l. 18. for no Religion, r. no revealed Religion. ib. l. 18. there dele and
indeed. p. 31. l. 13. when they, r. when Papists. ib. l. 25. after shown, r. a
full Point. p. 32. l. 28. for you who are, r. you are* ib. l. 38. r. (...). p.
34. l. 4. for Monarchiall, r. Monarchical. ib. l. 47. for Actrocius, r.
Atrocious. p. 35. l. 3. for Capital, r. Capitol. p. 36. l. 30. for the Papists,
r. some of the Papists. p. 37. l. 41. for Lawful, r. venial. ib. l. 53. for of
Protestants r. of some Protestants. for page 325. r. p. 225. p. 39. l. 40. for
Creswel, r. Chreicton. p. 40. l. 8. for Pavure, r. Pauvre. ib. l. 28. and l.
34, for Creswell, r. Chreicton. p. 41. l. 50. for bladed, r. blade. after page
42. r. page 43. ib. l. 1. for carry, r. carrying. p. 44. l. 31. for State*
there, r. State here. p. 45. l. 40. for (...) r. (...) p. 48. l. 41. for the
very, r. that very. p. 54. l. 23. for Chr^ches, r. Churches. p. 55. l. 49. for
serve virtue, r. severe virtue. p. 60. l. 2, for and think, r. think. ib. l. 3.
for baldring, r. bantring. p. 62. l. 2. for Danaeus, r. Alsted. p. 65. l. 38.
for of the intolerable, r. of the so called intolerable. p. 66. l. 23. for ten,
r. nineteen. p. 69. l. 4. for Conculcabis, r. Ambulabis. p, 75. l. 32. after to
be, r. looked on by many as. p. 78. l. 35. for that Queen, r. that by Queen. p.
83. l. 12. for and the, r. any supposed. p. 86. l. 20. for the Conjuncture, r.
a Conjuncture. p. 89. l. 6. for will, r. may. p. 106. l. 8. for great late
accession, r. great accession. p. 114. l. 22. for particulars r. peculiars. p.
125. l. 29. for the Spanish, r. of the Spanish. ib. l. 53. for of reason r. of
his reason. p. 131. l. 41. for ground under the subscription, r. groaned under
the superscription. p. 137. l. 11. after his name one, dele and. p. 139. l. 8.
for doing with, r. doing which. p. 147. l. 23. for that Restoration, r. the
Restoration. p. 155. l. 32. after the words to live, add yearly. p. 160. l. 24.
for 500, r. 5000. p. 164. l. 23. for Idolatry, r. will worship. p. 166. l. 27.
after having, dele of p. 167. l. 32. for sent to petition, r. sent too to
petition. ib. l. 37. after the word expire, dele and die, and add by, ib. l.
ult. for of many. r. of money. p. 169. l. 35. after with, begin a Parenthesis,
ib. l. 38. after the word Country, dele the mark of a Parenthesis, ib. l. 40.
for namely, r. yet. p. 171. l. 2. after of, dele the Colon. ib. l. 19. for
own, r. one. ib. l. 31. after on, dele that. p. 175. l. 8. after Mary, add
and. p. 177. l. 11. after mallem, add me. ib. l. 29. after for, add said he.
ib. l. 39. after eligible, add not. p. 179. l. 34. for penetrating, r.
perpetrating. p. 182. l. 16. for where, r. were. p. 195. l. 45. for ever think,
r. ever thank. p. 209. l. 19. for have, r. has. p. 210. l. 32. after the word
Consistory, dele The Cardinals, and add Those. ib. l. 34. after the word
Heretics, add were. p. 211. l. 38. after that, add the. p. 218. l. 13. for and,
r. or. ib. l. 41. after by, dele the* p. 220. l. 51* after day, add cost him.
p. 223. l. 53. for were, r was. for causes, r. cause. p. 226. l. 46. after to,
dele be, and add her. p. 227. l. 46. after to, add some of. p. 243. l. 36 after
business, r. mostly. p. 249. l. 11. dele used and. ib. l. 26. dele when. p.
252. l. 23 after Interest, add of after England, add that. p. 265. l. 45. for
of, r. in. p. 271. l. 25. dele subtle. p. 273. l. 2. for on, r. or. p. 275. l.
38. for Lucriferous, r. Luciferous, for Luciferous, r. Lucriferous, ib. l. ult,
for sunt, r. sum. p. 282. l. 6 after it, dele and. ib. l. 7. before till, r.
were. ib. l. 10. for prattiques, r. Prattique. ib. l. 11. after have, r. no. p.
283. l. 27. for Reliogionary, r. Religionary. p. 286. l. 25. for angry, r.
ayry. p. 292. l. 34. for officii, r. officio. p. 303. l. 29 after men, add in
p. 304. l. 37. after them, dele these words, that is to say, immediately on the
King's Decease. p. 307. l. 10. for Custodii r. Custodiri. p. 316. l. 34. for
diffent, r. different. p. 317. l. 32. for Metroplysical, r. Metaphysical. p.
321. l. 12. for gave, r. give. p. 323. l. 22. dele the first and. p. 330. l.
25. for Lutheran, r. Calvinian* p. 345. l. ult. for haeredes, r. haereditates.
p. 355. l. 48. after in, add sese volvitur, and dele se convertitur. p. 357. l.
23. for all, r. any. p. 358. l. 16. dele that.


