A PETITION TO THE PETITIONERS.
5. Feb. 1679/80
THat there are a great number of subtle Engineers abroad, who under the Veil
of Piety and Justice, invent false and scandalous reports of the Government,
and Chief Magistrates of the Kingdom; daily laboring to imprint false
suggestions in the hearts of their fellow Subjects, with design, by that means
to put us together by the Ears, that they may once more make a scramble not for
the Good but for the Goods of the Nation.

It is most certain that there never was a violent attempt to make a change in
Government, or to force any thing from Governors, that ever any got any thing
by it, but such as had nothing to loose. By the very Constitution and Nature of
all Monarchy and Kingly Governments, Kings are at their Liberty to Call and
Assemble their Councils when they please; and Parliaments are no other, in
England, than the Kings Great Council, and give themselves no other name as
yet: and at this time His Majesty has been pleased by Proclamation of signify
His Resolutions of Proroguing the Parliament; and upon an Address being made
unto Him for their Sitting, he did forbid the Agitating or Presenting any more
Petitions to that purpose, yet nevertheless some men amongst us, with
indefatigable Industry and great Cunning, persuade others to join with them to
desire that of the King which he has declared against, and in such a manner
too as he has forbid, and therefore they can expect no other then to be again
denied: mark then what may be the Consequence of this proceeding. There is
nothing in the world more common than for one man having made a request unto
another, though for so trivial a thing as it matters not whether it be obtained
or no, yet if it be denied, he that is so denied will be displeased with the
other for denying; and on the other side, we know that over much importunity
stirs up wrath: may not then this sort of proceeding beget an enmity between
the King and His people, and when that has happened, it has often so fallen
out, that they have not been reconciled till experience has discovered that a
Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand: It looks like a Devilish Art to
drill the Nation into Rebellion, and it is not unlikely but that the next thing
when the Subscriptions are finished, will be to persuade the people to require
that with their Arms which they have Petitioned for with their Hands; or that
these men that are thus irregularly violent for the Parliaments Sitting against
the Kings will, may be as active, in case they should Sit, to abett and assist
them to Act what they think fit, be it right or wrong, and that it is not
impossible for Parliaments to do ill things, there be too many presidents.

There is nothing more dangerous to manage, or more doubtful in event, than to
bring in changes and alterations in the form and nature of Government, it is as
dangerous as to remove the Foundation of a House, in doing whereof the whole
Building will be shaken, and besides the danger of falling, it will receive
more hurt by shaking, than it does good by the new Reparation, to attempt to
force the King to call a Parliament against his will, is an attempt to change
the very Nature and Foundation of the Government, for hitherto Parliaments were
to Sit when the King pleased, but now some would have it that they must Sit
when some of the people please. Anguis sub herba Latet, there is a Snake in the
Grass, something is to be feared lies hid, not apparent to every Eye, else what is
the matter with us, is any man's Lawful Liberty restrained? Is any man's Property
invaded? Is the Protestant Religion any ways injured by the Government? But
zealously Asserted and Protected; are there not Laws sufficient, in a short
time, utterly to root out Popery from amongst us, to say truth our causeless
jealousies and fears, the old bane of the Nation, are our chief grievances: do
we fear the French Invading us, let us Arm our selves with resolution against
he comes, stoutly to repel him, but do not let us do his work for him before he
comes, by cutting our own Throats. There is no destruction so great as when we
destroy our selves, nor no greater encouragement and temptation to an Enemy
than to see us at variance. The Romans attained to their great Empire by the
Dissensions and Civil-Wars which they cunningly fomented amongst their
Neighbors; rather than by force of their Arms; and they themselves again fell
to ruin by the same means. The Contest between King Harold and his Brother
Toustain, did much facilitate the Norman Conquest. It were a great deal more
plausible to see a Petition to His Majesty for leave to invade this great
Bugbear the French King, than that that is now on Foot, perhaps the rattling of
such a Role of Parchment might have frightened all his Hobby-Horses into
Germany, or some other more remote Country.

If the Series and Course of Government must be changed every time a
Discontented or Dissenting party think fit, there will never be any settlement,
for it is impossible there should be such Laws as will please all; this Sect is
for one Form of Worship and Government, the other for another, the third for a
third, and all the rest of each several Sect (wherewith we too much abound) is
for a byway by it self: the Drunkards like not those Laws which restrain their
Tippling, the Lascivious men are for Community of women, the Idle and Lasie that
are poor and will not Labor, they are for Levelling: the Bravoes would have no
man Hanged for gentiley borrowing a Sum upon the Road; the vain Extravagant who
has wasted his Estate in Riot, he is for a year of Jubilee, a Reasumtion of his
Estate, and Release from his Debts: it is but the Good only that are pleased
with Good Laws, and such sort of men are not the greater number in all Nations:
Therefore to prevent the unreasonable desires of unreasonable men, where ever
were Restraints upon men in all well Ordered Commonwealths touching Petitions,
even in those States where the Government was most Popular: when Rome was a
Popular State, none were permitted upon pain of death to present any Petition
to the State without the privity and consent of the Senate, and this had the
reputation of the most necessary Law that could be, the like Rule is now
observed in that Ancient and Flourishing State of Venice: which sort of
Government many have an acking Tooth after, and would like enough have an
acking Heart if they had it; there it is not permitted that any present any
Petition or Request, unto the Senate, without the advice of the Council of
Sages. A notable custom it was that was amongst the Locresians that he that
would present any Petition or Request to have it pass into a Law, was
constrained to move it with a Rope about his Neck, wherewith he was upon the
place to be strangled if he failed to prove the Law by him moved for to be
profitable for the people, so dangerous was Innovation, and Novelty of Laws and
Liberty, for all sorts of people to meddle with the Government. Looked upon
amongst the Ancients, whose examples we ought to follow in things of good
success how unjustifiable and irregular, then is the course now practiced in
procuring Subscriptions to Petitions, as if every ordinary man that is hardly
able to write his name, were able to judge when it is necessary for a Parliament
to sit, and when not: but since what is past cannot be recalled, this Petitioner
humbly desires those that were seduced to Subscribe the Presumtive Petition, to
proceed no further, it is no disgrace to desist upon perse^^^ing the evil,
Humanum est erare sed in errore perseverare belluinum est. Sometimes to Err may
be the fault o'th best,
In faults to persevere belongs but to a beast.


For your own selves sake (dear Fellow Citizens and Countrymen) let us enjoy
Peace while we may, violent Remedies should be applied but to desperate
Diseases, and then only when there is no other hopes left. It concerns us very
narrowly to look about us that we be not seduced to work our own ruin by men
who have no other hopes to enrich themselves but by fishing in troubled waters.
A Civil-War is the greatest misery that can befall a Nation. Oh! What bloody
Masacres it produces, cruel Revengings, Exactions, Robberies, Rapes,
Depopulating of Cities, and Burning of Towns? Infinite and unexpressible are
the Calamities and Miseries which proceed from Rebellion, a word is enough to
the wise, but though you Bray a Fool or a Factious man in a Mortar, yet will
they not forsake their Folly: Therefore the Petitioner concludes with a
Scripture Phrase, which will certainly influence men of Religion. If it be
possible as much as lies in you live peaceably with all men, Romans xii. 18.

FINIS.

