THE VISIONS OF Government, WHEREIN The Antimonarchical Principles and
Practices of all Fanatical Commonwealths-men, and Jesuitical Politicians are
discovered, confuted, and exposed.

By EDWARD PETTIT, M. A. and Author of the Visions of Purgatory, and Thorough
Reformations.

Morosophi Moriones pessimi. LONDON, Printed by B. W. for Edward Vize, at the
Sign of the Bishop's Head over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. M DC
LXXXIV.

TO THE High, Potent, and Noble PRINCE, JAMES Duke, Marquess, and Earl of
ORMOND in ENGLAND and IRELAND; Earl of Ossery and Brecknock, Viscount Thurles,
Baron of Arclo, and Lanthony, Lord Licutenant General, and General Governor of
His Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland Lord of the Regalities, and Liberties of the
County of Tipperary; Lord Chancellor of the famous Universities of Oxford and
Dublin; Lord High Steward of His Majesty's Household; One of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council in England, Scotland, and Ireland, and Knight of the
Most Noble Order of the GARTER.
May it it please Your Grace,
I Humbly presume to take this opportunity of congratulating the late
Deliverance of your Grace's Noble Son, his Excellency the Earl of Arran, under
whose Care and Conduct, the flourishing Kingdom of Ireland injoyces both Peace
and Plenty at this day: and I hope Your Grace will be pleased to accept of
these honest labors of my Pen, in defense of that Monarchy, which you have so
long assisted with your Counsels, so often vindicated with Your Sword. My Lord,
There never was a wiser Government, never a more Gracious Sovereign, never a
more faithful Subject than Your self. All your Princely Virtues will make Your
Grace an Illustrious Pattern to the Ages to come, who cannot be paralleled by
any that are past. He that compared Your Grace to Barzillai, did it, because
among all David's Worthies, there was none that for Greatness, Fidelity, and
long Experience, might compare with You: and yet You as far exceed his recorded
Merits, as the Irish Seas do the little River of Jordan. May the ever-living
God make Your Grace as far excel him in length of days, by adding to Your
Illustrious Life, those which in his Divine Wisdom he has been pleased to take
from Your Right Honorable Father, and from Your Noble Son, the late Earl of
Ossery; and thus make up to us our loss here upon Earth, and Yours with a late,
but glorious Immortality, with them in Heaven. This is the hearty Prayer of all
that Fear God, and Honor the King, and in particular, of

Your Grace's most humble and obedient Servant, EDWARD PETTIT.

THE CONTENTS.
VISION I.
THe Introduction. The Ghost of S. Jerome, a Native of Hungary, after a relation
of the present State of that Kingdom, condemns their Rebellion, from the
Doctrine and practice of the Christians of his time. The Grand Confederacy
against Christian Religion and Government, discovered in a Dialogue betwixt the
Ghosts of the late Vizier Cuperlee, a General of the Jesuits, and the Earl of
Shaftsbury. The reason why the Fanatics of England, lament the defeat of the
Turks. A parallel in some new Remarques betwixt them. Whether was the more
Unchristian, to wish the success of the Turkish Arms before Vienna, or of the
Moors before Tangier. The impious and foolish conceit of preventing Arbitrary
Government, under the Protection of the Grand Seignior. p. 1

VISION II.
THe miserable state of the Christians under the Turks: the happy condition of
the people of England: Good Government the reason of it: The Malecontens
described and exposed: The Argument that converted and confirmed a Jew in the
Christian Faith: He confutes and condemns the Fanatics for their Rebellious
Murmurings and Practices: He proves Monarchy to be of Divine Institution, and
the best of Governments. The Monarchy of England the best in the World. The
design of Hobbs's Leviathan and of Nevil's Plato Redivivus, they are both in
the extremes, and both exploded. The Ghosts of Hobbs, Machiavel, and some other
modern Politicians, quarrel about Pre-eminence. Lucifer not able to decide the
Controversy, referrs it to Bradshaw; He determines for Richard Baxter, upon
the account of that Maxim, that Dominion is founded in Grace. The Folly of it
discovered in his Book entitled A Holy Commonwealth; and the Villainy of it in
the Practices of the late Commonwealth of England. p. 45

VISION III.
THe monstrous Loyalty of the Fanatics: Their several Ridiculous Policies; the
growth and design of the late Hellish Conspiracy. The two fundamental
Principles of the Good Old Cause. First, That All Civil Authority is derived
Originally from the People: The extreme villainy and folly of this Proposition
thoroughly examined, and by a Civilized Cannibal condemned. The Second, That
Birthright and Proximity of Blood give no Title to Rule or Government: and that
It is lawful to preclude the next Heir from his Right of Succession to the
Crown. The great impiety and folly of this Proposition fully discovered and
condemned by an Indian of New England. The Authors and Abetters of them both,
exposed. The great Wisdom and Goodness of our present Gracious Sovereign, in
securing to this Monarchy the right and lineal descent of the Crown. p. 147

VISION IV.
THe wicked Policy of raising a mean or evil opinion of the Sovereign in the
minds of the Subjects. The trivial and unreasonable occasions of such an
opinion, a pleasant instance thereof in the Case of the Salique Law; it is
condemned by an Hermaphrodite. Better that the Sovereignty should be in one
Woman than in five hundred men. The Sovereignty of England in a single Person.
The Heresy of the Whiggish Lawyers. Those that (...) of the Antiquity of
Parliamentes and those that vilify them, are Commonwealths men, and enemies
both of King and Parliament. The Characters of several Commonwealths-men; good
advice to them. A Panegyric upon the King, the Duke, the Royal Family, and all
the True-hearted Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, and Commonalty of this Realm, an
hearty Prayer for them. p. 217

Books Printed for, and are to be sold by Edward Vize, at the Bishop's Head
over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.
A Discourse of Prayer: Wherein this great Duty is stated, so as to oppose some
Principles and Practices of Papists and Fanatics; as they are contrary to the
Public Forms of the Church of England, established by her Ecclesiastical
Canons, and confirmed by Acts of Parliament.

A Discourse concerning the Trial of Spirits: Wherein Inquity is made into Men's
Pretenses to Inspiration for publishing Doctrines in the Name of God, beyond
the Rules of the Sacred Scriptures. In opposition to some Principles and
Practices of Papists and Fanatics; as they contradict the Doctrines of the
Church of England, defined in her Articles of Religion, established by her
Ecclesiastical Canons, and confirmed by Acts of Parliament.

A Spittle Sermon Preached In Saint Brides Parish Church, on Wednesday in
Easter Week, being the Second Day of April, 1684. Before the Right Honorable
the Lord Mayor, the Court of Aldermen, and the Sheriffs of the now Protestant,
and Loyal, City of London. These three, by Thomas Pittis, D. D. Chaplain in
Ordinary to his Majesty.

Advice to the Readers of the Common Prayer, and to the People attending the
same: With a Preface concerning Divine Worship. Humbly offered to
Consideration, for promoting the greater Decency and Solemnity in performing
the Offices of Gods Public Worship, administered according to the Order
established by Law amongst us. By a well meaning (though unlearned) Laick of
the Church of England, T. S.

The Life of the Learned and Reverend Dr. Peter Heylin, Chaplain to Charles I.
and Charles II. Monarchs of Great Britain. Written by George Vernon, Rector of
Bourton on the Water in Gloucestershire.

The Crafty Lady: Or the Rival of Himself: A Gallant Intriegue. Translated out
of French into English, by F. C. Ph. Gent.

ERRATA.
The Reader is desired to take notice of two mistakes which escaped the Press.

PAge 22. line 16. for Castles, read Cabal^; p. 29. blot out with Liquors not
Symbolical.

THE First VISION OF GOVERNMENT.
The CONTENTS.
The Introduction: The Ghost of S. Jerome a Native of Hungary, after a relation
of the Present State of that Kingdom, condemns their Rebellion, from the
Doctrine and Practice of the Christians of his Time. The grand Confederacy
against Christian Religion and Government, discovered in a Dialogue betwixt the
Ghosts of the late Vizier Cuperlee, a General of the Jesuits, and of the Earl
of Shaftsbury. The Reasons why the Fanatics of England lament the Defeat of
the Turks; a parallel in some new remarques betwixt them: Whether was the more
Unchristian, to wish the Success of the Turkish Arms before Vienna, or of the
Moors before Tangier. The impious and foolish conceit, of preventing Arbitrary
Government, under the Protection of the Grand Seignior.

THE Famous Story of the Apparition of Buda in Hungary, after the successful
Victory which the Christians obtained over the Turks at Barkan, is so generally
known, that I need not relate it again: I am sure that when it was first told
to me, it made such an impression upon my Fancy all that day, that I no sooner
slept at night, but I dreamed at such a swift rate, that I was got as far as
the Berg Towns, famous for those profound and rich Mines of Silver, in
possession of the Rebels under the Command of Count Teckeley. Whether it was
my Fear or Curiosity that let me drop down to the bottom of one of them, I
cannot certainly tell: But I no sooner found my legs again, but methought I
marched through a dark and narrow Passage; at the farther end of which, I
espied a very old Man with a long white Beard, sitting at a Table, with a dim
Light and a Book before him, and laying his right hand upon a Deathshead, he
seemed to weep very bitterly. Bless me, quoth I! Where am I? In Limbo Patrum?
Have I stumbl'd upon one of the Antediluvian Patriarchs? What Venerable Sage is
this? I am resolved to know what part of the Chronology he belongs to. In order
to it, I advanced three or four steps, with a design to ask him his Name: but
as soon as he lifted up his head, I perceived that it was S. Jerome, the most
eminent Scholar that ever that Born at Stridon.
Nation bred, and a worthy Father of the Latin Church. I was extremely amazed
to meet with him so far under ground; and being desirous to know the Reasons of
it, he prevented my boldness, by saying, You may wonder to meet with my
Effigies or Ghost in any other place under the Sun, but in the Chapel of the
Nativity of Bethlehem, Sandys Trav. p. 141.
where I spent the latter part of my Life in those Religious Duties which
became so Sacred a place: you may wonder, that I, who lived and died where the
Savior of the World and the King of Glory was born, should here appear where
the Mammon of Unrighteousness is hatched in the Womb of the Earth. I should be
much more surpised, Holy Father (said I) to meet you upon the surface of it,
which is all over stained with the Garbage of Insidels steeped in whole streams
of Christian Blood, as if they had utterly banished the Doctrine of that Prince
of Peace. How! cried he, have the Goths overrun the World again? Is my Native
Soil trodden down once more by those impure Barbarians? No, cried I, they are
not called Goths nor Vandals neither; but they style themselves The Brethren,
the Elect, Holy Saints, and Reformed Christians. These are (replied he) fine
Titles which some ancient Heretics usurped and abused; but pray let me know
their present case, as short as you can. I shall with all submission, said I,
give you an impartial account of them to the best of my memory.

This your Native Kingdom of Hungaria, after many revolutions, from being a
Province of the Roman Empire, fell at last into the possession of the Austrian
Family, which now upholds the small remains of the Western parts of it in
Germany. Ferdinand the Brother of Charles the Fifth, laid claim to it in right
of his Wife, who was Sister to the unfortunate Ludovicus the Second; but the
Hungarians made choice of John Sepusio Vaivod of Transylvania; who, to settle
himself, called in Solomon the Magnificent, Emperor of the Turks. John Sepusio
dying, left only an Infant, who was Crowned in his Cradle: upon this, the
Turkish Emperor, who had restored the Father, under pretense of protecting the
Son, seized the Regal City of Buda, with many other Towns, and filled them with
his own Garrisons; upon which, the Hungarians seeing their growing danger, did
with universal consent, elect the aforesaid Ferdinand their King, as best able
to defend them; in whose Family it has continued for an hundred and forty
years; their Elections being matter of Formality only. They took the best
course (replied the Father): What is the reason that they now revolt from them?
You must understand (said I) that these Princes of the House of Austria are
great Patrons of the Jesuits (a pestilent sort of Heretics) who have poisoned
the Christian World with their damnable Doctrines, of Deposing and Killing
Sovereign Kings and Princes: and though one would think this were enough to
inflame all the Potentates of the Earth against them: yet they have gained so
much upon the Emperor, that (upon the account of their forsaking the Romish
Superstitions) they have not only advised him to abridge them of some of their
Civil Rights, but to persecute them with extreme Rigor for the sake of their
Religion: upon which, a Party of them have renounced their Allegiance to their
Temporal Lord, have set up one of his sworn Subjects against him; and to
confirm him, have recalled the Turks, the Disciples of one Mahomet, who has
damned many Millions of men with his impure Doctrines, made up of a monstrous
confusion of Arianism, Judaism and Paganism, and now threatens all Religion
with his Blasphemies, and all Christendons with his Arms.

What! said he, looking as austerely upon me (as if Ruffinus had peep't over my
shoulder) because they are persecuted by the Counsels of the Jesuits, will they
be damned by their Doctrines? Was there ever such a Mystery of Iniquity since
the subtle Serpent twined about the Tree with the forbidden fruit in his mouth?
Was there ever such an Age as this? Surely these are the last and norst of
days; and I am certain it was not so in those wherein I lived: and were I now
amongst them, I should tell them, that the Christians did not revolt from
Constantius though an Arian, nor rebel against Julian, though an Apostate, and
both Persecutors. They did not call in the Goths to refine the Gospel, nor the
Persians to reform them from Idolatry. They took up the Cross to suffer with
their Savior, but they did not take up Arms to rebel against his Vicegerent.
They wrote against Heresies, but durst not so much as speak evil of Dignities.
So that as the Practices of these days are much differing from the Piety of
the former; so let them pretend to what they will of the latter, it is Ambition
makes great Traitors, and Covetousness little Rebels: for the first, pray
observe my Commentary upon that Text, Put them in mind to be subject to
Principalities and Powers, and to be ready to every good work. Quod quidem
Comment. S. Hier. in cap. 3. Epist. ad Titum.
praeceptum, etc. which precept in this and that other place (viz. Romans 13.) I
think to be therefore given, because at that time the opinion of Judas of
Galilee was yet fresh, and had many followers, and of which there is mention
made in the Acts of the Holy Apostles; for before those Acts 5. 36.
days rose up Theudas, boasting himself to be some body. Now for the second,
And in the days of Taxing arose Judas of Galilee, who proposed it as probable
from the Law, that none but God should be called Lord, and that those who paid
their Tenths to the Temple, should not pay Tribute to Caesar.

Ay, but Holy Father (said I) I told you, that they were persecuted for the
sake of their Religion, and therefore cannot be said to rebel out of
Covetousness.

I confess (replied he) that a blind zeal may carry them a great way; but such
sight not so much against the Idol, as for the Gold that is about it. It Is for
this gay dross (pointing to the Silver Ore) that they drag the glittering Steel
from the bowels of their Mother Earth, to sheath it by an unnatural War, in one
another. They quarrel not for Heavenly Graces, but for Earthly Plunder: they
sight not to refine their Religion, but their Gold: it is for this, the Turk,
who hates an Image, becomes an Idolater by his Covetousness; and the True
Protestant turns Jesuit to worship this Mass: and since the Banners of Mahomet
are the Ensigns of Mammon, it is no wonder that so many crowd under them.

At this I heard a mighty clashing of Armor, and a great confused noise of
people howling and groaning; upon which, the Candle before S. Jerome burnt
blue: and by the last light of it he dissolved into a shower of Tears, and so
in a Mist vanished away. I was now left in the dark, not knowing which way I
came in, or how to get out again: and therefore I stood my ground, expecting to
see what would be the event of that great Hurly Burly I heard: at last a pair
of great Gates opened, and there crowded in a vast number of Turks, all bloody
and wounded, stripped stark naked, shivering and groaning, and crying, How has
the Mufti deceived us! What a prodigious Impostor does our great Prophet
Mahomet at last prove to us! the first promising us victory if we fight, and
the second a Paradise if we die. -- But what did they promise you for running
away? cried a great number of ugly she Devils, (with nasty duggs, pushing them
forward with flaming Torches) Had ye not superfine notions of the state after
death, think you? Are you not pretty Companions for rolling black-ey'd women,
when your carcasses are nothing but dust or putrefaction? assure your selves we
are all the Company you are like to keep; and if this be your Paradise, you
shall enjoy it for evermore.

These were no sooner disposed of where those implacable Furies thought fit,
but I saw a great number, as I thought, under a more cruel discipline: for they
were driven along by an huge and terrible tall Fiend, branding them on the
backs with red hot half Moons; and their faces were all oversmear'd with blood:
asking who they were, I was told that they were the Teckelites, and that
Lucifer had taken particular care of them, by separating them from the honester
Turks, by cutting off their foreskins, and had bedaubed their faces with the
blood of their Circumcision, in token of their renouncing their Christian
Baptism, and to mark them out for the greater Damnation.

I was no sooner got clear of those numerous wretches, but I espied a
Gentleman, whom I formerly knew, and who was acquainted with most of the
affairs of Christendom, and had travailed through most parts of Turkey; but
before I could accost him, there came between us the renowned Vizier Cuperlee,
raging and fretting with so much wrath and fury in his face, that he made all
tremble before him.

However, as soon as he was past, Signior Christiano (for that was my friends
name) came to me, and inviting me to follow after him, told me that I should
both hear and see things worth my Observation: and indeed we had not gone a
Furlong, before the haughty Vizier fell on his knees, and laying his hand on
his breast, and bowing his head: O Mahomet ( cried He) our holy and great
Prophet, why have thou suffered so much shame and dishonor to hefall the
Ottoman Forces, that were raised to propagate thy Faith and holy Religion, to
the ends of the Earth? Whilst I governed the Divan, all things, we undertook,
prospered, both at home and abroad; but now I understand that the Banner that
bears thy Sacred name, is carried in Triumph to the Idolatrous City. And the
Musselmen, Rome.
thy true disciples, flee before the face of Gaurs and Unbelievers; see here
the Carcasses of thy proselytes that come from the burning sands of Libya, lie
here unburied in this cold Climate, where Rocks of Ice blunt the Sunbeams!
Grant we may revenge this loss, this dishonor, upon these unwashed Christians;
that we may flea their Magistrates alive; That we may rip up their teeming
Matrons, and give their Breasts to Wolves and Dogs; That we may send all their
Sacred Priests to the Plough.

Not all of them, cried a Jesuit, who had like to have stumbled over him; I
know not what wrong we of our Society have done you: You are beholding to us
for that posture of affairs that gave an advantage of beginning a War, which in
all probability might have proved very honorable and profitable to the Sultan:
had our designs taken effect in Poland, that King had never hindered yours
before Vienna. Did not We divide the Christian Princes, it were in vain for all
the forces of the East to attacque the united Powers of Christendom: it is we
have weakened the house of Austria; it is we have brought your mortal enemy, the
Spaniard, so low: and although you will not acknowledge Christ; yet I know not
what reasons you have to object against Ignatius Loyola, who was as good a
Soldier as Mahomet; and We have since been as great Merchants.

I do not forget, replied the Vizier, how much the Divan is beholding to your
Conclave; and therefore let this be the agreement betwixt us: We will carry on
the War in the Empire, until you have gained the Popedom, and when Vienna is
Ours, and Rome Yours, you shall help us to destroy all the Heretics of our
Religion, especially the Persians; and We will assist you to destroy all those
of Yours, particularly the English.

The Bargain was concluded by their friendly parting, but the Jesuit was not
long gone, ere there was a cry, Make room for the King of Poland: At this very
name, the Vizier quaked for fear; but when he saw only a lean fallow Carrion of
a fellow coming toward him; Had the Pox (said He) but sprung such a Mine in
the sides of Sobietski, Our forces had taken Vienna long ago. But it was a
fatal Septem. 9.
day to us, when he with his Young Alexander.
Scanderbeg came upon us; a day wherein the Gaurs have reason to rejoice: and a
day wherein the Tories, replied the Earl of S. had as much reason to give
Thanks. Who are they (said the Vizier)? I never heard of them before. The most
irreconcilable enemies that you have in the World, replied the Earl; and whom
we had utterly destroyed, had not our designs been unfortunately discovered: by
a short relation of which you will know how much I deserved the Kingdom of
Poland at your hands. You must know that the King of England is Guarrantee of
the Peace of Christendom, and by that high Honor conferred upon him by the
Christian Princes, He was in a capacity to turn all the strength of the West
upon you, and not only to free the Empire of Germany from the Arms of France;
but to put both the Dutch and Spaniard also into a condition of sending
Supplies, both of Men and Moneys, besides what he might have afforded of his
own: But we the true Protestants of Great Britain, being oppressed with Popish
and Idolatrous Abominations, stirred up the minds of the people to contend
against the encroachments of the Man of sin: By which means we raised so many
Tumults and Seditions, that he had not only enough to do to keep his own
Subjects in Peace, but indeed it was a wonder that he preserved his own life.
However, We made it uncomfortable enough to him: For though the Occasions were
never so pressing and urgent: Though the Honor and safety of the Nation
depended never so much upon it, we would not grant him a Penny; nay, we would
not let him borrow an Asper of any of his Subjects.

How! Cried the Vizier, smiling, Would you not grant him any? Would you not let
him borrow any? by Mahomet, ' it was bravely done, thou shall have all the
Goggle-ey'd wenches in Paradise; by that very means we gained the Imperial City
of Constantinople. For when Mahomet the Great besieged that City, the miserable
Emperor Constantinus Palaeologus went in vain from door to door to borrow
money, to pay his Soldiers; but when it was taken, to the eternal shame of the
Citizens, there was enough found, not only to supply the Luxury, but the
Covetousness of the Turks. I see now you are our friends, and therefore let us
make a League; an Association be pleased to call it, said the Earl, and let it
be to destroy Popery and Popish Successors. Withal my heart replied the
Vizier, I Will down with their Images, I Will burn their Wooden gods, until the
sap runs out at their Heels; we'll persecute their Crucified God from City to
City. Oh! ay, ay, cried the Earl, Now you have hit upon it, be sure utterly to
abolish the Sign of the Cross, and you will gain the Hearts of all true
Protestants for ever. Well! said the Vizier, now our hands are in, we'll take
care to establish the Protestant Religion, so that no time shall wear it out.
How so, replied the Earl? Why, said the Vizier, you know that one Pope Gregory
has polluted your Christian account or Calendar, by the alteration of ten
days; for the future therefore let all true Protestants date all affairs, from
the Year of Hegira. All the reason in the world, said the Earl; for I Will tell
you what a Sorcerous trick a damned Popish Almanac maker served you. What was
that, said the Vizier? You know, replied the Earl, that the ninth day of
September, the Christian Army came to the Relief of Vienna, that on the tenth
they were clearly Masters of your Camp, and routed your forces. Too true, said
the Vizier. What then? why, in an Almanac which a Gentleman bought at Florence
in Italy, printed for the year 1683, for the 20th day of September, which with
us is the 10th, was this prediction: il gladio di Dio in viscera di Imperio
Ottomanno, principi Christiani molto felici, etc. No more of the Language of
the beast. In English, thus: That the Sword of God should be in the bowels of
the Ottoman Empire, that the Christians should be very happy, etc. How
wonderfully, replied the Vizier, did all your Protestant Prognosticators fib
that year when they so confidently affirmed that we should pull down the Pope,
and overturn the Triple Crown. Don't despair, said the Earl, you have the
prayers of the Brethren: Do but once again clap your Horse-tail to the Beast in
the Revelation, and I Will warrant you, she will run away with the Whore of
Babylon, and give her such a damnable fall as she never yet had. I perceive,
replied the Vizier, you are not very faithful to any body; you do but make
sport with our affliction, but I am sure we have reason to be sorrowful in good
earnest. Oh! that Fatal day, that Black and Gloomy day.

The Earl seeing him in a great fit of grief, turned to his Chaplain, a little
diminutive Puritan, that stood at his back in Querpo. Comfort him up, thou man
of God; Comfort him up, said He, with some portion of Scripture, lest he faint
away. -- -- At this, Mr. Prick Ears opened his mouth, and began to utter, How
are the Mighty fallen! Hold, cried the Earl, have a care of stumbling upon the
Mountains of Gilboa, you know it is about Vienna; apply 'um right, and now go on.

How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished! Tell it not in
London, publish it not in Rome, least the Daughters of the Tories rejoyc, least
the daughters of the Uncircumcised triumph. An excellent Preacher, replied the
Vizier, he cuts out all our Muezims and Dervices, a Bar and half. Pray, Sir,
one word more of Comfort; I am sure you know that every man's fate is written in
his forehead.

Why truly, Sir, replied He, if a man's time be come, he must die; or in short,
if a man's time be come, he must be gone: and never be troubled for the loss of
your men, perhaps in all your Turkish Empire, you cannot find a quarter so many
who are predestined to be killed before Vienna; therefore once more blow up
the Trumpet in Zion, go out once more to fight the Lords Battles; and if any of
those Janissaries die that had a hand in the death of the Grand Seignior, we
will be mindful to Ibrahim the 2^
atone for them; and if they be not disposed for your Paradise, we will take
care to convey them to their fellow laborers, in our Saints Everlasting Rest.

The Vizier seemed very well pleased, for he went away smiling; and besides, a
messenger told him that his Successor the Grand Vizier, who was so
unsuccessfull in the last Campaign, was strangled by the Aga of the Janissaries,
at Belgrade, Which gave him great content. He was no sooner got out of sight;
but the Jesuit returned again, and finding the Earl all alone. My Lord (said
He) truly we laid a dangerous train, which might have blown us all up; the
Metaphor was carried on a little too far: for had the Turks taken Vienna, we
had lost a good College there, and no body knows how far they would have
ravaged further. It Is true! We are bound by the Hospin.
Laws of our Founder, to promote the glory of our Order, though with the Ruin
of Christendom; but we must not do it, by making all the world Turkey: therefore
our Brethren the Presbyterians and Independents were too too Zealous, to wish
the success of their Arms before that City; they push on all their business
with too much violence, and lay themselves too open to the World: and this is
the reason that all their designs miscarry. What a yelping and bawling did they
keep, when they pursued us from one hole to another, when as they might, to
their own knowledge, have taken us napping in their own Conventicles? but they,
to gain their ends, by running us down before the people, have so overshot
themselves, that they have broke their own Necks. For our part we can spare a
few men as well as the Turk, and don't so much value that they over-reacht us,
as that they betrayed themselves: the discovery of their conspiracy has
confounded all our Measures for a whole Age; and we may gape as long for a
Fifth-Monarchy, as the Jews for their Messiah* if they do not carry things more
prudently for the future. Let all things at home therefore be hushed, and
forgotten, and 'twill be enough that the Turks keep the Game a going, though
they do not win all. In the mean time we may so play Ours, as to establish
Christ's Throne in due season, to the utter confusion of all Turkish, Popish,
Arbitrary, Tyrannical Monarchy; and this is the Business I am about, and so
farewell.

As soon as he was gone: And fare Thee well, thou pool and Buffoon, replied the
Earl. Do you talk to me of Establishing, Establishing, and of Fixing a
Fifth-Monarchy? you may as well persuade me to keep the fifth Commandment. I
hate all Fixings and Settlements: Were I confined to any fixed posture but a few
days, the corroding humors in my Blood would eat more holes in my Carcass,
than there is in a Nutmeggrater; and I should wear more Taps, than a Porcupine
has quills; I must fan my blood with perpetual motion, or I die, I die with
restless grief; as the old man of Verona, whom the thoughts of a Confinement to
those bounds He never in his life had past, killed as dead as a door-nail. I
cannot endure the thoughts of Constancy to any one thing; therefore tell me not
of an Established Government, nor of a Church upon a Rock; my head builds
Castles in the Air, my very Soul has the Nettle-springes; I cannot endure any
repose; my whole life was continual Stratagem, and indefatigable Ambuscado; I
delighted in cabals
nothing like Midnight Castles, secret Conspiracies, and tragical Changes, and
to have my part of skulking from one danger to another, with the letchery of
Just escaping what I most justly deserved. I hate all Religions, especially
that which pretends to be unchangeable, and can be so little while a Friend to
any man, that were there none other now in the world but Antony Ashley Cooper,
Antony would fall out with Ashley, and Ashley with Antony, and Cooper with
Both, and there would be Civil Wars in my self for evermore.

It was the pleasantest thing in the world to see with what delight he crept
away, and stole out of the Company; and indeed we were glad to be rid of him,
for we were as weary of him as he was of himself. He was no sooner gone, but
you see, Sir, said my friend, what the case of Mankind is at this day; you have
heard the whole mystery of iniquity unravel'd by the bustling Gentleman of the
Age; and you may easily conclude, what the fatal consequences of such Clashing
and malignant Combinations may be; you may see in the very Vrinal of the
aforesaid Earl, the Complexions of all the Fanatics of England, and know the
reasons that they should have such projects and whimsies in their Pates; they
have all of them a swinging dose of adust Choler in their blood, which is the
reason their heads are so full of wild Capricio's and politic Systems, so that
the supreme Magistrate, under whom they live, has as much need of a Regiment
of Physicians as of Dragoons, of a Magazin of Hellebore as of Gunpowder: and if
all the Enthusiastic knaves and fools were to be confined, it is a question
whether Bedlam or Newgate should be the more populous. The Rabbis hold that
this feral Venom was infused by the sting of the Serpent into the forbidden
fruit, and since has tainted more or less all Humane Race: Therefore where it
prevails above the reason of the man, it turns him into a Devil, and produces
all those disinal effects, that ruffle the World; it makes men Traitorous,
Heady, Highminded, Disobedient, etc. It makes them unquiet, uneasy, fills them
with strange desires, and stranger imaginations and devices, to accomplish
them; no mad, or desperate Lover ever suggested to himself such distant fetches
to obatin his ends; hence our Politic Illuminati, utterly despairing of
attempting any thing at home, since the discovery of their late villainous
Conspiracy, have the folly to imagine, and the wickedness to desire that the
Mahometans may so alarm, and disorder all Christendom; that the King, who to a
Miracle has kept us in peace, may upon some account or other, as might thence
happen, be engaged in such Circumstances of a War, as to give them fresh
opportunities of a Rebellion.

I suppose, Sir (said I) this in process of time will be styled by the Godly of
the Land, The calling in of the Brethren. By my troth, a good Dose of Opium a
la mode de Turcoise would do well to lay their Politic Noddles asleep. But,
Sir, by this your Anatomy of the Saints, we ought rather to pity them for their
Disease, than condemn them for their Sin: for if this be the cause of their
Phrensies, they cannot help them.

They may and ought (replied he) it is true, it has more of the nature of the
Devil in it, than any other Humor of the body; but then consequently it is more
odious to the mind, and cannot so soon soften us into a compliance with it, as
Love or other Passions of that nature. But if a man will run into the
Temptation, he deserves to be punished for the Sin. -- He that goes into a
Conventicle, takes as direct a course to be a Craytor in the sense of S. Peter,
as he that goes into the Stews, to be a Whoremonger in the sense of S. Paul:
And I do not find that S. Chrysostom condemns any thing more, than the very
Curiosity of those Christians in his Time, that went to the Synagogues of the
Jews.

Truly, Sir (said I) I perceive a man had need have a care how he goes into a
Scotch Kirk; for he is in a very fair way to a Turkish Mosch.

Indeed (replied he) their Cupolas' do now and then put me in mind of a Blue
Bonnet: and now it comes into my head, I have observed so many Customs,
Principles and Practices, which are common both to Turks and True Protestants,
that methinks they all ought to wear Turbants.

A good way (said I) to prevent Popish Cornered Caps.

Pray, Sir (said he) don't interrupt me: I tell you seriously, that the design
of Servetus (that great Impostor and Heretic) of reconciling the Turkish
Alcoran to the Christian Religion (as he calls it) had something more than bare
Whimsey and unpracticable Speculation.

O Lord, Sir (said I) how can that be? What fellowship has Christ with Belial
(said the Apostle)? and I may say, What Fellowship has Christ with Mahomet?
You may as well persuade me, that the Loadstone that draws up Mahomets Tomb,
was a piece of Christ's Sepulcher; but let us know what the Blasphemous fool
would be at.

He says, replied my friend, it is easily done; it is but ( says he) taking away
the Article of the Trinity, and these two being joined together, a great
hindrance would be removed; and that the asserting that Article had engaged to
madness whole Provinces.

I believe then, Sir (said I) that Marvel by his Mischiefs of Creeds and
Impositions meant this Madness of whole Provinces. That Merry Andrew of Hull
made a fair way for his project, by vilifying the Athanasian Creed, and calling
that glorious Champion of the Truth [Satanasius] which Creed of his, you know
was composed to distinguish betwixt the Orthodox and the Arian, and to confound
those Blasphemies, from which Mahomet drew his infernal doctrines. But, Sir,
said I, this is but one man.

Oh Sir (said He) those whom He and others call the Sober trading part of the
Nation, all the impious Heretical and Blasphemous Schismatics that abuse the
Sacred Orders of the Church, and vilify the Sacraments, are no small friends
of Mahomets.

The Sober! said I: What! Because Mahomet forbad the drinking of Wine?

Why, replied He, do you think that the only reason why Mahomet forbad the
drinking of Wine, was to prevent the evil Consequences of excess and
intemperance?

So it is said (replied I).

Do you think, said He, that the Devil was such a dull Politician, as to
discountenance a vice so pernicious to mankind, had he not had a design at the
bottom of it, of more fatal consequence to them? Well! i will tell you what just
now comes into my head, I believe that Mahomet was so well acquainted with the
frame of the Christian Religion, and with the nature of those duties required
of us, and of the Sacraments enjoined us, that he concluded it impossible to
overthrow the Christian Faith, and make way for his doctrines, unless he could
abolish the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Now by prohibiting the taste of Wine
to his Disciples and Followers, that Sacrament, according to Christ's
institution, must consequently be neglected or forgotten. And now what think
you of those who never will receive; or of those stupefied Rascals that have
abused it with Asymbolical Liquors, with Liquors not Symbolical, and yet all
this while, come in for a share with our True Protestants?

I have often wondered, said I, at the great progress of so ridiculous and
absurd a Religion as Turcism; but when I consider the fatal Phrensies of
several Heretics disposing them before hand for it, I rest satisfied: However
it is no wonder that the Trading, part of them should side with Mahomet, for
they cannot but admire him for leaving his Merchandising, to go a Preaching and
Fighting. What Trades are they of? pray, said He. Why Sir, said I, I have heard
of Fishmongers, Ironmongers, and Whoremongers.

I will not reflect, said He, upon any man's Calling; there are a great many
honest men of all Trades, excepting of the last (if that be one): but of the
Factious this must be said, that without any great stretching of a Metaphor,
they may even turn Musselmen: I believe that of the 72 Sects among the Turks,
there is scarce any one we could not parallel among the True Protestants. What
is a Silent- meeting of Quakers, but an Herd of Enthusiastic Mutes? And they
will no more pull off their Hats, than a Turk his Turbant; and would sooner
chose to call their Congregation together with the noise of a Crier, than with
the sound of a Bell. The Turkish Marriages are performed by a Caddee or Civil
Judge, as the Fanatics by a Justice of the Peace in the late Times. How
deliciously would our Anabaptists soak and dabble in their Bagnio's? And in the
doctrine of Fatality, they do so jump with our Presbyterians, that one would
think that the Turks fought under Calvin's long Beard, instead of a white
Horse's Tail: Fleaing alive, is a Turkish Cruelty, threatened by our
meekhearted: and such an Assassin as Rumbold would make a true Saracens Head
with one eye. It was a strange thing, and worthy our observation, that in the
same year wherein our True Protestants put King Charles the First to death;
that their Brethren of the Thracian Bosphorus should slay Ibrahim the Second,
their Grand Seignior; and still more strange, that the Jesuit should so
bedevil the uttermost parts of the Earth, as about that Time to bring in the
holy Tartars to assist those Rebels of China, who drove their Emperor
Zunchinius to those extremities, as to hang himself, But to go on, one would
think that the Foreman of the late infamous Ignoramus Jury had learnt his Art
of the most Malicious sort of Turks, when amongst them; for they hold it
meritorious to be perjured, or bring in a false Evidence in a Controversy
betwixt a Turk and a Christian. And that most of the Assembly of Divines came
from the Universities of Aleppo or Scanderoon; for Mr. Ricaut tells us, that
the success of the Mohammedan Arms produces an Argument for the Confirmation of
their Faith; that whatsoever prospers, has God the Author for it; and by how
much the more successful have been their Wars, by so much the more has God
been an owner of their Cause. Now do but examine the tenth proposition
condemned at Oxford, 1683. Possession and strength give a right to govern, and
success in a Cause or Enterprise proclaims it to be lawful and just: to pursue
it, is to comply with the will of God, because it is to follow the Conduct of
his Providence: This is the Doctrine of Owen, Baxter, and Jenkins, and of all
the great sticklers for the good Did Cause; but I think the Laws of England,
and the Arms of Germany and Poland, have almost put it out of fashion. But
moreover, they do so fully agree in their Sanguinary positions and Violent
Practices, that our Saints Militant propagate the Faith of the Gospel, by the
Doctrine of the Alcoran, and are therefore the worst of all Christians, by thus
sympathising with Turks. To qualify a man to be a true Christian, according to
the Peace, as well as the Purity of the Gospel, We will take Grotius his Word
and Rule, for once, in his Book de veritate Christianae Religionis, page 400.
His words are these: Revocatur etiam eadem Occasion ipsis in memoriam, arma
Christi Militibus assignata, non esse, qualibus Mahumetes nititur; sed Spiritus
propria, apta expugnandis Munitionibus, quae se adversus Dei cognitionem
erigunt: pro scuto, siduciam; pro Lorica, Justitiam, etc. They call to mind
upon the same occasion, that the Arms assigned to the Soldiers of Christ, are
not such as support Mahomet, but such as properly belong to the Spirit, being
fitted to the pulling down of strong Holds that exalt themselves against the
knowledge of God; for a Shield, Faith; and for a Breast Plate, Righteousness of
Life.

On the contrary, Sir (said I) the way of Catechizing mankind with Ammunition,
and sanctifying the Nations with Powder and Shot, is the avowed doctrine and
practice of the Dissenters; and to join with Turks, rather than with Papists
(for such they call the men of the Church of England) does not come by any new
way of inspiration into the Pericranions of the Saints; for Cartwright popt
that notion into their heads long ago, as Mr. November. 5. 1683.
Pelling observes in his excellent Sermon preached before my Lord Mayor at Bow:
But shall they have the rewards of Saints? shall they receive the Crown of
Righteousness, that wish siccess to the Arms of Infidels? Oh Heavens! to what
an height of wickedness are they now arrived? They who had need of a Turkish
Veil to hide their Hypocrisy; have now more need of one to hide their Villainy,
if they had any Shame for that, for which an Atheist would blush: and yet, they
call themselves the Reformed Christians. What mortal Tongue can tell the sad
consequences of the taking the Imperial City? What Crowds of innocent people
would have been massacred? What abominable rapes committed? What terrors, and
desolations would those Ravaging Barbarians have carried along with them, like
a flood? What Rivers of Blood would they have sent before, to the very German
Ocean. My very Heart trembles at the thoughts, that any such imaginations
should ever enter into their.

O Sir, (replied He) I perceive you are a Novice too in these Cases, let me
propose one thing to you; What do you think of those persons that would have
sacrificed the Garrison of Tangier to the Fury of the Moors, rather than have
missed of their designs in England? Considering indeed how much the welfare of
Christendom depended upon the protection of Vienna; it was a diabolical thought
to wish it in the hands of the Turks: but considering withal, how much the
Reputation of England depended upon the preservation of the Garrison and People
of Tangier; it was no less dishonorable, no less unchristian-like to abandon
them to the Moors.

Pray, Sir, who did so? (said I). They, said he, who refused to comply with his
Majesty's just demands, when he so earnestly and so frequently moved them for
Supplies for that Garrison, at that time so much in danger. Now let us weigh
the Case; the first was the Result of the flashy Politics of the Zealous of
the Land over a Pipe and a Pot, in a Tavern or an Ale house; but the latter was
the deliberate determination of those, who in particular styled themselves the
Patriots of their Country, and were the most active of all the great Council of
the Nation assembled in Parliament: it is true, they were not many of them, but
they had got such a trick of starting Bugbears at that time, that the Loyal,
the Wise, and the Honest knew not which way to turn themselves.

You know (said I) that the Nation was then in great danger of the Papists at
home.

But, replied He, the Spanish Pilgrims that so affrighted us, it seems, were
driven out of Spain to the Coasts of Barbary, and not visible in these parts.

Sir, said I again, was it not reported to be a Nest and Harbor for Papists.

They (said He) that can make a Turk a true Protestant, can by inverting the
Rule, make a Church of England man a Papist when they please: No, no Sir, they
knew as well they were no Papists, as that they themselves were no Christians,
if they be none who designed the Ruin of so good a King, and of so Righteous a
Government; and had not his Majesty, whose Goodness extends it self to all his
Subjects, as far as the Sun shines, when He had more need of their Help at
home, taken care to preserve them at his own excessive Cost and Charges, they
must have been all lost. But for a further touch of the piety of our true
Protestant Numidians, and to determine the point; Consider that our own
Countrymen are dearer to us by the Laws of Nature and Nations, than Foreigners;
and consider that the Moors are the worst sort of Mahometans, the very spawn of
Incestuous Saracens, and the most barbarous Mongrels of all mankind; and
therefore show me now, if you can, in the Histories of all the Commonwealths
that have been since the world began, such an Instance of unnatural Barbarity:
When did the Athenians, Lacedaemonians, Romans, or Carthaginians ever do the
like! how many emblems of Honor and Reward do we meet with in ancient Coins,
ob Cives servatos, for the saving the lives of fellow Citizens? sed haecest
fides Punica, this is treachery with a vengeance, and not to be paralleled by
any but those Rebels, who after they had destroyed their King and Master, put
the Moors to less trouble, and sold their fellow Subjects to them for Slaves.
Well, delenda est Carthago: -- if those Patriots aforesaid, who are gone in
Pilgrimage for the sake of the good old Cause to the Kings Bench in Southwark,
instead of going over the Thames, were to cross the Seas, and had as many men
as that Town would hold, with nothing but a single Wall for their defense, and
that Charity of theirs aforesaid, they would soon know what it is to nuzzle
with the Monsters of Africa; and the Serpents of the Deserts would hiss at them
for a Generation of Vipers.

Pious Patriots truly (said I) but pray tell me in short, what are the
pretended Reasons for such exorbitant Wishes and Resolutions?

To prevent (replied He) Popery and Arbitrary Government, and that they might
obtain Liberty of Conscience.

It seems, Sir, said I, that they are mightily taken with that Liberty of
Conscience, which they hear is granted to Christians of all sorts, over all the
Turkish Dominions: and since you have been a witness of it, 'Pray give me an
account of it.

Mr. Paul Ricaut (replied he) tells you (Page 188. Histor. of the Present State
of the Ottoman Empire) That Mahomet granted Toleration; but it was before his
Religion was fully established by the Sword, and to comply with the Heretical
Christians of his Time, who favored any Innovations against the Catholic
Faith. But in some places of his Alcoran, he is of another mind, and gives his
Musselmen Instructions to destroy them utterly, hip and thigh, root and branch.
So that his Toleration is just like the late Presbyterians; and only giving
quarter to a man in the heat of the Battle, with an intent to cut his Throat in
cold Blood: and the Mahometans now tolerate Christian Churches; but if they
happen to be ruined by fire, or any other accident, they dare not rebuild them;
as in the fire at Constantinople 1660. wherein many Christian Churches and
Chapels were ruined, and when almost rebuilt, by the piety of the Christians,
were commanded to be thrown down by the Turks, as contrary to their Law. Now
since they dare not meet in any other places, Christianity must necessarily
wear out with the Walls of their Churches, which they dare not so much as
repair; and indeed considering the ignorance of the Greeks and Arabians, the
conservation of the Christian Faith is to be attributed to the strict
observation of Fasts and Feasts.

If, Sir, (said I) our true Protestants, who in the late times abolisht them,
were but to put in their helping hand; I perceive by what you last said, That
they with the Turks, would blot out the very memory of Christianity from off
the face of the Earth, if it were possible for men or Devils to do it: but
after all, methinks, it is very strange, that they should wish themselves under
the protection of the Grand Seignior, for fear of Arbitrary Government.

You will think so, said he, if you will take a small Journey with me.

With all my Heart, Sir, ( said I) and with that methoughts I followed him a
great way through many subterranean windings and turnings, until at last I
espied the light of the day, through a hole at a great distance; and as soon as
we were got into open Air: I have brought you, said He, this way, to avoid the
Confines of Hungary, which are neither pleasant nor safe, by reason of the
present Wars. But now you are in Turkey, come mount with me this winged Steed,
he will outdo either Pegasus or Pacolet, and carry you swift as thought can
fly; and we shall survey the present State of it in a small time.

We went indeed very swiftly, yet I was amazed, considering the noise of their
vast Armies; to see such desolate Wildernesses; to see those rich Countries, so
famous of old for their strength and glory, now nothing but vast Deserts; to
see almost all Judea, a barren Rock, excepting some little shaded Valleys that
were green, and so much of those Countries of Greece, so famous for Husbandry
and Pastorals under the Heathens, lie overgrown and untilled; Religion quite
banished from the one, and Learning from the other: the Highways indeed had
some numbers of People upon them, and their Caravansera's or Public Inns, but
their room was better than their Company: the Cities, some of them large and
populous, but withal, old, and ruinous; and the Inhabitants rude and barbarous;
the Janissaries insulting over the natural Turks, and all over the miserable
Christians. You see now, said He, what a Curse a Tyrannical Government is to
mankind, and what a vast Part of the best Habitable World it has blasted. The
Grand Seignior is the most absolute Monarch that is, or ever was in any Age;
and has one thing peculiar to his Government, which never was known before in
the World, which makes him so prodigal of the Lives of his Soldiers, and that
is this; He is absolute Lord of all the Lands of his Empire, and all his
Timariots hold of him in Capite; for which they serve in the Wars: if he loses
his men in Battle, Sieges, or any other chances of War, He gets by their death,
all New-comers, being obliged to renew their Leases with a considerable sum of
money; and the oftener they fall, the more he gets: whatever in the frame of
his Government seems commendable as the speedy execution of Justice, etc. is by
chance, out of necessity, and depending upon the various Humors of his
Tyrannising Slaves, (their Common Law, if I may call it so, signifying little
or nothing) and they all at his will; the Policy of his Government, still
argues the Misery of his Subjects; and infamous Lusts of the Great Ones, the
extreme wants of the Poor, and the perpetual dangers of them all, make up their
whole lives: and it is under this unlimited Tyrants Banners the Teckelites of
Hungary sight, and the true Protestants of England wish success to his Arms;
whose Lust twenty Nations cannot satisfy, nor twenty Kingdoms his Gluttony,
who ravishes and deflowrs from the Danube to Tigris, and from the Deserts of
Libya, to the Forests of Russia.

They take the same course, Sir, ( said I) to be free from Arbitrary Government
by Turcism, as from Popery by Jesuitism: But pray let us away for England, for
I have had enough of Turkey.

With all my Heart, ( replied He) but by the way, You see what are the
consequences of Schism and Separation; you see how under the pretense of
avoiding those Ceremonies, which they themselves count indifferent in the
Church of England, they would take Sanctuary in a Turkish Mosque, and be
contented to mingle with the impurest Unbelievers, rather than join in
Communion with us; and when they have done, stand it out, and justify it in
the face of Heaven and Earth: I protest, it quite confounds me, but that
Epiphanius tells us of Heretics. (Haer. 18.) that boasted of their Kindred
with Cain, and the Sodomites, and Judas; and said, That they only were endued
with wisdom from on high. And I have read of the Beguardi, a sort of scrupulous
Buffoons in the XIV. Century, that held it was a Sin to kiss a Woman, but not
to lie with Her; But never in all my days, did I ever so much as hear of such
a parcel of Squeamish Hypocrites before, as they are; that can strain at a Gnat
in the Common Prayer Book, but swallow a Camel, even that very Camel that
carries the Alcoran to Mahomets Tomb.

THE Second VISION OF GOVERNMENT.
The CONTENTS.
The miserable state of the Christians under the Turks: the happy condition of
the people of England: Good Government the reason of it: The Malcontents
described and exposed: The Argument that converted and confirmed a Jew in the
Christian Faith: He confutes and condemns the Fanatics for their Rebellious
Murmurings and Practices: He proves Monarchy to be of Divine Institution, and
the best of Governments. The Monarchy of England the best in the World. The
design of Hobb's Leviathan and of Nevil's Plato Redivivus, they are both in the
extremes, and both exploded. The Ghosts of Hobbs, Machiavel, and some other
modern Politicians, quarrel about Pre-eminence. Lucifer not able to decide the
Controversy, referrs it to Bradshaw; He determines for Richard baxter, upon
the account of that Maxim, that Dominion is founded in Grace. The Folly of it
discovered in his Book entitled A Holy Commonwealth; and the Villainy of it in
the Practices of the late Commonwealth of England.

WE were now sailing for England as fast as the Winds, and swift as our Desires
could carry us, when by the way (methoughts) we found a Ienizary floating upon
the Seas, and half starved, who had attempted to make an escape in a little
Cock-Boat from Malta, where he had for some time been detained a Prisoner. As
soon as he was refreshed with a few Cordials, Seignior Christiano knew him very
well: And turning to me, You cannot imagine (said he) how much I have been
beholden to this poor Fellow all along my Travels in Turkey; and with what
fidelity he has attended me through several dangers; and therefore out of mere
gratitude I am bound to take care for his Preservation.

I thought Sir, (said I) there had been nothing in Turkey but Tyranny,
Perfidiousness and Cruelty to be met withal. Yes (replied he) there is a
certain thing amongst them called Good Nature by us (for none other Language
can express it) which influence's some of them with that Candor and Humanity,
as will make them stand fairer before the Great Tribunal, than the Murtherous
Zeal of Treacherous and Fanatical Christians. But for this, we are rather
beholding to the particular dispositions of men, than to the Constitution of
their Government, which in it self is unnaturally Cruel and Barbarous:
therefore because some may say, that I have represented the State of the
Christians under the Turks to be more desperately deplorable than really it is;
I do confess that you may meet with Civilities from some particular persons
amongst them; and that they allow the Graecians the free exercise of their
Religion; insomuch, that at Larissa, the chief City of Thessaly, the
Archbishop (even in the time of the Grand Seignior's residence there) appears
in some splendour in his Cathedral Church of S. Achilleus; and at Tornovo a
great Town and a Bishops See, not far from thence, there were not long ago, no
less than Eighteen Christian Churches, and but Three Moschea's: But, as I told
you before, these Churches must in time fall to ruin; and the reason they are
allowed so many, is, because they being so numerous, might upon great
extremities of oppression revolt, and reconcile themselves to the Latin Church
for their Protection. However, they pay dear enough for that Liberty they have:
and what do you think of a motion in the Divan, of putting most of the
Christians throughout all their Dominions to death upon any memorable defeat?
Therefore what a miserable condition are they in, who are like to lose their
Religion if the Turks prevail, or their Lives, if they be routed? And indeed
they are permitted to enjoy both, as the Caloires of Mount Athos do the
Treasures of their Chapel, which the Turks can surprise, and take away when
they please. The desolation, waste and barrenness of those Countries, formerly
so rich, must needs be occasioned by the Tyranny of that Government, wherein
the Peasants durst not sow what they fear the Soldiers would reap: and they
have a saying, That were it not for the Timariots, there would no Grass grow
where the Grand Seignior's Horse sets his foot. It Is true, that the very
Luxuriant Temperature of some Grounds in so vast an Empire, produce Rich Vines,
Rice, with most sorts of Grain, Cotton, Sesamum, etc. with little Industry: but
all the Provinces are vastly altered from that state we read of in Ancient
Histories: and on the contrary, England as much for the better, from what it
was in former times: So that those of England are very wicked, that wish the
success of the Turkish Arms abroad; and very Ignorant, or what is worse, very
ungrateful, that dislike their own Government, and mutiny against their Prince
at home.

We were now come as far as Greenwich, where we landed; and the calm and bright
Sunshine Day, in the most delightsome time of the Spring, invited us to take a
walk to the top of the Hill: as soon as I had breathed a little, I observed,
that the Turk we brought along with us, was almost ravished with delight and
wonder: And surely, (said he) this is the Paradise of the Western World, and
the Garden of all Pleasures: How thick is this Noble Country set with shining
Palaces in the midst of Verdant Groves intermixed with embroidered Plains of
diverse colors? and that vast and splendid City (pointing to London) stretching
it self out in full ease beyond the reach of mine eyes, upon the Banks of this
large and open River?

Methinks truly, (said I to Seignior Christiano) it is as Noble a Prospect as
ever I beheld: yet I cannot forget that of Constantinople from Scutari or
Galata; the Towering Moschea's, with their gilded Half Moons, over-topping the
Cyprus Trees, put me in mind of the Hesperides of the Poets with Golden Fruit.

You might better (replied he) have bestowed your hovering fancy upon the
Apples of Sodom: for how finely soever that City appears at a distance, there
is not a more confused dirty hole of the bigness, in the Universe, when you are
in it; the Houses resemble so many Prisons, and the Inhabitants are all Slaves.

It Is our condition (said the Turk) to which we were born, and in which we must
live and die, (and although some of our Order, have, like the Praetorian Bands
of Rome, or the Mammalucs of Egypt of late years, been somewhat too insolent)
yet the Grand Seignior is Lord of all we have on this side the Grave: we eat
his Bread, and drink his Water, and breathe his Air; and therefore we must do
and suffer his will; we may live as long as we can, but we must dye when He
please: we must have Patienza sin a perder la testa e poi patienza. Patience to
the loss of our heads, and patience after that. Since the case is thus with us,
his other Subjects have little encouragement to build, plant, or sow, any more
than what will protect them from the immediate Injuries of Hunger and Cold, or
to provide for the next Generation, who are so miserable in their own. But
pray, Sir, (said he to me) what is the reason that the people of England are so
very Rich, so very Happy, as they seem to be?

They really are so ( replied I) if they knew their own happiness. The people
of England by the Providence of God, and the Goodness of their Princes, from
the Times that were before your Empire had a Name or Being, have enjoyed many
great Privileges under the Name of Property; and what may seem strange to you,
the Prerogative of the King, is the very Property or Liberty of the Subject; a
Mystery as unknown to you in our State, as the Articles of the Christian Faith
in our Church.

It Is hard indeed I believe (said he) many of your own people do'nt understand
it.

I wish they did ( said I), for our Government is so divinely tempered, that
the Honor of the King consists in the Happiness of his People; and the
Happiness of the People, in the Honor of the King. He, by his good and
wholesome Laws protects and encourages them, and they all ought to honor and
defend him. By his Laws those Lands have those delightful limits and
boundaries, which you see; and instead of Thorns and Briars, are rich in what
is good for food, and pleasant to the taste. By his Laws, the Lusts, Ambition
and Covetousness of men are kept under; every one being confined to his proper
Business and Station, to the increase of Virtue, Honor and Justice. Hence
it is, that you see the waters burdened with the Fruits and Products of other
Nations, and the Land with our own. Hence it is, that all Arts and Sciences
flourish, and even from our improved Arts of War for our defense, you learn how
to invade the effects of our peace. Look but into that famous City of London,
and see how vastly the condition of mankind is altered, from what you find it
in Constantinople; here you will see the Markets crowded with fatted Sheep and
Oxen, there with lean Slaves, whose only hopes depend upon the being bought by
a good Master; here our greatest trouble is, to get a good Servant; and if they
were but all good Subjects, there is not a better King in the World.

Not good Subjects (cried He)! then it is too good a Land for so bad a People;
but methinks, they seem to have little either of Business or Trouble, for they
walk to and fro as they please: pray, Sir, let me be so happy, as to partake
with them of their great freedom.

At this we went down into the Walks, and on a sudden fell upon two Persons
that were talking together very earnestly: we were unwilling to interrupt them;
yet kept at such a distance as to overhear them (for they talked very loud) one
of them saying, well! well! I confess, I have pretty well feathered my Nest,
but let the Kings affairs go how they will, I will even secure my self, I will
even lie and Lowng ( as they call it) let others stickle that have a great deal
to get, and little to lose; for my part, I am for Cokesing of Mammon, I Will not
hazard my Fortunes; truly not I. Indeed, said the other, things are carried
very strangely at Court; I wonder what becomes of all the money; I think they
did well to vote that no body should lend him any upon any Branch of his
Revenue. Of whom do they speak, said the Turk? Of the King ( said I) -- And who
made that Vote? the Parliament (said I). And what is that replied He? The Great
Council of the Nation, into which, some Seditious persons crept in of late
years, and promoted such a Vote. And who are these persons that talk at this
rate, said He? Why, said I, they have both of them very good Offices under the
King; how many Aspers a day have they, said He again? Aspers! (said I) do you
talk of Aspers! they have at the rate of 4. or 5000. pieces of Eight of Yearly
Revenues, besides what they get by the bye. At this the Turk fell into such a
rage, that he had like to have run over me, and looking sternly upon them,

Ye ungrateful Dogs! quoth He, do Ye eat your Masters Bread, to vomit it up in
his face again? were ye in the Grand Seigniors Dominions, he would scorn to
defile the meanest Slave he has, by being your Executioner, but would cram ye
both into a hole, until ye either devoured one another for Hunger, or that
those Mouths (that spoke those words) eat up those Hands that used to feed
them. And then, turning to me, Are these, said he, the fruits of Virtue, Honor
and Justice you lately talked of?

You talked, Sir, ( said I) of Patience too lately, pray have a little now: I
could rather ( said he) endure to have my head cut off, than my ears on to hear
what such ungrateful men say. But perhaps those other two Gentlemen that walk
yonder, are of a better mind; they too are hot in discourse, let us hear them.
As soon as we came near them; What Justice, Tom, (cried one of them) can we
expect from those Tory Lawyers, now they are got upon the Bench? the very name
of Whigg, is enough to cast a man in any Suit or Trial that comes before them.
-- That is an hard case (said the Turk to me) -- And what will become of the
Protestant Religion, Jack, (said the other)? for Dr. Oats tells us, That most
of the Bishops are Popishly inclined, and you know Popery is Image Worship,
mere Idolatry -- Poor men, said the Turk, I protest I pity them -- But hark
you, Tom (said he again) pray lend me 50. l. for a Fortnight. -- I vow, Jack
(replied the other) thou art a merry fellow, but thou have such slippery tricks
with thee; you know how you served Mr. L. N. the other day, who was your good
friend; and besides, if Fortune frowned upon you, or your Friends were unkind
to you, that you could not pay Your Debts, it were another case; but you have
got a trick of Borrowing Money, when you have a great deal by you, either for
the sake of the use of it, or with a design never to repay it. However, I have
a Bottle of Wine or two, and a Wench at your service, but a pox on the pulling
down these Conventicles, a man cannot get a wholesome Wench half so conveniently
now as formerly. -- -- Prithee, Tom, don't stand fooling, said he, let me have
so much Money, I Will be faithful to you.

At this the other began to Curse and Swear at such a desperate rate, that the
Turk jumpt as if he had been frighted out of his wits; and rolling his eyes to
and fro, and looking upwards. Are we, said he, poor Turks, so careful of
defiling that Sacred Name in a piece of Paper; and do these Christians make
nothing to blaspheme it upon so trivial an account? Oh! Jesu, if thou be God,
as the Christians say thou art; as thou by the hands of Amurath the Second,
did revenge the perfidious dealing of Ladislaus the Hungarian King, and
punish him for his Perjury; so look upon these people that dishonor thy Name,
and take vengeance on them for their Blasphemy. Then turning to us, You are,
said he, civil Persons, and I heartily thank you for your goodness toward me;
but I Will return to Turkey, and rather endure the meanest slavery of that place,
than the wickedness of this. So away he went in great have and fury; putting me
in mind of Hathny a Nobleman of the Indians, who being told that the Spaniards
went to Heaven, renounced his Baptism; protesting that He would rather go to
Hell with the unbaptiz'd, than to live in Heaven with so cruel a people.

He was no sooner gone, but we fell into the company of a Gentleman that was of
the Reformed Church, and born in Romania. He had been thoroughly acquainted with
all the Scruples and Controversies, which the Rigid and Factious Calvinists,
and other Sectaries had raised in Bohemia, Hungaria, Misia, and Transylvania;
and whilst He was in England, had a full account of our Ecclesiastical
Government given him to his full satisfaction; and being withal a Person of
good Learning, and fine Conversation, we were extremely glad to meet him; but
our first Respects were interrupted with the loud talk of two Clergymen, one of
them saying, -- What a noise have we had this whole Age about a few
insignificant Ceremonies? my Living would be worth 40 l. per Annum more, were
it not for these Ceremonies; it is they make so many Dissenters, they keep
people from coming to Church. Then your Father had an hard Bargain of it when
He bought that Living for You ( replied the other) 'twas well it was not known
that it was actually void when He bought the Presentation. What was that either
to him or me, (replied he again) if there was any going to the Devil in the
Case, his little Attorney had his Fee for that Journey: besides, you know my
Father is a Presbyterian, and so he did not act contrary to his Conscience,
because He thinks it Lawful. And to save my self, I told him, that if He let me
know what it cost him, that I would not take it; for I would not break my Oaths
for all the Preferments in England; but a deuce take these Ceremonies; I wonder
at our Bishops and Governors, that they should stickle so much for them, for
now the Plot is discovered, they say, they are willing to come to Church but
for them.

You are troubled about Ceremonies (said the other) and I have as much reason
to be concerned for the Substance; for my part I can get no Preferment, the
Bishops are the most partial men in the World, and where they take a fancy,
think no preferments too much, whilst others may even lick their fingers and
starve; I have had a good mind to Johnsonize, or Allsopize a long time. But now
the Plot is discovered, as you say, I am resolved to be a swinging Tory, for
the dissenting Preachers are quite broke. How do you know that ( said he)? Why!
( replied he) a Tradesman in London said, That he had about Fifty Pounds owing
him by them, and when he lately went to demand it, he was told, that they
wondered that he should be so impudent, as come for money in time of
persecution.

Mr. Halicius (for that was the Gentleman's name) could no longer forbear them;
but turning to him that last spoke. As for you, Sir (said he) it signifies not
a farthing, whether you be of a Conventicle, a Mosch, a Synagogue, or a Pagode;
for you are resolved to be of no Church, until you see which way the Wind lies
by the Weathercock upon the Steeple: But for that Gentleman that is Instituted
and Inducted into the Nine and Thirty Articles of the Church of England, let me
advise him, when he parts with the Ceremonies, even to throw the small Tithes
too into the bargain: for I do assure him, they will scarce be contented with
the great ones at last: If the experience of the late Plunderings and
Sequestrations here in England, will not convince him, Dr. Basier can tell him
what vexatious troubles and controversies they have from little beginnings,
raised in all the Eastern Provinces of Christendom; and what a squabble they
afterward made about Episcopacy at Moras vaherheli in the year 1657. even
whilst the Turks were knocking at the fore- door, and the Jesuits at the back.

Sir (said I) without going over the Water, one would think, that what King
Charles the First foretold would befall the Trimmers in his days, might
forewarn those of our See Pryn Repub. p. 16.
Those now called Moderate Men, they will then (said he) call Malignant; and
the inequality, injustice and oppression they will then endure, will too late
discover to them to their cost, that they have undone themselves with too much
discretion; and obtained nothing by their unjustifiable cautious compliance,
but to be destroyed at last. But for those people who raise and object these
scruples upon the account of their Tender Consciences, it has been enough
discovered, wherein that Tenderness consists: and it is as manifest, that they
have no Conscience at all; and they as little, who comply with them. I do
verily from my heart believe, that there are some in the world, that make
Objections, and dispute against some Ceremonies and Forms of Prayer in the
Liturgy, wherein there are public Devotions appointed for every day of the
year Morning and Evening, who do not once in a Month pray in private. I am very
plain, I say, I do believe it: What signifies the Surplice to so black a
Villain as Ferguson? Why should such a Messenger of Satan as Oats, scruple to
pray for all that travel by Land or by Water? Do you think the Ring in
Matrimony any great Nuisance to such an Hellish Cheat as Meed? Or that they
value the Sign of the Cross, (the Banner of the Obedient and Holy Jesus) who
are Rebellious Traitors at home, and join with impure Infidels abroad?

Whether they were both convinced or ashamed, I cannot tell; but they marched
off; and as they were going, This I must say (said Mr. Halicius) in all the
world where ever I come, that there never was in any Church since the
plantation of the Gospel, more Pious, Learned, Ingenious and truly faithful
Clergymen, than there are at this day in the Church of England; and if these
and all other lukewarm Trimmers were spued out of it, it would be much better
for the Body of it, and for the Head too.

We were now walking still onward until in a shady solitary place we saw a
Nonconformist Preacher fall in among a company of women who were very Rich in
their Garb; they seemed somewhat disconsolate: but as soon as they saw him,
they cried, Welcome thou Man of God! Yea, very welcome art thou unto us! How
have thou been preserved in these days of tribulation? Indeed (said he) the
persecution waxes hot against the people of the Lord; the great Dragon is
broken loose with his long tail, and vomits out whole floods of Popish
Holy Water after the Woman in travail; the hunting Nimrods pursue us; the Folds
are broken down, and the Sheep are scattered: I am come therefore to refresh
ye, O ye scattered Flocks; and since ye cannot hear the Gospel, pray read it in
these godly Bukes. Here likewise take these holy things: here is S. Russel' s
Picture, and a Sliver of the Deal Board spotted with his Blood shed for the
Good Old Cause: Here is likewise the Picture of S. Sydney, with an Inch of his
Cane; and here are the works of Mr. Baxter and Mr. Doolittle, with their
Effigies: These are excellent Antidotes against the Powers of Popery, and the
Charms of Antichrist: Oh ye pretty little Lambs, that cry Meigh, Meigh, with
earnest longings and groanings: Here is Milk for Babes, and Meats for Strong
Men, in four and twenty Sermons: when ye have digested these, the Man of Sin
will never be able to prevail over the Babe of Grace. --

In exchange for this Trash, they privately crowded three or four Guinea's into
his hand, which he meekly took, with his leave at the same time: But one of
them was so overwhelmed with grief and trouble for his going away, that her
sighs interrupted her speech for a long time; at last a few broken sentences
burst out, and she cried, Oh how the Vision cease, and the Prophets prophecy
not! In the midst of this great Agony, a Bramble-Bush chanced to catch hold on
a deep Lace on her Petticoat, and made a great Rent in it. Good God! what an
alteration was there in a moment? She fell a scolding and railing at her Maid,
that followed waiting upon her, as if she had been bewitched; calling her all
the ugly Names, her fury could suggest; as if by her carelessness she had been
the cause of it: when again spying us, and fearing that we overheard her, she
as artificially changed her Note: Thou simple Wench, thou dundernoles, quoth
she, somewhat more softly, and with a smile, Can thou not find the Chapter?
Fie Mary, fie; here take the Bible again, look the Eleventh Chapter to the
Hebrews and at the Thirty Seventh Verse, there thou shall find an account of
our sufferings.

At this a little Old Man, that stood behind her, burst out a laughing; and
looking on me, Don't this place of Scripture, said he, daintily suit their
present Garb and Conditions? Don't these look as if they wandered about in
Sheepskins and Goat Skins! You may soon imagine, how much they are destitute,
afflicted or tormented. These are the genteelest mourners in Zion that ever I
met with; all of them in the newest fashion: I believe truly these Martyrs are
more troubled about their Tailors, than about their Executioners. Well, I
little thought to find the women of England dissatisfied of all others in the
world; I am sure their freedoms and privileges are so extraordinarily great,
that were there a Bridge from Calais to Dover, we should have them scamper
hither in throngs from all parts of Europe: and had the last great Frost but
lasted so long and sharp, as to have laid all the Waters betwixt those two
places, they would have scrambled over in shoals, though they had sopt their
Constitutions to some purpose.

Sir, said I to him, if you fully understood the Humors of some of the people
of this Nation, and the happiness they enjoy, you would say, that the men have
as little reason to be turbulent and mutinous, as the women to be Peevish and
Discontented.

They have less reason to be so (said he) than any people under the Heavens. I
think I have seen most of the Nations of Europe; and when I consider the
singular advantages of peace and plenty, which you here enjoy, it infinitely
aggravates the base Ingratitude of a stubborn and factious Generation of men
among you, that endeavor to subvert so excellent a Government, and to disturb
the peace of so noble and flourishing a Kingdom. To deal freely with you, I am
a Jew by Birth; I was born at Lublin in Poland, but by the grace of God I am
now a Christian; and I confess to you that the happy condition of the
Christians of the Reformed Church of England, is a sufficient Argument fully to
confirm me in my Conversion: For, (besides the removal of those prejudices
which the Church of Rome gives us by their Pictures, and Images) I find the
People of England far to exceed the Ancient Israelites in all Temporal
Blessings, even in the most prosperous Times, wherein they possessed the Land of
Canaan.

First, In the Situation. For besides the old Inhabitants of the Land that were
left to be Judge. 2. v. 3.
thorns in their sides, they were encompassed with Enemies round about; besides
the Philistines, they had the Assyrians, the Egyptians, the Aromites, the
Edomites, the Moabites, and Amorites; nay, the Tribe of Asher, that bordered
along the Sea Coasts, were never Masters of Sidon: But they were governed by
their own Magistrates, as was Tire, till taken by Alexander, or rifled by
Nebuchadnezzar to no purpose, sometimes before: But you have the Seas not only
open unto you for traffic, but around about you for a Guard and Defense; and I
look that the Union of the Kingdom of Scotland to England, might prove as great
a Blessing to Great Britain, as the separation and revolt of the Ten Tribes was
a Curse and Calamity to the whole Body of the Israelites in General. It Is true,
Boccalin tells us, That in his Time, when England was in the Scales, that it
weighed some hundreds of thousands of grains less, after Scotland was added to
it, than it did before. But you know what Devil it was that played that
paradoxical Gambol, it was the frothy Spirit of Light headed Fanaticism, which
is in such a fair way to be Conjured down, or Blow'n off, that it will prove
heavy enough to some body over the Water one of these days (If I be not
mistaken.) In the mean time well might one, speaking of the Bloody designs of
the Jesuits, Nov. 5th. say of Great Britain Barclai. de Conj. Ang.
Non videbatur posse Tentari fundamentum tam been vallati Imperii: That it did
not seem possible that the foundation of an Empire so well intrencht, could
ever be shaken. But England exceeds the Land of Canaan.

Secondly, In all manner of plenty: though it does not feed such vast numbers
of people for the small Circuit of Ground, yet her Valleys are like Eden, her
Hills like Lebanon, her Springs like Pisgah, a Land which not only injoys those
Blessings in the fullest extent, which God promised to the most exact Obedience
of the Israelites: But by its successful Traffic to all the parts of the
Terrestrial Globe, possesses several Delights and Treasures, which all the Four
great Monarchies of old never heard, or dreamed of* And,

Thirdly, In the improvement of all Arts and Sciences; if Solomon had more
Knowledge in natural Causes, than any man living, 'twas his Prerogative as
King; for none of the Ancient Vertuosi, neither Heman, nor Chalcal, nor Elcan,
nor Darda, have left any Philosophical Transactions behind them. If He
understood the nature of the Loadstone, and taught the Tyrians, and
Phoenicians, the use of it, as Fuller.
one of this Nation affirms: It Is a strange thing that the Graecians, a people
so Curious, and Inquisitive, so near Neighbors to them, so famous for
Shipping, and among whom it was first found, and had a name, should be utterly
ignorant of so noble a Mystery. If He understood the Circulation of the Blood,
and knew all Trees, and Plants, from the Cedar of Lebanon, to the Hyssop on the
wall; his Philosophy vanished with his Religion: For, He little considered the
nature of that wood, or of those Minerals, whereof those gods ( He afterward
worshipped) were made. But you have a numerous Society of excellent Philosophers,
of whose knowledge there is more certainty, and greater variety; and that a
Royal Society too, encouraged by a King, wise as Solomon in his Government; and
more Knowing both in Philosophy and Navigation: Who need not to send to foreign
Nations for Mariners, for his Shipping, as 2 Chronicles. c ^. ^. 18.
Solomon did, or for Workmen to build his Temple. And were his Government so
absolute and despotical; or his Tribute and Taxes so 2 Chronicles. 10. v. 11.
heavy upon his People, would be as rich himself. Therefore when with these
things, I consider the admirable frame of your Government, the wonders that
have been wrought for its preservation and Continuance, I conclude, that the
Doctrine of Jesus, is the last Will of Heaven, and that those that profess it,
are in the favor of God, by the blessings they receive on Earth. And although
my own condition be mean: yet (to the clear understanding of Types and
Prophecies) having by the same Doctrine learnt the admirable Lessons of
Patience and Obedience, I wonder that men should not become better Subjects for
the same reasons, for which I am become the better Christian.

That very Plenty, Sir, ( said I) that is an Argument to make you become an
humble Christian, makes them proud Traitors: Nay, their very Plea for
Rebellion, is the very same which the Apostle uses for Obedience, ( viz.) for
Conscience sake. Though the Government be never so good, yet a Kingly
Government, they say, is against their Consciences; that it is not according to
the will of God. They will rip you up a great number of Kings, that did evil in
the sight of the Lord; and are often buzzing in your ears, the sentence of the
unjust King; they tell you, that the Apostles and Martyrs were brought before
Kings, etc. and positively affirm, that the Israelites sinned very grievously
in asking a King.

They did so, (replied He very hastily) and what then? Do they know wherein the
nature of their sin consisted (that they apply it as a Rule to themselves) all
their other Objections are ridiculously frivolous, but I will clear this by
proving, that though the Israelites sinned in asking a King, yet it was the
will of God that they should be governed by Kings; His Promise and his Blessing
too. And this I Will do by considering wherein the sin of the Israelites
consisted.

First, Then it consisted in this, that they preferred the Government of an
Earthly King, before 1 Samuel c. 8. v. 7.
having God for their King; for their Government under Judges, was
Theocratical. They were confirmed by Miracles, and raised immediately for their
deliverance by God himself.

Secondly, Their sin consisted in that they, who were Gods chosen and peculiar
people, should ask to be governed by a King, like all the Nations. I do not
speak Here of the Prohibition: Deuteronomy. 17. v. 15.
Thou may not set a Stranger over thee, [ to be King]. ( For that and
Marriages, and all other Communion with the Nations was forbidden them, for
fear of Idolatry). But they were not to be like all the Nations as to the
Manner of their Kingly Government. 1. Because God had given a particular Rule
for the King, He should set over his own people, Deuteronomy. 17. v. 18. 19. And 2. We
read 1 Samuel chap. 10. v. 24. that Samuel told the people, the Manner of the
Kingdom, and wrote it in a Book, and laid it up before the Lord.

Thirdly, The sin of the Israelites consisted, in that They [the People] asked a
King: In that they would be their own Carvers, and Chusers: That they that were
redeemed from being slaves in Egypt, should not depend upon the same
Providence for their station and Condition in Canaan. By thus asking, they
seemed to choose, before God had chosen and moreover, they who were prohibited
to say, that they possessed the Land through their own Righteousness, might be
presumed to say, they enjoyed that Government by their own Wisdom. And,

Fourthly, Their sin consisted in that they Then asked a King, in that they
would not wait Gods appointed time. Therefore because they preposterously asked
a King, He gave them one in his wrath: one that was not qualified according to
the Prophecy, nor did He answer their expectation. But in his Anointed Servant
David, He fully confirmed it to be his Time, his Will, his own Ordinance, and
that Government which He foretold, and provided in his Law for his own People.
And as the Condition of the Israelites both in Church and State, was the most
flourishing and splendid under the Reign of his Successor King Solomon, that
ever it was before, or after: So the Taking away their King, was the greatest
Judgment that was threatened, Deuteronomy. 28. v. 36. the Lord shall bring thee and
thy King which thou shall set over thee, unto a Nation which neither thou, nor
thy Fathers have known; and there shall thou serve other Gods, Wood and Stone.
And it was the greatest Judgment that ever was executed, Lament. 2. v. 9. Her
King and her Princes are among the Gentiles. The Law is no more, the Prophets
also find no Vision from the Lord. So that you see, that as the King was
appointed by God in the Law, so with their King they lost that Law. But the
severest Judgment of all was, that with the loss of their King, They lost the
surest, and directest rule of finding out the Messiah, given to them in Jacobs
Prophecy, Genesis 49. v. 10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Law
giver from between his feet, until Shiloh come. For as by the Alterations,
Change, and loss of the Law, they were deprived of the right understanding
those Types, which foreshew the Manner of his Coming: So (though the Prophecy
held good) by the loss of their King in their Captivity, the Changes of their
Government; it had as it were a veil drawn over it, and became obscure to them,
as to the Time of his Coming. In short, the giving the Jews a King, was the
greatest Blessing, and the taking him away, the greatest Curse: the one the
Righteous Ordinance of God, the other his just Judgment.

But, Sir, (said I) they will say, What signifies the Jewish Government to us
Protestants?

Protestants (said he) do they call themselves! Mahomet has not more corrupted
the History, than they the scope and design of the Old Testament, where and
when it may serve their turn. How many hundred Sermons have they preached
against Monarchy, from this instance of the Israelites asking a King; the
deluded people swallowing these impudent Falsifications with so much
greediness, that they would gobble down Goliath for one of the Minor Prophets,
if one of these lying ones did but bid them gape: and thus much it signifies to
those True Protestants, that if it was a sin in the Israelites at that time to
ask a King, it is ten times more a sin in the people of England at this day, to
ask, or seek after a Commonwealth, for these three reasons.

First, Because under the Gospel there are particular, and especial Commands,
for our Obedience to The King as Supreme; and consequently, for our continuance
in that Obedience: but there was no prohibition under the Law positively
forbidding the Jews to ask a King, but there was a certain Promise, that they
should be governed by Kings.

Secondly, Because after the full Revelation of Gods will, the ordinary course
of his Providence joined with the foresaid Apostolical and Evangelical Precept,
is as obliging and binding, as all the Miracles he wrought under the Theocracy
of the ancient Israelites; though I think the Preservation of the Kings of
England of late days have been little less Miraculous.

Thirdly, Because such disobedience (of which deposing him, and altering the
frame of his Government, is the highest) is threatened with a greater Curse and
Punishment, than the Breach of all, or any of the Laws of Moses, even with
Damnation, in that sense, wherein it is threatened to the Scribes and Pharisees,
the scrupulous observers of small things of that Law, whilst they neglected
the greater ones of Judgment, etc.

But Sir ( said I) they have as much abused the sense and meaning of the New
Testament, as they have the scope and design of the Old: You may cloy them with
Repetitions of Arguments and endless Quotations out of both of them, and all to
no purpose. You may tell them that God shadows the rewards of Heaven, with what
he accounts most excellent upon Earth, with Crowns, Scepters, Thrones, and
Robes of Glory. That to fill us with an awful sense and veneration of the
excellency of his Eternal Majesty, He styles himself King of kings, and Lord of
lords; that Heaven is his Throne, and Earth his footstool. You may tell them,
that by him Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice: That they are styled gods,
and are his Vicegerents, who is the God of all gods. That Treason is a very
great sin, and the breach of all the Commandments; because the highest offense
against him who is Custos utriusque Tabulae, that bears not the Sword in
vain, but is to execute wrath upon all them that do evil, by the breach of any
of them. But it will be in vain; they will be deaf as Adders, and still
Rebellious as the old Serpent. You may urge them with the Laws of Nature and
Nations; you may tell them, that there never was any Language spoken under
Heaven, that have not some word, or other signifying the Supreme Power in a
single Person. That the very Heathens acknowledged this power to be derived
from God, and still it is much more in vain; when the Atheist cannot do the
Business of the Rebel, the Fanatic shall; and when the Fanatic cannot, the
Atheist shall; and when neither of them, the Politician.

The Politician (said he) what kind of Politician do you mean?

The Politician (said I) I here speak of, is a stranger Monster than any Beast
of America. He is a Composition of Fool and Knave, of Hawk and Buzzard, Atheist
and Fanatic, Beast and Devil, in the shape of a Man. His Father begat Him,
being at enmity with his Mother, when the Bells rung backward for a great fire
in a deep Snow; One, that never was long of one mind, nor ever a friend to any
one body. He quarreled with his Milk Porrage the very first Breath he drew to
cool it; beat his elder Brother by surprise; gave his Sisters black eyes; pist
in his Mothers mouth when she was fast asleep; and oft-times pulled the Chair
from behind his Aged Father, when he was going to sit down. These were the
Domestic stratagems of his Childhood. But no sooner is He come to Years of
Rebellion, but you see him as rampant in Public. He finds fault with every
Ordinance of God and man; He is for knocking down of Monarchs, pulling Lawn
Sleeves over the ears of Bishops. Altering and Changing the Government, and all
this while, thinks himself wondrous wise, and very Holy: And now his Freak is
come to full Maturity, He lies, cheats, is perjured, writes, and fights,
ventures to be Hanged and then Damned. -- And now what do you think of him? Is
not such an heterogeneous Buffoon fit to make Laws for others, who would never
be governed himself? Is he not a dainty projector, to model the World; and of
full growth, to become the Perpetual Dictator of all mankind; the standing
Oracle of the Times, and in opposition to the wisdom and experience of twenty
Ages, to prescribe new forms of Government for three Nations, and oblige them
in all have, to become a Commonwealth, who have been ruled by Kings for above a
thousand years?

Your very Character of him, (said he) has already set my teeth on edge, and so
no more of him. But I must tell you, that there has been so much said and
written in defense of Monarchy, that a man might talk his Tongue to the stumps
in the repetition of other men's Arguments: And the Inconveniences of
Aristocracy and Democracy are so notorious; that they were no News above two
thousand years ago; Old Aristotle has so sufficiently described them in his
Book of Politics, that we gather from thence, that He sooner found out the
Madness of the people, than the Raging of the Sea. But one would think, that
that Government for Christians, should be the most Authentic, which God for
the Jews, thought most convenient.

More than one would think, ( said I) that men should most of all desire to
continue under that form of Government, under which by all variety of
experience, they have been most happy. And if Seignior Boccalini would be
pleased to lend us his Balance, with which He weighed the Kingdoms and States
of Europe, I dare venture to confute all the Republicans upon Earth, with this
one Experiment: Let them put into one of the Scales, all the Commonwealths that
have been under the Sun; let them clap in the Ephori of Sparta, the Demarchi of
Athens, the Tribunes and Consuls of Rome, the Gentlemen and Senators of Venice,
the Hoghen Moghen States of Holland, the Cantons of Switzerland, the Leagues of
the Grisons, the Elders of Geneva, with whole Bundles of Hans Towns, and all
the late Holy Brethren that are fled to them; and I will put but one single
Monarchy into the other, and it shall as certainly weigh them all down, as the
Bible does the Pope, and his Trinkets, the Devil and all his works, in the Book
of Martyrs.

What Monarchy is that (said he)?

The Ancient and Flourishing Monarchy of England (said I), a Monarchy which has
the singular advantages of all the three known Forms of Government, without the
Inconveniences of any one of them; a Monarchy so divinely good, as neither Jew
or Gentile knew of Old, and such an one, as none other Christians besides,
enjoy at this day.

Pray Sir (said he) give me a short account of it.

As well as I can ( said I) with all my heart. You must know that this Monarchy
of England, is a Paternal, Hereditary Monarchy; the Kings thereof not using
that absolute Despotical Power, which the Kings of Judah sometimes did. No man's
Life is taken away from him by any of the Kings Messengers; but he may clear
himself if Innocent, or give better satisfaction to the world if guilty, by
being tried according to Law: And where the Chronicles of England seem to speak
the contrary, those persons, as Tho. Becket, etc. are to be considered as
Traitors in the very act of open Hostility and Rebellion, or protected from the
proceedings of the Law by the Pope or the People: But our present Gracious
Sovereign has given such admirable instances of his great Justice, Clemency,
and Patience, as no History can parallel; even the very Murderers of his Father
(who would scarce allow him to speak before their impious Tribunal) were
permitted to say what they could in their own defense: And those very Barbarous
Villains, that did not design to at the Rye^
allow him time to say his Prayers, were not only legally tried, convicted and
justly condemned, with all manner of regular proceedings, but had afterward
the charitable assistance of his own Chaplains. And although upon the relation
of such an horrid design against his Royal Person, if He had cut them all to
pieces without any more ado, no mortal man could have questioned, or have
called him to an account for it; yet such is the malice of that implacable
Party, that for his great Clemency, they insinuate, that he wants Courage; and
for his Justice, they do as much as say, he is a Tyrant.

But as the King, so are his Laws, so good for the People, that King James did
as truly, as solemnly declare, That the Common Law of England was as proper for
this Nation, as the Law of Moses was for the Jews. But still, to supply the
defects of the Common Law, we have our Statute Laws, which were made at sundry
times, and upon diverse occasions in Parliament; and these Laws receive matter
from the Lords and Commons, but form and life from the King: and then our
Ecclesiastical and Maritine Courts are governed by the Civil Laws, which are
the result of the Wisdom and Prudence of the best Lawgivers that have been in
all Ages, and for the Good of others, as well as of our own Nation.

If your Laws (said he) be so very good, how comes it to pass, that there are
so many Controversies, long and vexatious Suits, such endless Differences and
Quarrels among the Subjects? What is the reason, that those who have been
Factious, Turbulent, and Seditious, should go so long unpunished?

The Reason, Sir, ( said I) is, because the King will govern by Law, but they
will not be ruled by it: But have a little patience, Hemp is not ripe in a day.
It Is no Magical plant, raised by the sin of Witchcraft, and yet 'twill conjure
down the Devil in Time. Easter Term is coming on a pace, and as some of their
mouths have been pretty cool the last great Frost: So if others be not more
quiet for the Future, they will not have so much money to burn in their pockets
against the next. To your first Question, I might Answer, by asking you the
reason of so many Disputes, and Janglings in Religion. I am sure you confess,
that you are satisfied as to the excellency of the Christian Faith, and yet you
might as well object against the Truth of it, because there have been so many
Heresies in the Church, as against the goodness of our Laws; Because there are
so many peevish, subtle, and factious persons in the State. There are likewise
Heretics among the Lawyers, as well as among the Divines. For if the Laws of
God are not free from the false Glosses, and Expositions of ambitious or
covetous Casuists, how shall any Law of man escape them? To conclude, after
all, our Government is a Miracle of a thousand years working. And although some
will tell you, the Times and Occasions of Enacting, or Repealing any Statute
Law, and the Originals of all our Courts of Judicature; Yet considering the
many, and strange revolutions that attend all sublunary Principalities and
Powers, it is a work beyond the reach of the most exquisite Judgment to unravel
the whole Series of Affairs, that have brought this admirable frame of
Government to perfection.

Truly, Sir, (said he) I do not perceive that the People of England have any
reason to fear Arbitrary Government under so gracious a Prince, or to he weary
of a Monarchy so vastly differing from those four, which were so formidably
represented in the Ancient Vision of the Prophet Daniel.

I am sure, ( said I) there is none in being, that may at this day compare with
it; all the Eastern Empires and Monarchies, are absolutely Tyrannical; and of
the West, the people of France have lost their Liberties; the Kingdom of Spain
suffers extremely by the clashing Interests of the Jesuits with other Orders,
and their treachery to the House of Austria; and so does the Empire of Germany;
the Kingdoms of Denmark, and Bohemia, have not been so long Hereditary, and the
Kingdom of Poland is Elective to this day.

Now, (said he) you are come to my Native Country, I can assure you, that there
are great Inconveniences attending the Time of the Interregnum, and Election
too. And however our present Magnanimous and truly Illustrious King, has by his
Conduct and Valor, gained himself immortal renown: Yet it is better for the
people to have Peace, than a prosperous War. And the King of England has had as
hard a Task (and which has required as much Courage and Prudence) to subdue and
quell his Turkish Protestants at home, as the King of Poland had, to conquer
the Protestant Turks abroad. Against which sort of true Protestants, the true
Turks shall arise in the Judgment, and shall condemn them. For they make
Obedience to their Prince, a point of their Religion; but these make a Duty and
a practice of Rebellion. The very Indians shall arise in the Judgment with
these Protestant Barbarians, and shall condemn them. For the Noble Inhabitants
of Nicaragua, made no Law for that person that should kill the King, thinking
(like Solon in the Case of Parricide) that none could be so wicked as to do it;
but these condemned their King, from whom they have their Law, and that
contrary to all Law. Nar, the very Jews, the Scribes and Pharisees, shall arise
in the Judgment with these Reformed Christians, and shall condemn them; for
they offered Sacrifices for the prosperity of Caesar, but these Sacrificed
Caesar himself, at his own Gate.

You have said enough to their immortal shame, and confusion ( said I). But
thanks be to God who has restored the Son to the Throne of his Father, to our
great Comfort. And may He, in despite of all the Enemies of God, and the King,
long continue to sit thereon, to our lasting peace. I am sure this Nation has
under him enjoyed three and twenty such years of plenty, and prosperity, as you
cannot cull out, and show together since the Conquest, enough to testify that
Monarchy is the best of Governments, that ours is the best of Monarchies, and
King Charles II. is the best of Monarchs, whose Service (like his, whose
Minister He is) is Perfect Freedom.

-- Neque enim Libertas Tutior ulla est,
Quam Domino Servire bono. --
The Sun was now down, and it began to grow dusky, so my little Polander took
his leave, and Seign. Chr. who had been talking all this while with another
man, came smiling to me, and said, I know (dear Friend) that you are a person
very Curious and Inquisitive into the Nature and Reasons of Human Affairs, and
I have now an Extraordinary Opportunity of pleasuring you at the highest rate.
That Gentleman I now came from is a Magician, and He, with two or three more,
it seems, are to have an Action to night, wherein they design to raise the
Ghosts of all the late Politicians that are dead, and to charm the Spirits of
those now living, from their bodies whilst asleep, so that you may hear
extraordinary Conferences about Polity and Government, and may have occasion of
engaging your self in them, as you shall think convenient.

The name of a Magician did a little startle me at first, but the bent of my
fancy prevailed above any scruple of Conscience, being in a Dream, wherein
honest men do those things sometimes, which they would abhor when awake.
Indeed, I had no time to determine with my self, for methoughts Seign. Chr. was
very earnest with me, saying, See Yonder! the Gentleman calls us, let us go to
him, I know you will be very welcome for my sake: [as soon as we came to him] I
am apt to think ( said he to me) that you, Sir, are somewhat afraid of Spirits.

I never see him tremble but once in all my life, ( replied Seignior Chr.) and
that was at the sight of a very pretty Woman, and then indeed, He could neither
sing nor say. But,

They who in Combat dare the Devil desie,
Are sometimes vanquished by a Ladies eye.
I do assure you, He neither sears your Spirits, nor yet your Politicians; for
He is an Honest Fellow, and though I have known him mistaken, yet that Honesty
of His, is better than the strength of Goliath, than the valor of Cromwell,
than the wit and learning of Hobbs, or Milton, than the Policy of Shaftsbury,
or the piety of Baxter. And therefore I will venture to set him upon whole
Troops of Rascally Knavish Apparitions, and you will be satisfied, that he does
not fear such Spirits. [ Then turning to me.] What in the dumps, Friend? Cheer
up! I shall now give you an opportunity of seeing to what extravagant excesses
the late Politicians have run on both Hands; some swelling the Sovereign
Magistrate into such a monstrous Bulkiness, that He bursts asunder with the
shining venom they infuse into him; others scattering the Supreme Power into
whole Herds of Pharaoh's ravenous lean Kine. Some are for Absolute Tyranny,
others, for Dissolute Anarchy: Thus leaving us the dismal choice of the Fire
from the Bramble, to devour us, or of the more scorching flames from whole
Bundles of Jack Straws, to consume us.

We were now come to Fox-Hall, that renowned Magazin of Narratives and
Gunpowder, and this was the place of Randesvouze for these famous Politicians.
-- -- The Lord knows which way we gat into a Vault, but methoughts as soon as
we were there, one of the Magicians speaking a sort of unintelligible
gibberish, burnt a composition of strange Gumms in a Censer, which had such an
odd smell, that a trilling damp seized my spirits, and in that confusion, the
place was changed into a stately long Portico, supported with several rows of
Marble Pillars, upon which their hung a great many Trophies, and Spoils taken
by surprise, or stratagem, and great numbers of Historical Pictures of Martial
exploits that succeeded; this led us into a Magnificent Dome, almost as large
as the Pantheon in Rome, in the rotunda (upon Pedestals of equal height) stood
the Statuas of Famous Persons, who by the strength of their own Genius's, from
low beginnings, arrived to mavelous grandeur, and continued in it. As of
Marmurius, Marius, Dioclesian, Justinus, and Tamberlain, and others. Turning on
the left hand, we passed through a door into a ruinous Court, in which there
were several antic Statuas Crowned with Mushrooms, as of Massianello,
Knipperdolling, and several other excrescences of Fortune, who in her freaks
had taken them from Stalls, and Bulks, to set them on Thrones, and then
suddenly kicked them down again into their Graves. In a corner of this Court, we
entered a narrow and winding passage, which led us at last into a large Room
hung with black, and set around with dimm Tapers. I was strangely surprised
with this enchanted place: But much more astonished, when at the upper end of
it, I saw Oliver Cromwell sitting in a Chair of State, with two skeletons on
each hand, attending him, which sometimes seemed to move; whilst I was looking
on him, there came out from behind the Hangings, an old Fellow in Boots, with a
Book in his hand, who made his obeisance to Oliver, and as he presented it, He
said, You, Sir, are that unlimited and absolute Sovereign, that mighty
Leviathan I have here endeavored in this Book, to recommend to all mankind;
suffer me therefore a poor Mackrel, to come under the shadow of your Finns,
until this storm of Thunder be past.

Oliver took the Book, and after he had read a little of it, He returned him
another, Entitled, Killing no Murder; telling him that by that Book ( which
had made him as fearful as himself) he might see how much he had been beholding
to him for his own. For thou have herein ( said he) given me more power under
thy hand, than the Devil ever did by word of mouth. Nay, thou have carried me
to the top of an higher Mountain of Dominion, than ever he pretended yet to set
his Cloven Foot upon, since his fall; but the height makes me giddy, and
subject upon the least touch to drop after him into the bottomless Pit.
Therefore the Devil, who pretends to dispose of Kingdoms with the same
Authority, thou pretendest to give Rules to govern them, take thee, and thy
Book for thy pains. -- And then rising up, and looking on us with a Ghastly
Visage; What ( said he) have I got by the sycophancy of this cowardly Paltroon,
but real and everlasting shame and disgrace? What have I got by all the
Hypocritical villainies, that I have acted under the Sun, but Eternal and
substantial Miseries; those that called me Gideon and Joshua, and I know not
who forsooth, and made Poems and Panegyricks upon me, are themselves so
ridiculously infamous, that their very Names outstink the Brimstone of Hell: My
memory is scandalous, my Posterity dishonorable, this Politic head of mine,
that was whilom so wondrous wise, is now nothing but a Whirl-gig to the winds,
which, in consort with Ireton's and Bradshaw's, whistles tunes to Owls and
Batts in gloomy nights; and this Heart of mine, formerly so stout and firm, is
now as full of Infernal Vermin, as an old rotten Holland Cheese is of Mites.
The Atheists magnified me on Earth, the Fanatics placed me in Heaven, but the
Devil was more sure of me in Hell. And now, Sir, You might better have styled
your Book the Salamander of unquenchable fire, and then I would have thankt you
in my own Element. At this, His great red Nose bounc't like a Cracker, and He
vanished with a stink and a smoke.

Hobbs was so affrighted, that he would have didled away in all have, but that
Seignior Chr. stopped him, saying, Is this, Sir, the Famous Leviathan, with whom
you have made such a Bustle? Is this your renowned Behemoth? The greasy
Villain indeed looked as if he had been anointed with none other but Train Oil*
Bless me! How could a man of your parts and Education, condescend to slatter
such a nasty and loutish Brute, with Titles and Prerogatives, overtopping all
the Laws of God and Nature?

What! ( said 1) do you wonder at this! What is it He will not say, or write,
who has used his Pen as Arbitrarily, as Oliver did his Sword; and has canceled
all the obligations that can be laid upon the soul of man, with the same
insolence with which the other has trampled upon them. If this Mr. Hobbs had
not so much valor as Cromwell, He had no less Ambition, and took as much pride
and pains to be thought an absolute Philosopher, as the other did to be an
absolute Sovereign. Now when the Knave or the Fool prevails, what signifies the
Scholar as to any thing, either of public or private good? But such an one is
in as ready a way to do mischief in the State, as Nestorius that eminent
Heretic in the Church; In both cases it holds true what Castalio says, Nihil
est tam absurdum quod non dicat quamvis doctus homo, si falsum defendendum
susceperit: There is nothing so absurd, which a man though otherwise learned,
may not say, if He once undertakes to defend that which is false. And indeed,
nothing in the World can be more absurd, nothing more destructive of Human
Society and Government, than the Principles and Positions in that wicked and
ridiculous Book. What can be more absurd, than to make a man an absolute
Prince, and an absolute Slave, in the same moment? I suppose, He did not wade
over the tops of his Boots, to descry the true state and condition of his
unwieldy Leviathan; if he did, he might have found it as truly Miserable, as He
has made it monstrously great: (to carry on his Metaphor) He might have found
the True Protestant Flail Fish ready to give him mortal thumps on his Crupper,
upon all occasions, whilst the Sword-Fish is playing the more dangerous part of
the Assassin at his Belly. And this is the true state of his Sovereign Lord
Behemoth, by his wit, and the malice of the Devil, Usurper of the great Deep:
And this is the whole duty of all his loving Fishes, according to the Doctrine
of Hobbs. And now, what can be more ridiculous, what more absurd?

Now those Principles that are contradictory, and destructive of themselves,
must needs be very destructive of Human Society; I will cull out but two
Propositions for a taste. Nothing the Sovereign can do to a Subject, on what
pretense soever, can properly be called injustice, or injury. On the other hand,

The obligation of Subjects to their Sovereign, is as long, and no longer than
the Power lasts, by which he is able to protect them.

Upon which, (and several other Propositions) says the right Honorable Edward
late Earl of Clarendon, in his excellent Book, Entitled, Page 193.
A Survey of the Leviath. -- -- The view of these naked Propositions by
themselves, without any other clothing, or disguise of words, may better serve
to make them odious to King and People. And the first will easily discern, to
how high a pinnacle of power soever he would carry him, he leaves him upon such
a Precipice, from whence the least Blast of Invasion from a Neighbor, or from
Rebellion by his Subjects, may throw him headlong to irrecoverable Ruin; and
the other will as much abhor an Allegiance of that Temper, that, by any
misfortune of their Prince, they may be absolved from, and cease to be
Subjects, when the Sovereign has need of their Obedience. And since that
Learned States man has so effectually confounded Leviathan with this issue of
his Brain; We need not to fear that such an one will ever spring from his Loins.

The People of England (replied Seignior Christiano) have more reason to be
afraid of a great many, than of a Great one. For they who are for turning this
Ancient Monarchy into a Commonwealth, are for Complementing their Patriots with
the same unlimited and unbounded power, which Hobbs gives his single Sovereign:
and are not a Shoal of Sharks, damned devouring, eager, swift Sharks, as
ravenous as a great lubberly gorbellied Leviathan? Do you think that Cromwell'
s Divan, consisting of an hundred and four Godly, as He called them, were not
as merciless as himself was Cruel? I do assure you, that the Author of Plato
Redivivus has outdone Mr. Hobbs, and from Mr. Harringtons Oceana, has pilfer'd
whole Shoals of the aforesaid Sharks, that will do more mischief in one day,
than his wallowing Leviathan ever could in a whole month. For it is that stump
of a Politician, that sharking Politician (said he), pointing to the Author of
Plato Redivivus, who has nim'd all his santastical and rascally Notions from
Doleman and Harrington, and stands leering in that Corner, that has been
beating that Bush of his Blockhead, (that struts out like a Foxes tail, and
wherein the Vermin are all of a quality) to reduce this Ancient Monarchy into a
Democracy, in order to which, He imploys the whole stock of his malice, to
scoff and burlesque all the Sacred Orders of the Church, [ as the ready way to
ruin the State]. The truth is, says he, page 98. I could wish there had never
been any Clergy, the purity of Christian Religion, as also the good and Orderly
Government of the World had been much better provided for. And so says Mr.
Harrington, An ounce of wisdom, is worth a pound of Clergy. Ocean. p. 223. And
Ministers of all others, least understand Political Principles. And then having
vilisied Monarchy, as the worst of Governments, and the Corruption of all
others, He very Dogmatically proclaims the State of Venice, to be the
Perfectest pattern of Government now existent. And so did Mr. Harrington in
his* Venetian Ballott. To gain Authority and success to his Politic frame (He
recommended to this Nation) he Caresses the People with the same unlimited and
transcendent power, which Doleman is most graciously pleased to bestow upon
them; by which they are enabled to change, and depose their Princes at their
Leisure, and alter and model the Government at their pleasure; to prompt them
to this, (with his Father the Devil, and Doleman) He slights the Plea of
Monarchs Divine right; makes the King a sharer with, and Trustee of the People;
and looks upon it as a pretense, that they have their power from God: And after
all, with an impudence only proper to himself. He would cully the King out of
his Prerogatives, with the rusty Complement of giving him more Ease, and of
making him more Glorious. These, and other wicked and ridiculous Positions,
destructive both of King and People, make up the Politics of this filthy
Dreamer, who has more of Pythagoras his Ass, than of Plato' s Spirit in him.

If the Devil ( said I) be in him, I will make him come out of him, if I can:
And with that I marched up to him. -- You, Sir, ( said I) that have so
industriously labored to change, and new model our Government, did like a
Politician indeed, to conjure up the Ghost of an Athenian, a sort of sickle,
giddy headed people, that felt more fatal Changes, and Revolutions, than any
Nation under the Sun: So like our present Fanatics, Acts 17. ^1.
That they spent their Time in nothing else, but either to tell, or to hear
some new thing. But, Sir, when you were scraping in the rubbish of their City,
for the Ghost of Plato, you had done well if you had brought along with you the
Statua of Jupiter (...), which they erected to deter men from being perjured.
Hence it is, that one of their Poets wondering that such persons escaped, when
the Oak is sometimes thunderstruck, said (...) that the Oak is not for sworn.
Hence it was that they termed a righteous person, (...); and that (...), a
perjurious, signified a wicked man: insomuch, that I meet but one among them
fit to make a Foreman of a true Protestant Ignoramus Jury, and that was
Lysander, who was so infamous for that saying of his, (...). That we ought to
cheat Children with Cock alls, but Enemies with Oaths. Now since your Friends
at home are grown so scandalous for breaking the Third and Ninth Commandments,
which were given by Moses, who was a King among the righteous: You cannot tell
how far such a Statua might deter them, because set up by a Religious
Commonwealth. But you have brought nothing with you from thence, but (...). a
Brazen face: And it is with this Brazen face, you have the confidence to appear
in defense of your many-headed Democracy, to vilisie the present Established
Government, in despite of the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom; and when you
have done, (as I am told) to appear in Westminster Hall, at a time, when one, a
very little worse than your self, received Sentence of Death for High Treason;
And if the Platonic Year were true, a man might easily guess your fate every
Revolution of Saturn: (But to the purpose) Greece is not able to contain your
Politics, but you whip over into Italy, and as the Painters of that Country
use sometimes to summon the fairest Courtesans together, and draw a Beautiful
face for the Blessed Virgin Mary, from the slagrancies of Harlots: So from the
Charming Constitutions of Rome in its Youth, and Venice in its old Age, would
you model us a pure, sound, and glorious Government.

I would so, (replied Nevil), For in the most turbulent Times of that
Commonwealth, and Factions between the Nobility and People, Rome was much more
full of virtuous and Heroic Citizens, than ever it was under Aurelius, or
Anteninus. p. 43.

But, ( said I) are there not as many virtuous and Heroic Persons under King
Charles the Second in England? But now I think of it, the late Shaftsbuty's
Conspiracy would have left us as few, had it taken effect, as Catalines would
in Rome. And I believe, that such a Protestant as you are, who will allow of no
Priests, but those of Mars, esteem a few Heathen Philosophers, before all the
Ministers of the Gospel. He was a Conjurer like your self, that was ravished
with the love of Tully, for writing against Transubstantiation, in his third
Book, de Natura deorum: Cum Fruges Cererem, vinum Liberum dicimus, genere nos
quidem sermonis utimur usit ato, sed ecquemtam amentem esse put as qui illud
quo vescatur Deum credat esse? When we call Corn Ceres, and Wine Bacchus, we
only use a customary way of Speech, but whom do you think so mad, as to believe
that with which he is sed, to be a God? And just such a true Protestant!
Politic Antiquarian is the Author of Plato Redivivus; and just such a
formidable enemy to Popery.

But, Sir, if Ancient Governments do not please you, (said he) because out of
Fashion, What think you of the Venetian? I declare it to be the best in the
World at this day.

Indeed, ( said I), the Venetians, I confess, have not been altogether so
Pope-ridden, as some others have; and their Dukes may marry the Adriatic Sea,
without a License from the Bishop of Rome; but I hope you believe it cannot be
done without the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome: And that the Pope
has a great deal less Jurisdiction in England, (if ever you took the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy.) But you have lost your English Conscience, and no
body values your Protestant Policy: For is not the King of England much better
than a Duke of Venice? Is not the Succession in the right Line, as Authentic
from Scripture, as good by experience, as Ballotting? Is not the King of
England by the Grace of God, greater, and better than a Duke of Venice, by the
virtue of Hocus Pocus.

He is greater (said he), but that greatness is not better, either for himself,
or his people.

So says the Author of Plato Redivivus, (said I) but he does not think so.
Believe me, in the Ballotting Vrns, are buried all the Liberties of the common
people of Venice, they are there so far from choosing a Sovereign, that they
cannot choose a Gentleman; and never by any art, merit, or industry become one.
But the meanest Subjects of England have one advantage, which no Democracy in
the World, much less the Aristocracy of Venice, ever afforded, That by their
virtues, they sometimes arrive from the lowest condition, to an higher Sphere
of Splendour, Honor and Riches, than any Commonwealth upon Earth affords. -- I
know some have argued for a Commonwealth, from the great successes, and long
continuance of that Government; but they who look into the Original of it, will
find better reasons from the place and Situation, from the occasions of its
being inhabited, why it should fall into that Model; than why any others,
especially the Monarchy of England, should condescend, and conform to it. But
the Author of Plato Redivivus, would have it so, or else He loses his longing.
I wonder in this hatching Age, that no Politic Fop ever yet stood up and
demanded, or proposed, that the Kings of England should be acknowledged by the
same odd and fantastical Ceremonies, with which the Archduke of Austria is
confirmed in his Dukedom of Carinthia: For, there is nothing so ridiculous,
nothing so dangerous, as our Modern Heretics and Politicians do not now-adaies
assert. Therefore, Sir, let me as a Friend advise you, to keep your Politics
to yourself; You may frame and model in your Study, as long as you please,
without breaking your shins; but if you put them either in writing or practice,
you will endanger the breaking your Neck. And suppose you escape that, you may
chance to meet with those (if you have one Grain of honor, or sense lest you)
that will break either your brains or your heart. But if your head be so full
of Politics, even petition Jupiter to pluck thee up an Island somewhere in the
Atlantic Ocean, as He is seign'd to have done Delos for the Birth of Apollo;
there thou may be delivered of thy Politic Conceptions; for I do not know
any part of the Earth that has long peeped over the surface of the Waters,
that will be plagued with them. I say, even petition Jove; for such a restless
Varlet as thou art, art not fit to pray to the God of the Christians, whose
Vicegerent thou have debased, and whose Ministers thou have vilified. What
Religion you are of, I cannot tell, but by your recommending to us the
Dmocratical Government of old Rome, I am apt to believe that you would bring us
under the Jesuitical Discipline of the new. This was the advice of Parsons the
Jesuit, alias Doleman, and of his Confederates in his High Court of Memorials
for Reformation of England, at Sevil in Spain, Anno 1590. as Watson a Secular
Priest relates in his Quodlibets, p. 94, 95. And of Tho. Campanella an Italian
Friar, who in his Book de Monarchia Hispanica, c. 25. p. 204. informs the King
of Spain, That nothing will so much conduce to weaken the English, as
dissension and discord sown among them, First, by Instigating the swaying men
in the Parliament House; Vt Angliam in Formam Reipublicae reducant in
Imitationem Hollandorum: To reduce England into a form of a Commonwealth, in
Imitation of the Hollanders. But they value not what sort of Commonwealth,
whether Dutch, or Venetian they model us to, so that at last they may but
obtain their Ends of ruining our present established Government. For my part,
Sir, I wonder that any English man of common sense, should be cajoled to admire
the Politics of every whiffling Rascal, who under the name of a true
Protestant, is managing the most malicious Designs of our inveterate Enemies
the Jesuits. I wonder that any man of the least reason, and experience, should
not dread the desperate Hazzards that inseparably attend every change and
revolution in Government: the Restitution indeed of this Monarchy after the
late Civil Wars, was the greatest wonder that I meet with in all History, since
Dominion was founded on Earth, considering, that it was done without Violence,
or Bloodshed; but it never was, nor ever will be changed without numberless
Deaths and Calamities; and suppose it should be done, what would the People of
England get by being in the same Condition they were in twenty five Years ago:
Or, which the common people of Holland are in at this day, who pay Customs for
Foggs and Damps, and are Taxed for Quartane Agues; and who have nothing cheap
among them but Heresy and Schism? I confess, you have a great deal of reason
to admire the Fundamental Immunities and Privileges of the Venetians, because
very rare in a Christian Commonwealth; for they may whore and be clapped
according to Law, and go to the Conventicles of Venus without any great danger
of persecution for Righteousness sake. But how in the mean Time is this Liberty
of the people consistent with the Purity of the Gospel (for which you so
strenuously stickle and make a noise)? Oh, pray pardon me, I forgot that you
are a Politician! a Politician that is for obliging mankind with virtues
a-lamode, and Morality and Divinity of the newest fashion; you Politicians hate
the old dull phlegmatic grey-beard Apostolical Rules, you are for spick and
span new Riddles, and Paradoxes; and therefore, Sir, to oblige you, I will tell
you a piece of news.

What is that, (said he)?

I am heartily sorry, Sir, ( said I) for the great loss you particularly had
four thousand years ago: What an hard case was it, that the Records of Sodom
and Gomorrha, should be so unluckily burnt. Without doubt you would have
gathered things of great Moment from them, and might have gratified a great
many of your true Protestant Friends with surprising relations of the great
Liberties and Privileges of those people, of which we have a small hint, by
the memorable clutter they made about Lots door, Genesis 19. verse. 4. And such a
rabble of Catamites would most properly have raised the Ghost of Plato from the
dead, who was so notorious a Sodomite when alive.

You are a railing, prating Boy, (replied he) who values your Judgment that
have nothing of solid Learning, or substantial Politics in you? You are a
paltry quibbling insignificant Black Coat. Before I could answer him, Hobbs
took courage, and fell in with him pellmell, calling me Pedantical Academick.
His Vniversity-Learning (said he) has quite spoiled him, and for want of my
reasonings and conclusions, he is no better than a dull pragmatical Idiot. But
yonder is a grave serious and Ancient learned man, I will be judged by him. Ay!
and so will I too (replied Nevil), For He is one of our Friends, an Holy man,
and a good Commonwealths- man, a great Enemy to Tyranny; Ay, to Popery too
(said Hobbs).

I followed them and at some distance I espied Mr. Richard Baxter walking very
pensively, in a melancholy and musing posture; but before we got half way to
him, the two Politicians fell out betwixt themselves: for Hobbs struck Nevil
such a blow on the Head with his Cane, that, as if it had been a Magical Staff,
it turned all his Hair into an Anarchy of Snakes and Adders; and he again
returned Mr. Hobbs such a Salute on the Coxcomb, that his Head swelled ten
times too big for his Body; and yet as if proud of these extravagant
Deformities, they strove who should appear first before that great Arbitrator:
however it was pretty to see how they were both deceived: for Baxter no sooner
saw Hobbs, but with an austere visage, You Sir, (said he) your Holy
Commonwealth, p. 225.
Leviathan, or Absolute Impious Monarchy making us our Religion, etc. tends
not to secure us of a Righteous Government; because you are so Irreligious, as
not to pretend to any such thing as the securing a succession of the Christian
Religion, without which, a Righteous Government is not to be expected.

Hobbs was ready to rave with madness at this unexpected Reprimand from so
redoubted an Oracle; and on the other hand, Nevil was insolent with joy; until
Baxter turning to him, and mistaking him for Harrington, You Sir, (said he)
that think, Holy Commonwealth, p. 226.
Venice, where Popery rules, and Whoredom abounds, is the perfectest pattern
of Government for us now existent, intend not sure, that this Model shall keep
us from the Reign of Popery and Whoredom; and therefore doubtless, you intend
not, that this frame shall secure us the Christian Religion, without which
there can be no happy Government.

At this they all three fell together by the ears, and fought the Changes,
until an Officer that had a Tip-Staff in his hand, with a Deaths-Head on it,
commanded them to keep the Peace, in the Name of the King of Terrors, and told
them, that all their different pretensions should shortly be heard and
determined before the High Court of Policy: -- Baxter then again at liberty,
and somewhat more calm, said, I doubt not, but the Model of Venice, among
better men, might do much against Popery and Whoredom too, which does but show,
that it is not the Model, but the Better Men, that must do most: Holy
Commonwealth, p. 224.
for it is no mere Frame or Mode of Government, whether Monarchy, Aristocracy,
Democracy, or Mixed; whether the Roman, Spartan, Venetian, or any other Mode,
that will make happy a Commonwealth in the Hands of imprudent impious men, so
much as one of the other Forms, supposed worse, will do in the hands of men of
prudence, and fearing God.

Truly, ( said I to Seignior Chr.) I think this old man talks very piously and
Religiously, upon what grounds or designs, I cannot tell. ( Oh replied he) He
is an Extraordinary man, he has but two faults, or else he was not to be
matched in the world. Pray what are those ( said I) that should blemish so
Austere and Reverend a Person. Why ( replied he) He is only a Knave and a Fool.
Lord, Sir, ( said I) I think he has got Fitts too; for now he has no body to
dispute and wrangle with, see how his hands cuff and fight with one another.
What are they Convulsion fits? -- --. No, (said he) they are Contradiction
fits, they are the fits of Richard against Baxter. But let us leave him for a
little time, because we shall know enough of him by and by.

We were now following Hobbs, and his Antagonist to the High Court of
Politics, with a great desire to hear their debates and claims adjusted, and
to know the manner of that Court, and who presided in it. Going therefore
through a long Cloister, we came into a great Hall, at the upper end of which,
upon a kind of a Throne sat Lucifer, as I afterward understood; but he was in
so grave, so demure a shape, as if He had worn all the Hypocrisy of the
Scribes and Pharisees at once, his Countenance was Phip, and very Judicious to
behold, he had a little starch't Band, with great Bandstrings, a long black
Cloak down to his Cloven Foot, which now and then bob'd out, or else I had not
known or suspected him. -- The first Cause that was brought before him was, a
great Controversy betwixt the Jesuits and Presbyterians, concerning the
Doctrines of deposing and killing of Kings. The Jesuits claimed it in honor of
their Society, saying, that they first invented it, that they first preached,
and practiced it; that the Presbyterians stole it from them, and that they
could prove it. The Presbyterians replied, that it was they who first preached
it, that they had more openly professed it, and proffered to drop Authors with
them when ever they pleased, if they denied it. The Jesuits pleaded again, that
though their Society indeed was not very Ancient, no more than theirs was, yet
that they had it by Inheritance, by Tradition, and by Command from their holy
Fathers the Popes, long before the Sect of the Presbyterians had a name, or
were in being. The Presbyterians replied again very hastily, that although they
were obscured (for some Centuries) yet they could prove that they were lineally
descended from the Ancient, and famous Aerius.

At this last name, the Jesuits were almost quite down in the mouth, for a
great many thought that that Aerius was the Prince of the Air, and concluded
that Lucifer would be partial to so near a relation, and consequently that they
had lost the day; upon which there was an hideous brawl betwixt Goodman, Knox,
Buchanan, Gilly, and the Jesuits; at last Lucifer commanded silence, and
calling for a Bible said, Every Kingdom divided against it self, is brought to
desolation; the Sons of Belial should unite as Brethren in Iniquity; and so
with several Arguments advised them to understand one another better, to be
more moderate for the Future; and not to fall out about that of which He
himself was the first Author, that none of them should want their reward, that
first or last preached or practiced it. That he did not call himself the first
Author, for that he was ambitious of the honor of the Thing. But because they
had on both sides such endless Evidences, and so much merit, that he was
unwilling to disoblige either of them, and that rather than be on one side or
other, he thought it no dishonor to him for once and away to turn Crimmer.

They were willing to let the Controversy fall, because the noise of such a
thing at this time, might be equally prejudicial to them both; and Lucifer
advised, that it should rather be disowned until a more convenient season. So
silence being made, one with a cast Horn of some decrepit Devil, sounded with
so terrible and shrill a noise, that it raised the Ghosts of a great many
Politicians presently; A Crier called over their Names; and the first of them
that came forward, was the famous and renowned Nicolas Machiavel: He wondered at
first, what the occasion of being so unexpectedly summoned to appear there,
was: but being told, that it was the highest Court of Politics, and that he
was to give an account of his Writings, he began to tremble exceedingly; and
seeing so grave and venerable an Assembly, imagined they had been all Saints;
and verily thought Lucifer had been one of the Apostles or Primitive
Patriarchs: therefore addressing himself with all submission;

I hope (said he) Reverend Fathers, that at this Time, and in this Place, I
shall vindicate my self from those unjust aspersions, which the subtlety and
malice of some men have cast upon my Name and Memory for this whole Age last
past, charging me with three things.

First, That I should vilify Monarchy, and preser Democracy before it: To
which I answer, In a Letter to Zenobius Buon-delmontius.
That if I speak largely in Commendation of the latter, it ought to be
considered, that I was born, bred, and employed in a Free City, which was then
under that form of Government; and if you read my History of Florence, you will
find, that it did owe all its wealth, greatness and prosperity to it: what I
said of the glorious Achievements of the Commonwealth of Rome, was to show the
perfection of that Government in its kind, but not to propose it by way of
Imitation for all other people; for how can any man pretend to write upon
Policy, who destroys the most essential part of it, which is obedience to all
Government? therefore I protest, that the animating of private men, either
directly or indirectly, to disobey, much less to shake off any Government, how
Despotical so ever, was never in my Thoughts or Writings: and I always did,
and ever will declare, that in every Monarchy, the interests of the King and
People are the same.

At this there was a murmuring all over the Court, and Lucifer seemed somewhat
displeased: upon which, some that stood by me said, as we have cheated the
world above fourscore years about this man, and made his memory stink among the
True Protestants, who have at the same time an esteem for Politicians vastly
more Diabolical; so for diversion, we will even sham the Devil himself for once
and away.

Silence being made, Machiavel went on. The second thing objected against me,
is, That I should encourage Princes to Perjury and Breach of Oaths and
Promises: To which I answer, That any man that reads my Book entitled [The
Prince] with ordinary charity, may perceive, that it is not my intention therein
to recommend the Government of those men (there described) to the world; much
less, to teach them, to trample upon good men, and all that is sacred and
venerable upon earth. If I have been too punctual in describing those Monsters,
and drawn them to the life in all their Lineaments and Colors, I hope mankind
will know them the better, to avoid them; my Treatise being both a Satyr
against and a true Character of them. I speak not of Great and Honorable
Princes, such as the Kings of France and England, and others, who have the
States and Orders of their Kingdoms with excellent Laws and Constitutions to
frame and maintain their Government, and who reign over the Hearts, as well as
the Persons of their Subjects: I speak only of those Vermin bred out of the
Corruption of our own small Commonwealths and Cities, or engendered by the ill
blasts that come from Rome, as Olivaretto da Termo, Borgia, the Baglioni and
the Bentivoglii.

At this Lucifer grew so impatient, that he had certainly broke loose, if some
of his Counselors had not advised him to Moderation and Hypocrisy for a
little while; and then Machiavel went on.

The third thing, said he, laid to my charge, is, that I have vilified the
Clergy, and abused the sacred Orders of the Church of Rome: To this I answer,
That it is they have vilified and abused themselves; insomuch, that if the
Apostles of Christ should be sent again into the World, they would take more
pains to confute the Gallimaufry of Opinions and Innovations in that Church,
than they did to preach down the Traditions of the Pharisees, and the Fables
and Idolatry of the Gentiles; and would in all probability suffer a new
Martyrdom in that City, under the Vicar of Christ, for the same Doctrine which
once animated the Tyrants against them. As for Government, this I must say,
That whereas all other false worships even of Heathens, have been set up by
some Politic Legislators, for the support and preservation of Government. This
false, this spurious Religion (brought in upon the ruins of Christianity, by
the Popes) has deformed the face of Government in Europe; destroying all the
good Principles and Morality left us by the Heathens themselves; and introduced
instead thereof, Sordid, Cowardly, and Vnpolitick Notions, whereby they have
subjected mankind, and even great Princes, and States to their Empire, and
never suffered any Orders or Maxims to take place (where they have power) that
might make a Nation Wise, Honest, Great or Wealthy.

Lucifer burst out into such a fury, that the fire flew out of his eyes for
very wrath, crying, How aborninably am I cheated and abused by these
Politicians? I thought that I had been sure of as good a Secretary, as ever
managed the affairs of the Kingdom of Darkness; and on the contrary, he is for
bringing our whole Mystery of Iniquity to light. For my part, I do not know
whom to trust, or which way to turn my self: Are you my friends? And is this
your Politician, that has made such a noise in the world? How comes this to
pass?

May it please your Mighty Darkness, (replied one of the Jesuits) it was
necessary that we should reproach this man to all the world, who had been so
severe upon the Church and Court of Rome: and besides from his character of
Tyrants and Usurpers, we took occasion to render Just Princes odious to their
People, as if they observed those Maxims of Breach of Oaths and Promises; and
in the mean time have taught the people to practice them in good earnest: So
that in lieu of this one Politician, we can pleasure you with hundreds much
more serviceable to your Mighty Darkness. In the mean while we will strip him
of all his Infernal Honors and Titles he has so long enjoyed; so that he shall
no longer be called Old Nick (...), nor shall his Disciples be quibbled again
into the highest form of Politicians, with the Honorable and Redoubted Pun of
Match-less Villains. Take him away therefore, Guards, let him make room for
persons vastly more deserving of this High Court.

The next that came was Hobbs, who seemed infinitely vexed, that Machiavel had
had so long an Audience; and therefore with a kind of snarling scream he told
them, That he thought truly, that he did not only deserve to be heard most of
all, but first of all too; considering the great service he had done for the
President of that Honorable Court: For have not I, Sir, (said he to Lucifer)
made men Libertines and Atheists, by my Principles, Positions and Conclusions?
and consequently by that means promoted the fundamental Vices of your Empire,
Faction, Sedition and Rebellion, etc.? Have not I obtained to that excellent
Art of Reasoning, which like an Ignis Fatuus leads men into Bogs and Ditches,
whilst it pretends to give them light? My reasonings, I say, and Positions,
from which the unwary Sparks draw those Conclusions, which are most suitable to
their Lusts and Extravagancies, whilst to others, as bad Buzzards as the
former, they make a show of Tendency to the highest perfection of Nature, and
most sublime Morality? Have not I the most admirable way of slurring an
Argument, of any mortal man? Could any body so dexterously tack about with
Times and Persons, as I have done, both in my Words, Writings and Actions;
applying those things in my Defense against Bishop Bramhall, as if respecting
the King in Banishment, when as your Lucifership full well knows that I
designed them, by way of complement to Your Vicegerent Oliver then upon his
Throne? Lastly, Most Mighty Lucifer, you know, that after your Forces were
routed in Heaven, that the greatest Stratagem of yours, that ever took effect
upon Earth, was, the corrupting Humane Nature, when it was in its Innocence;
and therefore do but consider, in imitation of your Great Self, to what a
condition I have endeavored to reduce mankind, even now they are under the
Covenant of Grace, by that sublime speculation of mine; In the state of Nature,
there is no difference between Good and Evil, Right and Wrong; the state of
Nature is a state of War, in which, every man has a right to all things. For
from this fundamental Point, in despite of all the Rules of the Gospel, I have
drawn most powerful Topics of Violence, Treason and Rebellion.

Lucifer seemed extraordinary well pleased with him; insomuch, that he was
ready to pronounce him Prince of all the Politicians; and the Garland was
ordered to be brought for him: but Father Parsons stepping out, called to him
the Author of Plato Redivivus, telling him, that old Hobbs for all his Boots,
had been too nimble for him; and that if he did not make haste, he would lose,
what of Right did belong to him; and what through their Interest, they might
procure for him. He made what haste he could; but when he came, there was no
need of speaking himself; for after they had prevailed with Lucifer to suspend
his determination, they told him, that they had brought before him a
Politician, that was as much more deserving than Hobbs, or any Philosopher of
them all; as the practical part of Politics is above the speculative. It Is
true (said they) Hobbs' s Principles may gain some few proselytes; but they
signify no more to the Rabble, than if he had complemented them with Euclid' s
Elements; but this Gentleman has been pleased to condescend to furnish their
weakest capacities with Arguments for Rebellion; to increase their Fears and
Jealousies; to inflame their most brutish Zeal; and to fit them in whole shoals
for Hell and Damnation. Your Mighty Darkness ought likewise to consider, that
an Anarchy is far more destructive to mankind, than any Tyranny in one single
Person whatever; as witness the late Civil Wars in England, wherein you gained
almost, as much as you lost in the Ten Persecutions. And Lastly, We do assure
you, that we your most faithful Friends and Privy Counselors, have furnished
him with all those Rules and Instructions, which are the most direct and ready
way to revive the good Old Cause.

Lucifer was in so great suspense, that he spoke not a word of a long time: for
indeed, he knew not how to determine the Controversy between them: Which both
parties observing, began to be so clamorous, that he called to Bradshaw (who
had heard the whole matter) and desiring him to sit Vice President in his
place, he privately sneaked away. They were all so extremely well pleased with
their New President, that there was a profound silence at the very first sight
of him, knowing him to be one that had far outdone the Devil; and indeed the
very first glance of his eye gave them general satisfaction: For, rising up
with a Politic smile; It is not the first time (said he) Men, Brethren and
Fathers, that I have obliged and pleasur'd-you all. It is not the first time
that you have all stood to my final Judgment, and therefore I do not question
but you will as readily agree to my present determination. The difficulties
that are arisen here amongst us, are about the pretensions that are made by
several persons to the Hell-grave of Policy, and you are not yet satisfied who
most of all deserve to be the Head and Principal of our famous Society. I must
confess, that both Mr. Hobbs and his Antagonist, have made very fair, but not
full claims to this high Dignity. I confess, that there are many considerable
Friends on both sides, but as I will not extremely disoblige, so neither can I
satisfy either of them in this point; For, according to the merit of the
Cause, and the usual rule of ending Controversies of this nature, I must
dispose of it to a third Person. And I do not question, but that even the
Principals in this difference, will be the most ready to confer this honor
upon him, when they shall have seen him, and heard the reasons I shall move in
his behalf.

Every one was wondering, and impatient to know who this remarkable Politician
should be, when to their amazement, Mr. Baxter came creeping in, leaning upon a
Staff, out of breath, and with so ghastly a Visage, that the most mortified
Hermit in the World looked like a Glutton to him; with a faint and low voice,
Peace, Brethren, peace (said he) I have often labored for peace, Why are you
at Variance amongst your selves? Why are these Differences among you? Oh that
ye would lay aside this pride, this contention! Oh, this selfishness! this
selfishness! Oh, this pride! this selfconceit! Oh, my Brethren, if you would
but watch your thoughts, you would not be so fierce in your words and actions.
I say, watch your thoughts.

1. Watch them that come in. 2. Watch them that go out.
First, Watch them that come in. Therefore, when you find thoughts arising one
after another in your hearts, call them all to an account, keeping a Sentinel
at the door of your heart, saying, Who art thou for? If thou art for Christ,
give me the Word, thou shall freely pass: If thou art not for Christ, and have
not his Word, stand; If thou come up one step further, I Will fire at thee. Thus
if you keep down and suppress these Rebellious thoughts, this selfishness, this
pride, this contention will not be found among you; but oh! I am faint, faint,
worn out in the Vineyard of the Lord, and so my Brethren, farewell.

I could not sorbear smiling at this his sly Jargoon, and Seignior Chr.
turning to me, said, did you hear? This old Fellow says, He is worn out in the
Vineyard of the Lord, when as he has been sowing the Tares of Sedition and
Heresy for above forty Years in the Field of the Church. He will certainly
carry the Garland; for both Hobbs and Nevil do despair, and stand staring like
two Scotch Runts, that have all to bedighted the Fair; but let us hear what the
President is going to say.

At this Bradshaw stood up, and with a Countenance very composed, and grave,
said; Gentlemen, we do adjudge, pronounce, and declare this man (whose very
looks bespeak him, what his words and actions aloud proclaim him) to be the
greatest of all Politicians, for these following Reasons.

First, Without the Help of his Politics all ours had been insignificant, and
in Vain; that good old Cause, You value your self so much upon, had never been
brought to perfection, had not he mightily assisted us. You might as well have
attempted to whistle the Moon under your Hats, as to have laid the Head of the
King upon the Block, under the Axe of the Executioner, had not he the Preacher
first sentenc't him from the Pulpit; 'twas the Magic of his voice that raised
whole Legions of Reforming Zealots, and preached them into Rank and File against
their Sovereign; 'twas He snivel'd the Rabble to the Devil in such mighty
Shoals, as they crowded the Highwayes to Hell, for several years together. This
you Jesuits do so well know, that you venture drawing, hanging, and quartering,
for the sake of preaching in Seditious and Schismatical Conventicles in his
shape, and after his way; and therefore what signifies any other man's Writings,
either Hobbs or Nevils, when in competition with him, who has outpreacht,
outwrit, outdone, out-reform'd you all.

Secondly, He is most worthily to be accounted the chief Politician, upon the
account of that singular and unparallelled Spirit of Contradiction, which is in
him in a double portion, and in a double sense. And therefore when His Serene
Darkness Lucifer asked me, with what Confidence I could bring King Charles
before his own Bar of Kings Bench, when the very form of the Writ runs (Coram
nobis ubicunque) in his own name and Authority? My Answer was, That I brought
the King before himself, by the same Rule that Richard is against Baxter.

Thirdly, We must, and do acknowledge him to be the most extraordinary
Politician in the world, for he has not only deceived many thousands of people,
but he has cheated himself, more than any body else. For, first, He thinks
himself very Humble, when he is so very proud, that he is Proud of his
Humility; a sort of pride, which Lucifer never dreamt of. Secondly, He thinks
himself very meek and merciful, when as he is really more bloody, and cruel
than any Tyrant, he can either fear, or describe; witness his many sanguinary
and virulent Sermons he has preached; witness his behavior to one Major
Jenning, in the late Wars, in a Battle fought in the County of Salop, between
Lynsel and Longford, where the Kings Party being unfortunately routed, the poor
Major was stripped almost naked, and left for dead, but He with one Lieutenant
Hurdman, taking a walk among the wounded and dead Bodies, and observing some
life in the Major, Hurdman run him through the Body in cold blood, Baxter all
the while looking on, and taking off with his own hand the Kings Picture from
about his neck, telling him that He was a Popish Rogue, and that was his
Crucisix, and kept it some years after.

Thirdly, He thinks him very wise, fit to direct, rule and govern all mankind,
whenas he mistakes that to be the Spirit of wisdom in his heart, which is
nothing else but the whisperings of that Eating and Cancrous Wolf, that has
possessed the nape of his neck.

Lastly, If He, whose Faith is Faction, whose Religion is Rebellion, whose
Prayers are Spells, whose Piety is Magic, whose Purity is the gall of
Bitterness; who can cant and recant, and cant again; who can transform himself
into as many shapes as Lucifer (who is never more a Devil, than when an Angel
of Light,) and like him (who proud of his perfections, first rebelled in
Heaven) Proud of his Imaginary graces, pretend to rule and govern, and
consequently rebel on Earth, be the greatest Politician. Then make room for Mr.
Baxter, let him come in, and be Crowned with wreaths of Serpents, and Chaplets
of Adders; let his Triumphant Chariot be a Pulpit drawn on the wheels of
Cannon, by a Brace of Wolves in Sheeps Clothing. Let the Ancient Fathers of
the Church, whom out of Ignorance he has vilified; the Reverend and Learned
Prelates, whom out of Pride and Malice, he has abused, belyed and persecuted;
the most Righteous King, whose Murder (I speak my own and his sense) contrary
to the light of all Religion, Laws, Reason and Conscience, He has justified,
then denied, then again and again justified: Let them all be bound in Chains to
attend his Infernal Triumph to his Saints everlasting Rest. Then make room,
Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, Atheists, and Politicians, for the greatest
Rebel on Earth, and next to him that fell from Heaven.

After this, the Court arose every one, even the two Antagonists going away
very well satisfied. Seignior Chr. and I were left alone, and had a fair
opportunity to reflect upon what we had heard. The first thing that came into
my head, was the last part of Bradshaw's determination, wherein he compared the
Motives and Grounds of Baxter' s Rebellious Politics, with Lucifers. For my
part, ( said I) in his Preface to his Holy Commonwealth, He seems to deny that
Position, That Dominion is founded in Grace; and proves, that Godliness is not
Authority; And that the Saints are not the rightful Rulers of the World. And
many people that read that Book would think, that he wrote it with a great deal
of Zeal and Piety, for the promotion of Gods glory, and the improvement of all
virtues. He condemns both Trranny and Democracy; shows a bloody Tyrant in his
proper Colors, peppers the Rabble with whole Vollies of stinging Epithetes: is
very earnest for the Reign of Christ, the dignity of Saints, and the
Reformation of the World. He seems not so much concerned for any particular
sort of Government, as that we may be secured in the Main; and yet judges a
Mixed Monarchy the best: He lays open the Contrivances of the Jesuits, exposes
the Papal Usurpations over the Civil Magistrate; has garnisht his Book all over
with Quotations from good Authors, and confirmed his Propositions with
numberless authorities from Scripture.

From Scripture, (replied Seignior Christiano smiling) Did you never read, that
Satan is transformed into an Angel 2 Cor. 11. 14, 15.
of Light? and therefore it is no marvel, if his Ministers also be transformed
as the Ministers of Righteousness. And Vincentius Lirinensis tells us, Nullam
esse ad fallendum faciliorem viam, quam ut ubi nefarii erroris subinducitur
fraudulentia, ibi divinorum verborum praetendatur Autoritas. And Bishop
Davenant ( in his twelfth determined Question) says, Induant quam velint isti
Magistratuum Reformatores, etc. Let those Reformers of Magistrates mask under
what vizor they please, Religion may be their Plea, but Rebellion is their
Practice. And this is so true of Mr. Baxter, that as far as I can perceive, he
will confirm it with his last breath: But the Mask he has on, will appear to be
that of the Fool, as well as of the Knave: for whatever he in one place denies,
he most strictly and rigidly maintains in another; and there is not a more
ridiculous Book of Polity in the world. He confesses indeed, that he did not
design an Accurate Tract of Politics; not a discovery of an Utopia, or City of
the Sun. And indeed I am apt to believe him; for it rather dropped from the
concavities of the Midsummer Moon. Had he spent his Itch of Scribbling in
writing his Wifes Life, the History of Stewed Prunes, or the Pedigree of his
Gib-Cat, he had done much better, than to have defiled so much good Paper with
the indigested Excrements of his Brain upon such a subject: For Mr. Baxter did
not either honestly or seriously enough consider, that his whole Pile of
Politics stands tottering upon a false and rotten foundation: For he holds,
that the Sovereignty of England is in the three Estates, viz. King, Lords and
Commons; that the King has but a Coordinate Power, and may be overruled by
the other two. This is the fundamental Maxim of all his Politics, without
which, he never could have pretended to the framing his Theocratical Government
(as he calls it) or have made such a Bustle for his peculiar godly Friends and
Associates; but if this were true (which is utterly false) why may it not as
well happen, that the King and Lords should overruled, and consequently exciude
the Commons? And then what thanks is that House bound to give such a notable
Aphorismmonger? The Counselors in that August Assembly, are of three sorts by
the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom: Some are by Birth, as the Barons; some
Lambards Archion. p. 118.
by Succession, as Bishops; and some by Election, as Knights and Burgesses; and
these be all ( for the time) the Kings Council:) Did ever any King call a
Council to depose him? But suppose, according to Mr. Baxter, they might or
should do so, who should then hinder the two that are by Birth and Succession,
from overruling and excluding the third, that are by Election? But the
Bishops, it seems, must troop out after the King, for fear Mr. Baxter should
stumble upon such an horrid piece of nonsense, as the making two Estates
become three, by the taking away of one.

No less ridiculous is Mr. Baxter in this deposing humor of his: for he does
like the Abbess, who chid the Nun for Fornication, when she her self had the
Monks Breeches on her head, instead of her Veil, at the same time. He
pronounces very terribly, These. 327. That it is a most impious thing, for Popes
to pretend to disoblige Christians from their Oaths and Fidelity to their
Sovereigns, and to encourage their Subjects to rebel and murder them: But as if
it were a most pious thing in a Jack Presbyter, he breathes nothing but
perfidious Covenants, Engagements, Associations, Seditions and murdering
Treasons, for several Pages together immediately after.

Like a Fool as he is to his own Good Old Cause, he confesses, page 461. that
God has no where in Scripture told us, whether England should be governed by
one or two, or an hundred; but that where the King is Supreme, it is the will
of God that the people should obey him. A strange things, that the Politic
Saint should want Scripture upon so material an account, who is used to
squander it away so plentifully upon every trivial occasion. Well! since
Scripture (as he says) cannot, nothing more or better can declare the King of
England to be Supreme, unaccountable to none but God, than the fundamental Laws
of this Ancient and Just Monarchy. But because Mr. Baxter, who would never be
governed, has little or no knowledge of the Laws, he sends his Reader in p.
458. to Bacon and Prynn, who were as great Heretics for Lawyers, as he is for
a Divine: I wish that Mr. Baxter, who has deserved to lose his Tongue, as much
as Prynn did his Ears, would take example by him, and lay things seriously and
impartially to his heart, that by better Aphorisms of Humility and Obedience,
he would grow so good a Politician indeed, as at last to cheat the Devil. For
it is a strange thing, that a man who has taken so much pains for the salvation
of other men's souls, should so carelessly run on tick for the damnation of his
own; If it be true, that the King is Supreme, and that they who resist him, as
Mr. Baxter has done, shall receive damnation to themselves, and, as Mr. Prynn
himself Prynn's Repub. or spurious Good Old Cause.
says, they shall. But I fear he will never be of so good a mind.

For like a Knave as he is, by his Politics in this Book, and by his Schism
and Separation to this day, he practices those very Rules, which in the
beginning of this Book he discovers and declares to be the Jesuits Directions
for preserving Popery, and changing Religion in this Nation. I do not wonder,
that the late Colonel Sidney ( who was so great a Crony of Father Oliva' s, the
General of the Jesuits at Rome, for several years together) should borrow part
of his Speech he left behind him, out of Baxter' s Holy Commonwealth: for says
he, page 377. No Man or Family has originally more right to govern a Nation
than the rest, till Providence and Consent allow it them. Few Princes will
plead a Successive Right of Primogeniture from Noah. And this, without doubt,
was the Original of that politic strain in Colonel Sidney' s Speech, as the
directions of the Jesuits are of Mr. Baxter's Politics and practices: For
says he himself, the sum of Campanella' s Counsel ( for promoting the Spanish
Interests in England) was in Queen Elizabeth's days, 1. Above all to breed
dissentions and discords among our selves: To exasperate the minds of the
Bishops against King James, by persuading them that he was in heart a Papist,
and would bring in Popery: To make the Kingdom Elective: And lastly, To
persuade the chief Parliament men, to turn England into the form of a
Commonwealth.

Pray, Sir, ( said I) do but hear what Mr. Baxter says for himself at the
latter end of his Book, p. 489. If any one (says he) can prove that I was
guilty of hurt to the Person, or destruction of the Power of the King, or of
changing the Fundamental Constitutions of the Commonwealth, etc. I will never
gainsay him, if he calls me a most perfidious Rebel, and tell me that I am
guilty of far greater sin than Murder, Whoredom, Drunkenness, or such like; or
if they can solidly confute my Grounds, I will thank them, and confess my sin
to all the world: but Malicious railings, I take for Rebellions themselves, I
shall not regard.

I will not rail on Mr. Baxter (replied Seignior Chr.) (for it is a difficult
thing to nickname Schism, Sedition, Murder, and Treason) but this I must say
of his writings, If they were made hangings to his House of Office, as Olivers
Porters Papers are to his Cell, he might do himself the kindness of hiding the
one side of them that contradict the other. for certainly no man living, ever
gave himself the lie so often, or complemented himself into so many titles of
Infamy in one breath, since the world began; no man ever took so much pains to
justify himself, as Baxter has to expose and condemn himself. For would you
know what sin he is most guilty of, (that is so ready to make his Confession)
it is certainly that which he most declaims against, how dangerous a thing ( in
his most serious Meditations upon these his superfine Politics) (says he) is
pride of heart? When once it grows to an enormous height, it will make men
swell with self conceit, and think none so fit to govern Countries and Nations
as they: nor any so fit to teach the Church: nor any so meet to judge what is
good or evil to the Commonwealth. This he says at the end of that Book,
wherein he dogmatically prescribes rules of Polity for the State ( as since he
has done for the Church) in opposition to all the rules of Modesty and
Obedience, and contrary to all the Laws of God and man. To conclude for all Mr.
Baxter's pretenses to Gods glory, and the increase of Religion; these his
impracticable whimsies would be so far from procuring that good to this Nation,
which he promises to himself, and pretends to us; that they would certainly
overrun us with Enthusiastic Knaves and Hypocrites: and from Elihu in Job, we
may learn the fatal consequences of his ridiculous Politics: for we gather
from Job 34. 30. that He makes an hypocrite to reign, when he is minded to
scourge a sinful people.

We have learned, said I (dear friend), we have sufficiently learnt the truth
of this, by late and sad experience: we have found the wicked and dismal
Conclusions of this and other villainous Maxims of Fanatical and Hypocritical
Policy for twenty years together; wherein the Courts of Justice were filled
with Violence and Oppression; the Churches with Sacrilege and Blasphemy; the
Earth with the dead bodies, and Hell with the souls of Rebels: wherein there
was more wickedness committed in this one Island, than in all the world
besides; so that Foreigners said, that the King of England was King of Devils;
and I will swear, that there is none to compare with the white ones.

THE Third VISION OF GOVERNMENT.
The CONTENTS.
The monstrous Loyalty of the Fanatics: Their several Ridiculous Policies; the
growth and design of the late Hellish Conspiracy. The two fundamental
Principles of the Good Old Cause. First, That All Civil Authority is derived
Driginally from the People: The extreme villainy and folly of this Proposition
thoroughly examined, and by a Civilized Cannibal condemned. The Second, That
Birthright and Proximity of Blood give no Title to Rule or Government; and that
It is lawful to preclude the next Heir from his Right of Succession to the
Crown. The great impiety and folly of this Proposition fully discovered, and
condemned by an Indian of New England. The Authors and Abetters of them both,
exposed. The great Wisdom and Goodness of our present Gracious Sovereign, in
securing to this Monarchy the right and lineal descent of the Crown.

THE more haste, the worse speed! cried a blundering Fellow that stumbled upon
me, and had almost beaten me down: Whither so fast, friend, what is your
business (said Seignior Christiano to him?) I am upon life and death, Sir,
(said he) pray don't stop or stay me; I am going for Cordials for a matter of
forty or fifty people in the next room, that are all ready to swoon and dye
away. This broke off our discourse; and we hastened immediately to know what
was the matter, and who they were: At our first entrance, how wonderfully was I
surpised to see Hobbs and Boxter, Knox and Buchanan, Hunt and Gilby, Milton
and the Jesuits, sitting all together like friends, but in a very disconsolate
posture! Some complained of grievous pains in the Spleen; others were sick at
the Heart; but all of them were most dismally tormented in their heads Whilst I
stood looking on them, I can tell you what they all ail (said a Gentleman to
me, whom I took to be a Physician) I can tell what they ail, without feeling
their pulses; do but follow me -- -- -- He opened a door, which led us into a
Court, like that of the Schools at Oxford; in the midst of it, there was a
great Fire, and an Officer, very solemnly, threw a great number of Books into
it. These are (said the Gentleman) the Books and Writings containing those
infamous Heretical and Blasphemous Propositions, which that famous University
condemned and sentenced in their Convocation July 21. 1683. upon the discovery
of the late Hellish Conspiracy. And those men you just now past by, are
Fanatical Wizards, who are in pain, whilst their charms of Rebellion are
burning: but yonder Fellow is giving them a refreshing Cordial, made of a
composition of Impudence, Contradiction and Obstinacy; and you shall see them
all recover themselves immediately.

What he said proved true: for Hunt grew presently as brisk as a Body-Louse,
and smiling and turning himself round about; It is very certain, said he, (
good people) that these Protestant Subjects, namely, the Dissenters, have
cheerfully given their Assistance to the support of the Government: It is well
known, that they are an Industrious Trading People, that willingly pay
whatsoever Taxes the Law requires. And it is remarkable, that no people ever
expressed a greater zeal to oppose the various attacques of a Foreign
(Anti-spiritual) Power than these Dissenters: And could I know any one of them
that would shrink from his Princes service, when his Royal Person and
Government are menaced, I would esteem him not only a Fool, but a Traitor to
boot.

We are very much beholden to you indeed (replied Seignior Christiano) a smart
fellow truly; I think you wrote the Postscript not long before: and what you
now say, is in a Book entitled Compulsion of Conscience condemned, and that
came out a little after the discovery of the late Conspiracy; and would you
call him a Traitor? Surely Judas himself never looked damnation in the fate
with half that impudence, with which the Author of the Postscript has done Hell
it self within an inch of the Gallows; and thus to justify his or their
pretended Innocence, out-does him, that hanged himself, and so confessed his
Treachery. What Devil (said he, turning toward us) can trace these Infernal
Changlings, who if their villainy succeeds, are Righteous, if it miscarries, are
Innocent.

Indeed, Sir, (said I) they are no Changlings: this is an old trick of theirs
new vamp'd. For after that they had openly practiced Rebellion for Twenty years
together; after they had preached ten thousand Seditious Sermons, and written
above a thousand Treasonable Books, out came one at last, in the year 1660.
with this Pompous and Gorgeous Title, A Protestation of the Kings Supremacy,
made in the name of the Afflicted Ministers, and opposed to the shameful
Calumniations of the Prelates.

Very great indeed, (said he) my ears itch to hear what they therein do protest
or declare. First of all (as loud as they could bawl) We hold and maintain (
said they) the same Authority and Supremacy in all Causes and over all Persons,
Civil and Ecclesiastical (granted by Statute to Queen Elizabeth, and expressed
and declared in the Book of Advertisements and Injunctions, and in Mr. Bilson
against the Jesuits) to be due, in full and ample manner, without any
limitation or qualification to the King, his Heirs and Successors for ever, etc.

The same Authority (said he) granted by Statute! What do they mean?

You will know presently (said I). We hold and maintain (cried they again) that
though the Kings of this Realm were no members of the Church, but very
Infidels, yea, and Persecutors of the Truth, that yet those Churches that shall
be gathered together within these Dominions, ought to acknowledge and yield the
said Supremacy; and that the same is not tied to their Faith and Christianity,
but to their very Crown, from which no Subject or Subjects have power to
separate or disjoyn it.

They don't hold this for ever (said he): they hold it, I suppose, in a
Protestant sense, as they call it; that is, that it should not hold them long.
Well, it is no great matter what they hold, if the King does but hold his own;
if he does not, they will have as many holds for him, as they had for his
Father. The Devil, they say, is never so terrible and mischievous, as when he
appears laughing: I don't like this sanctified way of smiling in a man's face,
when they have been very near cutting his Throat: Are they the only True Loyal
Protestant Friends the King has? Well, Baxter may talk of Humility ( as long as
he pleases) and Bull of Chastity, and Mead of Honesty, and Ferguson of Piety,
and all of them of their Friendship and Loyalty; I only say, God keep the King
from his Friends, and I hope He will keep himself from his Enemies.

We now observed a Blear-eyed Fellow talking very earnestly to the people, who
seemed very attentive to hear him. Surely, ( said I) this Fellows sore eyes and
ill looks recommend him for a Politic and Mysterious Demagogue to the Rabble;
let us hear what he says.

I am very glad, (said he) that the Turks are beaten; for they were brought in
by Rebels: By Rebels ( said another to him) Did not the Emperor persecute and
oppress them beyond all measure? Why, what then (replied he) they ought not to
rebel? For example, we ought not to rebel or resist, though the King of England
should bring in Tyranny and Popery never so much: nay, though he brought in the
Inquisition of Spain: And nothing (said he) is more terrible than the
Inquisition. Do but look into the Book of Martyrs, and there you see the
Pictures of Men and Women, that were Burned, Flead alive, Hanged, Pulled limb
from limb by Trees and Wild Horses, that had their Eyes bored out, their Hands,
Feet and Head cut off.

The people seemed mightily troubled and affected: and I asked Seignior
Christiano what he was, or if he knew him.

Know him! (replied he) I have known him these three or four years, to have
been the most Factious Stickling Rascal in the whole Town, promoting Sedition
and Rebellion with all his might and Interest, in all times, and in all places
where he comes: his very breath stinks, and his teeth are rotten as Devils
dung, with talking of Treason. Do but consider, with what artificial malice he
has now conveyed those unreasonable Fears and Jealousies into the Hearts of the
people, that will most readily and effectually frighten them from that
Obedience he pretends to preach into those very rebellious practices, from
which he would seem to dissuade them. But this is no new Policy of theirs: for
in the beginning of the late Troubles, a Book called The Book of Projects, and
addressed to the King, did him more harm, than the most rancorous and railing
Libel that ever was set forth; and if it was not written with a great deal of
malice, it was published with a very great deal of Indiscretion. But yonder is
another of their Politicians at work.

We saw a tall black Fellow in a long Cloak, at some distance, with a Crowd
about him, who was howling and bawling at such an horrid rate, that before we
came near him, we could perfectly hear him, in a dismal Tone inveighing against
The Whore of Babylon, The Man of sin, Antichrist, Spiritual Wickednesses,
Popery and Idolatry; pleading heartily for the Purity of the Gospel, for a full
and thorough Reformation from all the relics and rags of Popish and
Prelatical Superstition. I was got by this time very near him; and as soon as
he had done, he walked off with one of his Audience (who they said was a very
rich man, and was looked upon as a very rigid Dissenter:) (thinking himself
private enough,) Sir, (said the Preacher to him) The Cardinal has given order
for the payment of twenty thousand Livres; pray take care to get your moneys
returned as soon as you can, and much good may it do you. But I beseech you, do
not neglect our business; you know your Instructions; be you sure to blaze
abroad, that such and such men are French Pensioners. Give T. N. twenty or
thirty, pounds for writing his last Book, for he is poor, but very true to us:
Make the World believe, that the dissenting Brethren are illegally persecuted;
and sham off our late miscarriage with pretenses, that the truth of things will
come to light; with boldly demanding Toleration and Liberty of Conscience, as
for people no way injurious to the Government: Above all, keep up that material
distinction of Court and Country Party, so as to make the former odious to the
people, and then affrighten them, with horrible Narratives and dreadful
Stories; and then again set them agog with hopes of Better Times ( if such and
such things come to pass). Thus may we deal with the foolish and impolitick
Rabble of this Nation, as the Ratcatcher did with the Children of Hamel, allure
them with Tabor and Pipe, with empty sounds, and rattling pretenses, until at
last we gingle them to the Mountain, whose Womb, though it contains but a
Mouse, will become a Grave big enough to swallow them all up.

As soon as he had done, Seignior Christiano went privately to him; Your
servant, Sir, (said he) I am very glad to see you in England, I hope all our
friends at Rome are well. Very well, ( replied he) I should be glad to drink a
Glass of Wine with you, but that I have extraordinary business with yonder
Gentleman at present: But pray meet me to morrow about three of the Clock at
the -- With all my heart, (replied Seignior Christiano) and then took his leave
of him: Turning again to me, That Jesuit (said he) entertained me very civilly
at Rome; but I don't like his company in London. Why, Sir, ( said I) is he a
Jesuit? He is so, (replied he), I remember him a great deal better, than Oats
does Don John.

That those Sir, ( said I) who receive moneys from the French Agents, should
exclaim against French Pensioners; that a Jesuit should cry down Popery, is no
more news, than that an old Bawd should inveigh against Fornication; that a
Libertine should struggle for Toleration, may be, because in the height of his
Politics he may fancy, that the letting loose the Lions in the Tower, or three
or four thousand Bears, would most properly conduce to the good of the Subject.
But I wonder, that the people of England should be cajoled into Fears,
Discontents, and Mutinies, by such an unreasonable and ridiculous distinction,
as of the Court and Country Party: For have the Courtiers no Estates? No
Interests in the Country? Have not they Liberties and Privileges appertaining
to them, as well as the rest of His Majesty's Subjects? Are they not as fit for
His service, who have been abroad, and have learned the experience in Foreign
Countries; and know their Designs and Policies; are they not as fit for his
Great Council, as if they had only strutted after a Pack of Dogs, or walked up
to the knees in Puppy in their own Grounds all the days of their lives? I do
not speak this to reproach any Country Gentleman: No Nation in the World has
more or better qualified for all Honorable employments, than this of England
has in every County; but I speak it against those, who object against any
Gentleman, though every way well qualified, only because (forsooth) he is a
Courtier; as if a man could not be a Good Subject and a Good Patriot at the
same time, and in the same place. Why any body should fear, that they should be
instrumental to the Bringing in of Popery, I cannot tell: But I am sure, a man
may observe more Devotion in the Kings and Dukes Chapels, than in any other
Churches or Chapels in England: But of all the men living, they have the most
reason to be against Tyranny. (if there was the least reason to fear it): For,
search the Histories of all Ages, and you will find, that under Tyrants, none
of the Subjects were more in danger, than those who immediately attended upon
their persons: What a miserable condition were the very Cronies of Alexander,
Nero, Domitian, etc. in? The Officers of the Grand Seignior's Seraglio at this
day, though fine and gay, are the veriest Slaves of the Turkish Empire: and a
Bustling English Country Fellow would sooner choose to dangle on a Gibbet, than
to stand sixth and starcht, in such a posture of silence and mortification, as
they are forced to do many hours together. Why then is this unreasonable, this
silly distinction?

It Is they (replied Seignior Christiano) who make a difference between the King
and his People, that make this distinction; they who would destroy the King and
his Government, always begin with his Council and his Court. This is but the
repeated practice of these restless and Diabolical Politicians, and according
to the methods and growth of the late Rebellion, you may trace them in all the
ways that directly led to the last Hellish Conspiracy. No Vermin that were
ever run down, ever left such a stink behind them all the way for these twenty
years; we have had the second part to the same tune, of Lying, Libelling,
Reviling, Swearing, Forswearing, Caballing, Canting, and Covenanting. So that I
do not wonder that you in your Visions of Thorough Reformation. p. 230.
last Book (that was Printed before the discovery of their Hellish Conspiracy)
should so positively foretell their Doom, who had so diligently observed their
practices.

I do not ( replied I) pretend to be either a Prophet or a Poet; but when his
Majesty's Declaration was read, I was startled to find them playing the same
Game over again so exactly, that a Body can scarce distinguish their Conspiracy
in 83. from their Villainy in 62. which they then confessed, and for which some of
them were executed; for the ends and design were the same, and that too was
managed by a Council of Six, as I have observed in that Book. I always feared
that they would grow desperate, and certainly concluded, that they would never
be quiet, until they had again either ruined the Government or themselves; Yet
the particulars which the King has declared to all his Loving Subjects, and
which they themselves have confessed and acknowledged more ways than one, are so
astonishing, that I tremble to think, that ever it should enter into the hearts
of men to destroy so excellent a Prince, so wise and just a Government, by such
Barbarous and bloody means as would make the most wretched slaves afraid to
think of Attempting against the most cruel and Tyrannical Moors and Infidels;
and most of all amazing is it to consider, that men of Honor, Estates, and
good Education (as they say they had) should engage themselves in so unnatural
and barbarous a Conspiracy: for Gods sake, how shall we wipe off that huge
scandal that is brought upon the English Nation, before all mankind; upon
Christianity, before Infidels and Unbelievers; upon the Reformation, before
Papists, by this unnatural and cruel Treachery?

There Is a question indeed (replied Seignior Christiano) for a Politician to
ask; I can carry you to several people in this Town, that can do it in the
twinkling of a Cows Thumb.

How is that ( said I)?

Why! the Fanatics lay it upon the Church of England; they say, that most of
the Conspirators were Conformists.

Well! they confess then ( said I) that there was a Conspiracy; but I say that
they that were engaged in it, were no more of the Church of England than those,
who cut off King Charles his Head, are of the Church Triumphant. He that rebels
against his Sovereign, is no more a Member of the Church of England [let him go
to Church as often as he will] than those Jews were of Christ's Mystical Body, who
often came to him and thronged him, and yet at last denied and Crucified him. But
Sir, that I may by any means be somewhat instrumental to the preventing men
from running into such dangerous Courses for the future: Pray let me know some
of those Principles by the which they at first are insensibly wheedled and
drawn into these fatal practices for the present.

The truth is, Sir, (replied he) the first and last Movers to these Enormities,
(let them pretend what they will) are the Devils of Pride, Ambition, and
Covetousness. But because it is the trick of such Politicians to puzzle the
understandings of men, with Propositions dressed up with probable Notions, and
plausible Conveniences. I will carry you to their Schools, where you may have
the Opportunity not only to know them, but to discover the Roguery and Folly of
them (if you can).

With all my heart, Sir, ( said I) as I see my opportunity, I will do the best
I can; And with that, following him through a Gate House, we came into a large
Court, and upon one of the doors on the left hand was cleav'd a Schedule, on
which was written: The Proposition to be defended to day is, All civil
Authority is derived originally from the People.

As soon as the door was opened we went in, and a small number of people came
after us, to hear a mongrel kind of a Fellow read upon this Question, from
which he maintained: That in the first Original of Nations, Monarchy came by
the Peoples Choice. That the forms of Government, and the Persons of
Governors, were of Man's Appointment. That the King had his Authority by the
consent of the People in the beginning of this Government, and consequently
that he held it by Compact; and then concluded with a long Harangue about the
safe Title from willing Nations; challenging any person there present, to make
what Objections he could against what he had said.

I observed that no body opposed him of a long time, and therefore being
encouraged by Seignior Christiano, I stood up and said, Most profound Sir, I
suppose that you have read of the offspring of the Serpents Teeth, and how that
crop of Levellers in the heat of their sap, most cruelly destroyed one another,
and since it was so fatal to spring rank and sile out of the earth, I fancy,
you believe that the more lucky part of Manking dropped in whole Shoals like
showers of Froggs, from the Clouds, and so peopled the World. If this was the
first adventure of Human Race, you might truly enough conclude, that they most
calmly after their fall, laid their heads together, and chose themselves a
Governor, and prescribed him a form of Government, Nemine contradicente. But
if the Books of Moses be more Authentic and Rational, than Ovids
Metamorphosis, we may without leading-strings, learn of him, that the
Propagation and Government of Mankind were ordained by the Divine Wisdom at the
same time, and that Alam became a King and a Father the Adam day. We may see
and know the Original and Plastic form of all the great succeeding Monarchies
in the Families of the Partriarchs, and prove this your Proposition to be
contrary to the Fundamental Law of Nature, and the first practice of Mankind.
But to give Your politic Conception, all the advantages it can possibly claim,
we will consider it in respect of a People, so far separate from this
Patriarchical O economy, and under such peculiar Circumstances, that your fancy
could not have contrived, much less can all History afford you an instance more
to your purpose. If you are in have to know, I tell you, I mean the People of
Israel in Egypt: They were almost Four hundred Years removed from this
Patriarchical Sovereignty, all the Authority that they had over one another,
was confounded, and swallowed up in that common slavery they were in under the
Egyptians. Now if the Original of their Civil Government (for which they were
so famous) was not derived from the People, then that your Proposition is
utterly false; but it is very true, that it was not Originally derived from the
People. Ergo, That it was not, is so true, that nothing is more impious than
this your Proposition; because,

First, It is contrary to Scripture. For when God raised up Moses to be a
Ruler, Judge, and Deliverer of his People that were scattered like the Straw
they were to gather over all that Land wherein they were equally in Bondage, we
find Exodus 4. that Moses so long expostulated with God about it, that at the
14th Verse, we read, that the Anger of the Lord was kindled against him; for he
pleaded at the first Verse, That the people would not believe him, nor hearken
to his voice: at the 10th Verse, that he was not Eloquent, as if not sufficient
to discharge such a message: at the 13th. almost peremptorily refused to go,
and would have turned it upon some other. So that it is hence manifest, that he
never sought it of the people, nor did they first choose or call him before he
was sent from God. Pray now how was the person here of man's Appointment? And
still your Politics will prove but false Divinity, for afterward when he had
signalized his Divine Mission by Wonders and Miracles; because Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram, rebelled against him, saying, Numb. 16. 13.
Is it a small thing that thou have brought us up out of a Land that flows
with Milk and Honey, to kill us in the Wilderness; except thou make thy self
altogether a Prince over us? Therefore Numb. 16. v. 32.
the Lord made a new Thing, and the Earth opened her mouth, etc. Because all
the Congregation murmured against Moses, and against Aaron, there died of the
Plague, more then fourteen Thousand. Because the People in the Absence of
Moses, caused Aaron to make a Calf, they were so far from making a King, that
had not Moses interceded for them, they had been Exodus 32. v. 10.
no longer a People. Thus this Moses whom they refused, saying, Who made thee a
Ruler and a Judge, the same did God send to be a Ruler and a deliverer, by the
hands of the Angel that was in the Bush, said the Proto martyr S. Stephen, Act.
7. v. 35.

Perhaps, Sir, (said Seignior Christiano) they that will allow of no Kings, but
those of their own making, will allow likewise of no Saints.

I suppose ( replied I) they will allow that the holy man here in his last
speech, reflects upon that stiff neck't and Rebellious People of the Jews: who
had been commanded, Exodus 32. ^.
not to follow a multitude to do evil. Not that multitude that murmured against
Moses and Aaron, not that whole multitude that led Jesus Christ before Pontius
Pilate, S. Luke 23. 1. from which multitude he had sometime before withdrawn
himself, because he perceived that they would come and take him by force to
make him a King, S. Joh. 6. v. 15.

But, Sir, (replied the Politician) may they not depose wicked Kings?

No, Sir, ( replied I) they may not, because they cannot tell when they have a
good one; and even the Bad ones ( Pontius Pilate himself) had no power at all,
but what was given him from above, how then can they take away that which they
have no Authority to give? But if the holy and righteous Jesus, when before an
unjust Tribunal, did not make use of those many Legions of Angels, which he
then could have commanded against his most malicious enemies, but was contented
patiently to suffer for our sakes; Why should any (that name his name) presume
to appeal to the rash and giddy multitude, when they shall be called to answer
before Kings and Rulers for his sake? Besides, even wicked Kings are the just
Judgments of God: and shall we fight against his Judgments? We may no more
remove a wicked Prince by murder, than seek to assuage the Pestilence by
Idolatry; but this wicked and ungodly Maxim is never more preached and
proclaimed abroad, than when there is the least reason for it, even whilst we
are under Religious Kings and Governors: However it is at all times most
Diabolically impious, because diametrically contrary to the plainest sense of
the word of God, in which we are taught, that by him Kings Reign, and Princes
decree Justice; By him Princes rule, and Nobles, even All the Judges of the
Earth.

Secondly, This Proposition is impious and false, because the Kings of England
do not derive either their power or form of Government from the People: All the
Objections about Contracts, Covenants, Coronation-Oaths, etc. come at last to
this consequence, that then God Almighty himself has a less right of Dominion
over us, because he condescends to encourage our Obedience to him, by the
Grants and Promises he makes in his Covenant with us. For by him, and for him,
do the Kings of this Realm rule over us; and from him they receive all that
power and goodness which they as his Ministers to us for good, communicate unto
the People: and indeed they have been Ministers to us for good, in reducing us
from the Barbarism of Heathenish Picts, to become the most civilized Nation,
and best Christians in the world. For, let but any man without the squint-eyed
malice of Doleman, and his Disciples, peruse the Chronicles of England, and he
will find, that the people thereof are (under God) beholding to their Kings for
all the good they enjoy at this day; it may be truly said of the Ancient
Britains, Populus nullis Legibus tenebatur, Arbitria principum pro Legibus
erant. 'Twas Lucius the first Christian King in all the World, that sent to
Rome for the unvaluable Treasures of the Gospel, which he set the higher price
upon by his own pious and illustrious example. 'Twas he changed the
Arch-Flamins and Flamins, (and all that mockery of Heathenisin, wherein the
Devil pretended to ape the Divine Institutions) into Arch-Bishopricks, and
Bishoprics, long before the name of a Rebellious Presbyter, or of a persidious
Jesuit, was known upon the face of the Earth. 'Twas Alfred the Saxon, but
Christian King of England, that divided this whole Realm into Shires, those
Shires into Lathes, Rapes or Ridings; those again into Wapentakes or Hundreds;
those again into Boroughs; and then as Jethro advised Moses, set over them,
etc. 'Twas Edward the Confessor, that like Justinian, collected the Laws that
were dispersed, into one Body.

But said the Politician ( again interrupting me) Were they not Laws before he
put them in order?

Without doubt ( said I) they were not, until allowed of by his Predecessors,
although perhaps they were never enrolled. But hark you, Sir, I will thank you,
and so shall all my Neighbors, if you can show me a Copy of the Grant of the
People to this King, wherein they empowered him to cure them of that nauseous
Disease the Struma; and when you have done, I will as easily prove that they
gave the Levites of old, power to heal the Leprosy; and when I have done, I
will take care that it shall not be called the Kings Evil, but the Peoples Evil
for the future. But don't so frivolously interrupt me, How can the King derive
his Power from the People, when all Power is originally under God, from him?
The People indeed, sometimes chose their subordinate Magistrates, as the May or
of a City, and this choice designs the Person, but does not confer the Power,
which descends by virtue of the Kings Charter, and therefore are said, (...),
such as are sent by him; and Lambard in his Archion, or Commentary upon the
High Courts of Justice in England, learnedly derives all the Lay and mixed
Courts of Records, from the Crown their Original: and says moreover, that
whatever power is by him, (that is, the King) committed over unto other men,
the same nevertheless remains still in himself; for as Bracton says well,
Rex habet Ordinariam Jurisdictionem, and omnia jura in Manu sua, quae nec ita
delegari possunt quin ordinaria remaneant cum ipso Rege. Though the Great
Council of the Nation, to which He gives life, may by the same sacred Breath be
dissolved, yet the King never dies; and all other inferior Courts, Civil or
Ecclesiastical, derive their Power from the King; by which as well the
Sovereign's goodness to the People, as that he derives not his Power from them,
is very manifest. Henry the Third, granted unto his Subjects that great
Charter, wherein he Ordained thus, * Communia 9 Hen. 3.
Placita non sequantur Curiam nostram sed teneantur in aliquo certo Loco. Yet
the Kings Power is not diminished, though Himself and his People thereby both
eased. I might confirm what I defend with innumerable Instances, but once I say
for all, That the Liberties, the Privileges, the Power the People have, is
from [this,] that the King has not his power from them. For,

Thirdly, This Proposition is impious and false, because the most ready way to
Tyranny. King Charles the First, died a Martyr for the People, for their
Liberties and Properties; and Our Gracious Sovereign King Charles the II.
restored them; but how long might they have whistled for them, had Cromwell's,
or any other Family continued the Usurpation? About the Year 1410. John de
Medicis stoutly maintaining the Liberties of the People of Florence, against
the Nobles, first settled that Sovereignty over them, that they pay excise for
Herbs, and Sallads; and but that the Princes of Tuscany have generally proved
mild and good, there is not the least scrit of a Law, or compact to limit them.
For the people who always do such things in a heat and hurry, never trouble
their heads about such Contracts, and Compacts, as our santastical Politicians
dream of. But why is this Proposition so frequently started under so gracious a
Prince, and so good a Government? Oh! without doubt to settle the Nation. --
Why at this Time a day, do we puzzle our heads with prying into the remotest
times of darkest Ignorance and Barbarism, for an unnecessary uncertainty? Oh!
by all means, to establish Christ's Throne. But must Christ's Throne be
established by appealing to the People? Was he ever so reviled in his three
Offices before? To the People; Who it seems need him not in his Prophets to
instruct them, they can preach to themselves; who it seems need him not in his
Priests, to interceed for them, because they can pray for themselves; who it
seems need him not in his Kings, to rule them, for they can govern themselves.
Was he ever so reviled by people that call themselves Christians? Such Doctrine
is more suitable with the lewd Revels of Fescenninus, than with the wise and
peaceable Discipline of the obedient and holy Jesus; and if you be not
convinced of the Impiety of it, you shall see enough of the madness and folly
of it.

The Wainscot behind his back parted asunder on a sudden, and opened like a
Scene, discovering a very large Field, in the which there were several
companies of people distinct from one another, who were very busy and
clamorous. I suppose Sir, ( said I, to him) you will allow that this
Proposition of yours, was never designed either to please or oblige those
People of England, who are Loyal Subjects to the King, or Obedient Sons of the
Church; and every Body will grant, that it is now vented to put the Dissenters
into a posture of Rebellion against their present Sovereign; therefore to
pleasure both you and them, I have brought them here all before you, and given
them here all before you, and given them every one their particular choice and
humor, and pray do but see what delicate work they make in the Conclusion.

The first Company we came among, were a great number of Presbyterians; they
were so hot and loud, that we thought that there had been several Competitors
for the Sovereignty; and that there had been a mortal difference between them,
but it seems there was no such thing; for all that great Bustle was made,
because they could get no body to take it upon him.

No sooner, said a young Fellow that stood by us, (when we inquired the reason)
had they hung up yonder Table, that contains the Sea Baxters H. Com.
Terms and Conditions of their Sovereign, but they proved so slavish, so base
and dangerous, that all men of Quality and Fashion, privately withdrew, and
there were none but Mechanics left; and now they have been several hours
proposing it to them, it seems none of them have accepted of it yet. But if you
please, you may hear what Arguments they use, by what they are going to say to
yonder Cobbler.

As soon as we came to them. We are not ignorant (said they unto him) that God
has endued Thee with the Spirit of Wisdom, Fortitude, and Justice; and that
thou art a man fearing God, and hating Covetousness, and therefore most sit to
go in and out before this great People.

Men and Brethren, (replied he) You may translate Kingdoms and Commonwealths
when you please, and to whom you please; but as for me, I am resolved to
translate nothing but old Shoes, as long as I live. I am not so weary of my
life yet I thank you; by Gomms, here I can sit, and be quiet, and not be
Plagued with your Monstrances and Petitions; you shall not say I have Popish, or
Evil Counselors. Here I can be safe, and fear no Caballing, Plotting, or
Conspiring; I am sure you will not depose me from my Bulk, you, shall not say, I
spend the Treasure of the Nation, or spoil Trading. I fear no Protestant
Flails, or Blunderbusses; the Boys now and tan beat out my Candle with
Squirts; and sometimes a Drunken Bully staggers against my Shed, and puts my
Lasts out of order, but I make 'um make Constitution for the damage they do me,
and that is all I ever receive: and who the Deuce would be plagued to rule you,
who tatter out more Governments in a Years time, than sixteen Solomon's can mend
in an Age. Therefore even go about your Business to some body else; if you walk
until you wear out your Shoes, I Will mend 'um as cheap as any body shall, and
thank you into the bargain.

We left them, and went to the Anabaptists, and Independents, and there we
found the case much otherwise; for if some little Jack of Leyden,
Knipperdolling, or any other Enthusiast, did but tell his Dream, the Rabble
were for wrapping him in Purple, putting the Sword into his hands, and then
willing to starve in his Service, being fed with nothing but Revelations; acted
all manner of Infernal Villainies for a time, until at last weary of their King,
they as hastily dispatched him. The Quakers were not so hot upon the point of
choosing a Supreme Magistrate, for they had a silent meeting about it a
longtime; at last, one of them very gravely broke the Ice, saying; Friends, it
is doubtful, Whether it is most convenient to have One, or Fifty, or an Hundred,
or none at all to rule over us; it is dangerous to have One, because we hear
how Friend Pen exalts himself above the Brethren in the Land of the Heathen,
by taking upon him the Titles, and Ceremonies of the Kings of the Gentiles; and
Ye know, that we must call no man Master.

At this, an arch Wag, that was in their dress, and had composed his Face, and
Hat like the Brethren, interrupting him, said: Friends, Ye have heard, that ye
must call no man Master, it is true; But why should this hinder you from having
one to oversee the Flock? For though Ye have all the Spirit, Ye are not all the
Head, or the Eye. Therefore I have thought of one, whom Ye may set over you,
and call him Master too, and yet call no man Master.

Who is that Friend! Who is that? cried they all at once!

Friends! (said he) Among your Brethren the Tartars, there arose one of late
days, who was neither Man, nor Woman, nor Hermophradite; But He was Man, and
eke Horse; in him was the the Spirit of Meekness and Humility, for he lived on
the Herbs of the Field, and has been at Grass all the days of his life.

Verily, ( said they) he is of the Family of Nebuchadnezzar.

Now you talk (said he) of Nebuchadnezzar; Harken, O Ye Children of men, to
what I am going to say unto you; There was a Neighbor of his, one Darius
Hystaspis, and he gat his Dominion by the Neighing of his Horse, for very
prudently he contrived to have a beautiful Mare in the next room, by which
means the Affections of his Horse were wonderfully moved in his behalf. If our
Friend Green of Colchester, would bring his Mare into some private place near
him, we should soon perceive and know, whether or no the Spirit of Government
be upon him. They never were so near coming to a positive resolution in this
world as at this moment: for the Motion was new and extraordinary; however,
having humm'd and groaned a little time, they could not agree, nor never will
about any thing of Government, so long as they are Quakers (I should have said)
Slaves, such as the Romans called Servi poenae, and such indeed they are, by
despising Civil Offices, and lawful Authority.

Going away from them, an Olivecolour'd Tawny complexion'd Fellow came staring,
and running so violently along, that he overthrew the Politician, and had like
to have beaten all the oraculous breath out of his Body; we stopped the man,
thinking he had been distracted, but we perceived that he began to recollect
himself: and therefore we asked him his Name, his Country, and what he was.

My Name, (said he) good Christians, is Jacomo, Jacomo, God knows; Pray save
me, or I shall be devoured presently.

What is the matter? What do you mean? ( said Seignior Christiano to him)

Truly, Sir, (said he) when I was a Boy, I was taken by the Spaniards from
those People you call Canibals, or Maneaters, and sold to the English
Plantations, under whom I have been brought up by degrees, to the knowledge of
Civil Government, and of the Christian Religion, ( an happy Captivity to me)
but passing through yonder Grove, I saw a great many of my Country men in a
kind of Pagode, and if they get me, they will certainly eat me up; therefore,
pray good people save me from them.

Fear not, ( said Seignior Christiano) they shall not hurt you, come along with
us, and show us where they are: so with much entreaty he carried us to them,
and as soon as we saw them, we knew some of them by their faces. They were a
great number of Adamites, at their execrable and impure Mysteries. -- Which
Seignior Christiano observing, These are a sort of Enthusiasts, (said he) that
have a peculiar piece of good Husbandry, for they would not put the Nation to
much charges for Royal Robes, Crowns, or Scepters; for they have abrogated the
very Primitive Institution of Fig Leaves: Yet a Tyrant in Armor, is not half
so destructive to mankind, as one of these naked Devils. -- Devils! ( said
Jacomo) ready to run three quarters speed again. -- Hold, hold ( cried Seignior
Chr.) they are only Adamites.

Adamites, (said he) What! where there is so many Christians? It Is no wonder,
to find nothing else among those you call Canibals; for they (poor creatures,
said he weeping) have no knowledge of God, or goodness; God has not sent any
one unto them, nor has he raised up any among them, nor has he empowered any
with Wisdom, and Authority over them, to redeem them from that general
Darkness, dismal Ignorance, and fatal Barbarity they lie under: Being equally
under the power of the Devil, who makes them equally the Enemies to one
another, he being the common Enemy of them all. But God has given you good
Kings, good Governors, many wise men, and good Laws; by which you are
instructed, and commanded to Build, to Plant, to Cloth your selves, to live
justly, peaceably, plentifully, and honorably in this World; and he has sent
you his good Ministers, to conduct you safely to a better. How is it O ye
Christians, that I see such Barbarous people among you? How is it, that I hear
of others so wickedly Rebellious, as would pull down these good Kings, these
good Magistrates, these good Ministers; and would bring themselves under the
power of the Devil, and of one another? Are such people better than those you
call Canibals? Are they not much worse, who under a pure and holy Religion, are
thus beastly and shameless; who under an obedient and patient Religion, are
thus unquiet, and rebellious; who under a loving and peaceable Religion, do
thus worse than Canibals, bite and devour one another? What would They give to
know that they are unclean? What would they give to know, how happy a thing
it is to obey? what would they give, could they know how to forgive one another?
O ye Christians, I hope God will be more merciful to the Souls of my poor
Father and Mother, for they knew no better: But what will become of such people
I cannot tell, for they can do no worse.

The Politician, who heard all this, was so extremely confounded, and ashamed;
that with great wrath he went up to the Adamites, and in the most bitter
language, reproved them for their shameless Bestiality. But their zeal was as
hot as his anger; for, without any more ado, they laid hold on him, crying out
Privilege, Liberty, Property! Saying, may not we go as we please, and do what
we please, but you must rule and govern us? We will teach you to invade the
Property of the Subject, and Liberty of Humane Nature; And with that without
any Redemption they hurried him away, tearing him like so many wild Beasts, and
so that Power he placed in the People, at the Beginning, soon made an end of
him.

We were now returning back to the Schools of the Politicians; and having
conveyed honest Jacomo out of all danger, and delivered him from his fears,
he very thankfully took his leave. And now, Sir, ( said I to Seignior
Christiano) you see what becomes of the Politician, and of his Proposition too;
nothing can be more impious, more dangerous, more ridiculous. For if every
particular Faction have so many endless difficulties concerning Government, not
only in opposition to each other, but even in it self, what must needs be the
Villainies, the follies, the freaks and frensies consequent of them, when in
full Combination against, and when they shall have overthrown that which is by
Law established? For all these and many more, are the People, for whom this
Proposition is ready cut and dried: That therefore it was ever true in it self,
or can be good to mankind, I will then be persuaded, (and never till then) when
that Golden Royal Age of the Politicians comes to pass; wherein the People
shall All become Kings, wherein Scepters shall be as common as Hedge-stakes,
and Crowns, as Blue Bonnets, and instead of Chairs, they shall cry have ye any
Thrones to mend: in the mean time, laying aside these ridiculous Dreams; is it
not much better for men of all Orders, to mind their own business, and
according to Gods Ordinance, to live quiet, and godly lives under their King,
than to be wheedled by the fantastical Notions of a few rascally Politicians
into mutinies, murders and Seditions, until at last they scramble to the Devil
upon all four, in the blood of their fellow Subjects? for this pretended
Original of Civil Power from the People, tends only to lead them into Civil
Wars, and Actual Rebellion against their Sovereign Prince; from which,

Libera nos Domine. We were again returned into the Court of the Politicians,
and at a door that stood open on the other side, we saw several people of all
sorts going in. So Seignior Christiano and I followed them, expecting rather
Fanatical Conventicle, than a learned Lecture in Politics; wondering that no
body of a long time stepped up into the Desk. I thought I heard a kind of
disputing and jangling behind me on the other side of the Wainscot, and by the
help of a little hole in the Boards, I peep't into the withdrawing Room, and
saw Rutherford, the Author of Lex Rex, Hunt, Parsons, and Johnson, very earnest
in forcing Complements, and Civilities upon one another. Parsons especially,
who was the Author of Doleman's, etc. drew back, and peremptorily refused the
Pre-eminence of sitting in the Chair that day; pretending a great deal of
modesty, and telling them, that they lived in an Age, wherein Impudence was
very modish, and that they had the Confidence to stealout of that Book, which
he was ashamed to own; at last, by Vote it was fixed upon a Jesuit that was a
stranger, who told them, That he should make bold for that little he had to
say, with some ends, and scraps of what they had all written; so that they
should teach the people by Proxy, and He would do it in disguise.

He had now fixed himself in the Chair, and after three or four lamentable sighs
and groans; My Brethren (said he) never was Popery in this world so near
breaking in upon us, never was the Nation so much in danger of Tyranny, and
Arbitrary Government; and can ye endure Tyranny and Persecution? Can you, who
are Freeborn Subjects, endure to be bound in Chains? To be burnt in Flames? To
be mangled and cut in pieces? Can ye endure to have your Eyeballs hang down
like ropes of Onions? And to have your Gutts dangle about your Shanks like
Knee-strings? To be torn asunder by Trees, and Wild Horses? And which is worst
of all, can ye avoid it if Popery, Hellish, Damnable, Diabolical, Devilish,
Infernal, Idolatrous, Cruel, Perfidious, silly sneaking Popery comes in? And
can ye avoid Popery coming in, if ye have a Popish King? And can ye avoid a
Popish King, if ye have a Popish Successor? And can ye hinder a Popish
Successor, unless by a Bill of Exclusion, ye drive him out like a midnight
Thief, and a Robber? Oh my Brethren, when ye have such fundamental Privileges,
when Parliaments have such uncontrollable Power; will ye be such Turkish
Bowstringish slavish fools, to endure it? Do ye not know that all Power is
Originally in the People? In the People, I say, I suppose ye are acquainted
with Them. Do ye not know, That all Monarchies are de jure Elective? That the
disposal and descent of the Crown depends wholly upon your pleasure; and that
You have an unlimited Power to determine this or that Government? That
Succession to Government, by nearness of blood, is by no Law of Nature, or
Divine; that an Heir Apparent, before his Coronation, and Admission by the
Realm, has the same, and no more Interest to the Kingdom, than the King of the
Romans or Caesar has to the German Empire? And consequently, that Birthright
and Proximity of Blood, give no Title to Rule or Government; and that it is
Lawful to preclude the next Heir from his Right of Succession to the Crown?

The People seemed strangely tickled and pleased with these Cokesing Doctrines.
But Seignior Christiano was so extremely incensed, that he had much ado to
refrain himself; but with a contemptible smile: I desire, Sir, (said he)
according to the privileges of this place that you and I before we part, may
freely and seriously debate these Points of Doctrine, which you have so
Dogmatically taught the People; for I must tell you, that they are so far from
being either true or good, that they are the very belchings of the Father of
Lies, and more destructive of Mankind, than the most Pestilential foists that
were ever squeezed from the Bottomless Pit. These your Propositions like the
chains of Darkness are linkt together to bind and fetter both Kings and People:
The Original (say you) of Civil Power is in the People; and that drags on this
consequence, that as they first conferred, so that they may afterward transfer
the Power to whom they please. Now this is contrary to all Law Natural and
Divine. For as I have proved that Moses received not any of his Power from the
People; so neither did Joshua that was his Successor, for Numb. 27. v. 18. we
find that God did in particular order Moses to take Joshua the Son of Nun, to
lay his hands upon him; at the 20. Verse. to put some of his honor upon him,
that all the Congregation of Israel might be obedient. This was that Joshua
whom the People were so far from choosing to be their Chief Magistrate, that
Numb. 14. v. 10. They bad, stone him with stones, even for that very obedience,
for which God afterward conferred that Honor upon him. If therefore neither
the Original of Power, nor yet the Succession of it, was in those Ancient
People, because Israelites; so much less is it in the People of England, not
only because Christians, but also, because under an immemorial Hereditary
Monarchy.

This (replied he) is not a like case, it is an inconclusive way of arguing from
the Jewish Theocracy.

In this (said I) it is not; for though the occasion was extraordinary, yet it
shows, that God did vindicate his own Ordinance of Government, in an
extraordinary manner too; and as the Moral Law was only that Law written on
Tables, which was first engraven in the Heart; so the Duties of Obedience, and
the Original of Authority, were naturally the same among the Clans of Barbarous
People, that they were in the Tribes; and the Original of both was
Patriarchical, derived from, and accountable to none but God; so that although
I grant, that many Examples in the Jewish Theocracy, cannot be for our
Imitation, because Typical; yet those things which happened unto them upon the
account of their Rebellions, murmurings and disobedience, 1 Cor. 10. 11.
happened unto them for Ensamples, and are written for our admonition, upon whom
the ends of the world are come, that we should not murmr as some of them also
murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer.

But, Sir, ( replied the Jesuit) to come home to our last Proposition; let us
come to those times, wherein the Theocratical Government had an end, in being
settled in the Tribe of Judah, and Family of David. What think you of the case
of Adonijah? He was Solomon's own natural and Elder Brother; yet upon bare
suspicion, he put him to death by a Messenger, without any form of Law, and
succeeded his Father David in his Kingdom.

You should first have said, He succeeded his Father, then put his Brother to
Death (replied Seignior Christiano) But what is this to the People?

It is enough to show, (said he) That Birthright and Proximity of Blood, give
no Title to Rule or Government.

It gives no Authority to the scope and design of your Proposition (replied
Seignior Christiano) Show me such an Instance as this, That Nathan the Prophet,
that very Nathan, who by command from God, in a miraculous manner discovered to
David his secret Murder of 1 King. 1. 13.
Vriah, and his Adultery with Bathsheba; should advise that Bathsheba to go to
David, and put him in mind of the Oath he swear unto her, that her Son Solomon
should reign after him. Show me such an Instance now, and I will conclude it to
be as extraordinary, as any thing under the Jewish Theocracy. But there is so
much to be said upon that account, that nothing but a Jesuitical Commentator
would urge it for a Rule, and Example to an Hereditary Monarchy in this Age of
the World. However, Sir, you have given me an opportunity of taking off one
Objection, you pious Politicians sometimes make against the Government of
wicked Kings; You say, That evil Kings ought to be Deposed, and that evil
Princes ought to be debarred from the Crown, if they Apostatize from the Faith.
To which I Answer; That as David was the Anointed of the Lord, according to
Gods Ordinance; so it was not lawful for the People to revolt from, rebel
against, or preclude his Heirs and Successors, from their Right to the Crown
and Scepter, until Shiloh should come, according to Gods promise: That their
Kings should be taken away from them, was their grievous punishment; that they
should rebel against them, was their grievous sin. And those Ten Tribes that
did revolt under the Conduct of Jeroboam, that striver for the People, (for so
his name imports) were utterly lost a little while after, and never certainly
heard of to this day. Well then, as it was not lawful for the Jews to rebel
against their Kings, or to put by the Royal Lineal Descent, until Christ's first
Coming. So neither is it Lawful for Christians, who are under such an
immemorial Hereditary Monarchy, as that of England, to rebel against their
Sovereign Prince, or put by the Royal Lineal Descent, so long as they, or the
world remains, even unto Christ's second Coming. And this will ever hold good,
if we consider, that the Feudal Laws joined to Evangelical, or Apostolical
precept, are as much, if not more Authoritative than the Laws of Moses, or the
Predictions of the Patriarchs and Prophets. But one thing I humbly offer in
Answer to all the terrible Arguments of our Precluding, and Deposing
Politicians; and that is this: That as our Savior Christ Jesus, was lineally
Descended according to the flesh, from those Jewish Kings, that did evil in the
sight of the Lord, that were themselves Idolaters; Yet it was not Lawful to
rebel against them, because their Sovereign; and that their Idolatry was no
obstacle to our Saviors taking our Nature upon him, because he was God. So
neither is any fault of any Hereditary Prince, a just pretense of Hindrance to
his Natural Right, or of Resistance when in Possession, because as much our
Sovereign; and because that Christ, by the power of his Spirit in the hearts of
true Believers, can make use even of Persecutors, for the Building up the
Mystical Body of his Church. God in his Judgments sometimes permits a Foreign
Power to captivate, or lead away the Prince of his People. But he never allowed
of a Power in the People, to imprison, or remove, or preclude their Prince; I
have never met with any Rule, or Command, whereby the People are allowed and
enjoined to disinherit a Prince, though for Idolatry; but I have read Numb. 14.
v. 12. that God threatened to disinherit the People for their Rebellion.

How (said he) can a People be disinherited?

You find in the same Verse (replied Seignior Christiano) That it was to be
done with a Witness, as the Author of Julian says in another case; but
however, though we meet not with whole Nations consumed in a moment, and
utterly extinct by a Pestilence. Yet there are many people in the World at this
day, who for their Rebellions, are disinherited to some purpose; What think you
of the Graecians, Bohemians, and Commons of France? Nay, the Waldenses, who had
the least blot in their Escutcheon, of any Foreign Church, did not go
unpunished for their Murdering Trincanel their Viscount in Beziers; nor did
they escape a retaliating Vengeance for their Insolence, by dashing out the
Teeth of their Bishop in the Church of S. Mary Magdalen in that City; for
within forty years after, they were given into the hands of the Croysadas,
under the French Kings, and Sacrificed in the self*same Church. Now as that
Affliction made them better, so those miseries the People of this Land felt in
the late Revolutions, might make them wiser; for though they were not Massacred
in cold blood, yet they were so disfranchised of their Liberties and
Privileges, that they might properly enough be said to have been disinherited.

But, Sir, What would you have the People do ( replied the Jesuit) in case of
imminent and unavoidable Persecution; had not they better hazard their
Liberties than their Lives?

I suppose (replied Seignior Christiano) you do not consider, that they have
immortal Souls to hazard too. But all the scruples which the Author of Julian
has out of the abundance of a reprobate fancy, started in cases of Persecution;
are so fully Answered by the Reverend and Learned Dr Hicks, that he may be glad
of a Prison to hide his face, or of a Dungeon, to cover his shame.

At the name of a Prison, the Jesuit sneak't down, and betook himself again
into the withdrawing-room; Seignior Christiano and I followed him, but before
we could fix to any further discourse, one that was a great stickler, for the
Bill of Exclusion, and a Member of the House of Commons, came in, and looking
with a stern Countenance upon Segnior Christiano: How dare you (said he)
affront a Clergyman, whom every body knows to be an honest man, an ingenious
man, and a good Scholar?

I suppose, Sir, (replied Segnior Christiano) you value him as little upon the
account of his being a Clergyman, as I do upon the account either of his
honesty or Scholarship. And indeed, I must presume to question either your
knowledge, or integrity, that can esteem and value a man for writing a Book,
wherein he has so basely, so wickedly falsified and corrupted the History of
the Church, in order to the ruining and undermining the Present State of this
Kingdom. You are now Convinced by the Learned Author of Jovian, that the Empire
of Rome never was Hereditary; and you cannot prove that the Monarchy of England
was ever otherwise; upon which account, I tell you, it is much a better
Constitution of Government, both in respect of Prince and People: For upon a
vacancy, what differences did there often happen between the Senate, and
Praetorian Bands? What divisions among the Soldiers themselves? Then what
Battles, Wars, and Desolations? So that at the death of every Emporour, the
whole Body of the Empire was in a Convulsion. -- Whilst they lived, What
trouble and perplexity had they about a Successor? If they did not name one,
they were afraid of every Famous Commander in the Army, and forced to stifle
many illustrious virtues; if they did name one, they were always jealous of
his hasty Ambition, and so, never the more at rest. How remarkable was that
saying to Nero, who put so many men to death upon bare Suspicion; Omnes licet
occideres, Successorem tuum occidere non possis; Though you kill all, you
cannot kill your Successor? Nor less Famous is that fatal Story of the Emperor
Caracalla, who inquiring of his Magicians, to know who should be his Successor,
was advertised in a Packet, that it was Macrinus; but he delivering the
Packet to Macrinus before he had read it himself; Macrinus first reads it, and
to prevent his own death, slew him by the hand of Martialis a Centurion, as he
retired to ease himself; and by the Election of the Soldiers, succeeded him in
the Empire. But the Kings of England need not to trouble themselves about the
knowledge of their Successors, by seeking to Magicians; since God by his
ordinary Providence in the course of Nature, and by the Fundamental Laws of
this Hereditary Monarchy, has indisputably determined and appointed them, which
is certainly the best Law, both for Prince and People; for if Tully said, de
Legibus.
Nos Legem bonam a mala nulla alia ratione nisi naturae norma dividere
possumus. We cannot distinguish a good Law from a bad one by any other Rule,
than that of Nature. We may conclude that to be the Best of all Laws, which to
the Fundamental Law of Nature, has the additional Authority of the grace of God.

It being thus much the right of the Princes of the English Blood Royal, to
succeed in the right Hereditary Line, both according to the Law of God and
Nature: How great is the injustice as well as the inconvenience of excluding,
or debarring any one of them, upon any pretense, especially, upon such an one,
as will not justify any private man, to disinherit his next Heir at Law? Among
the Romans, there was no such thing as an Entail; Yet in the Civil Law, Sir
Rob. Wiseman's Law of Laws. p. 141.
if a Child were quite left out of his Fathers Will, or were especially
disinherited, but without any Cause mentioned, or upon such a Cause as the Law
did not allow of; Or if upon a Legal Cause, yet not such as was true in fact,
the Will was void and null. How then shall a Prince of the English Blood Royal,
who has his right from God, and the Feudal Laws, be precluded from that Right
upon an illegal Cause, contrary to the Fundamental Laws of this Realm, contrary
to the essential reasons, and ends of Parliament, contrary to that very Oath,
by which every member is enabled and qualified to sit in it, contrary to the
Oaths and Obligations of all the Subjects of this Monarchy, of what quality or
condition soever they be, contrary to the last Words and Will of King Charles
the First. How can any Act or Ordinance be valid, and not ipso facto, void and
null, that should be made to preclude him? I wonder, that any English
Gentleman, that has the least veneration for the memory of that good King,
should go about to preclude his Second Son? It Is certain, that they who cut off
the Fathers Head, will not scruple to cut off the Entail from the Son. But I
marvel much, that men professing so great a Veneration for that glorious
Prince, should do it contrary to his last Will and words to his third Son the
Duke of Gloucester; Mark what I say, Child, you must not be a King so long as
your Brothers Charles and James do live. But above all, it is very strange that
such a motion should be made against a Prince, that has signalized his love and
kindness in so many dangers to his Country, his compassion to many people in
distress, his Charity to his Foes, his Fidelity to his Friends; insomuch, that
his Enemies lay his virtues to his charge, instead of Crimes; and like Owls
quarrel with the Sun that dazzles them. It Is strange that such a Prince, the
Son of such a Father, that has apparently such unquestionable right, and who
has given such assurance for the safety and prosperity of the Church of
England, should be debarred from that right, by such an illegal Plea, as that
of Presumptive Popery.

Presumptive Popery! ( said the Jesuit in Presbyterian disguise) Well! Is it
only presumptive? Hark you, Sir, I pray ( said he to the Excluder): I think the
most part of Your Estate is in Abbey Lands: it is so indeed ( replied he) and I
have been told that at Rome they have the Terriers of every foot of ground that
did formerly belong to their Monasteries, and Nunneries.

So I have heard (replied the Jesuit) they are a pack of subtle Knaves, and
they do hope to recover them again, or else they would not Plot and Contrive so
damnably as they do.

Well! well! ( replied he) We shall defeat their designs, and cut off all their
hopes, if we can but get the Bill of Exclusion to pass, we need not fear them:
For it is certain, that if he comes to be King, they expect that he should bring
in Popery. -- -- I think your Lands about your Seat, did formerly belong to a
sort of Monks they called Benedictines; I will say that of the Jesuits ( to
give the Devil his due) that they have not those Secular ends in converting
England to the Church of Rome, which other Priests and Monks have; for they
have no Lands to recover, as others have; but if you follow your business, you
may keep your Lands long enough for all the Papists. Come, Sir, be not troubled
about it, I thought you had been a man of a better Spirit; What shall I give
you for 1000. Acres, when Popery comes in? -- Prithee, ( replied he) What do
you take me for, do you think that I am afraid of them? I do so little fear
them, that give me but one Guinea down, and I will be bound to let you have
every Acre of those Grounds for sixpence an Acre that day they come to demand
them. -- Done! Done! ( replied the Jesuit) I Will try what metal you are of; so a
Bargain was concluded, and they merrily parted.

As soon as he was gone, another that had been an Excluder, came in very
melancholy, and walking about the Room in a pensive posture -- How now, Sir, (
said the Jesuit to him) Pray what is it that troubles you? Are you grieved that
you cannot get the Bill to pass the House of Lords? -- In truth, Sir, (replied
he) I had rather have given half my Estate, than that ever it was brought into
the House of Commons; I am sure a great many Gentlemen more are of my mind, pox
on it, that a man should be so damnably wheedled by a pack of Knaves and Fools;
I think I shall have a care of being heated again as long as I live, I think
there is some Magical Vapors and Damps that infatuate a man sometimes in that
House. -- -- You see now, Sir, ( said he) what becomes of the Jesuits Plot; it
was a fair stalking-Horse for the Fanatics to go a Blunderbuzzing with. -- If
the Devil had them all (replied the Gentleman) it were not a farthing matter;
we honest Gentlemen shall never be quiet until they are all hanged.

No more you will not truly, said the Jesuit, turning from him with a smile;
and going to a Gentleman that was walking in the Garden, we followed him: At
the first meeting, pray what news, Sir, ( said the Gentleman)? Oh! Sir, ( said
he) we are all utterly undone; I just now understand that the Bill of Exclusion
is thrown out by the House of Lords; so that all the whole Scheme of our
designs is broken, and nothing now but silence and forgetfulness must do our
business, unless the Presbyterians and Independents, by some extravagant
Attempt, do it for us. Pray Sir, ( said he) What did you expect would be the
consequence of that Bills passing? -- Why? ( said the Jesuit) we in a short
time would have made the Kingdom of England Elective, and this would have
dissolved the Hereditary lineal Descent for ever; for by that Precedent, we had
never wanted some excuse or other for a Bill of Exclusion, which would have
been of greater Authority, than all the Antiquated and disparate instances,
which Doleman has gathered from all History: And then we should have removed
the greatest Obstacle in the world, to our affairs, by setting up Kings of
another Family, in opposition to the true Hereditary Line, which was the advice
of Campanella, a great many years ago; and it was wise Counsel then, and wiser
now* For, First, -- That Family is so mortally, and justly incensed against us,
that we can never expect that they will ever trust, or be reconciled unto us.
Secondly, -- The Profits, Honors, and security which that Royal Family,
according to the Laws of the present Established Government injoys, and to which
it has a fundamental Right, are greater, than any Prince that is a Roman
Catholic can have, were it not for the disturbances we give them by making
Factions and Divisions among the People. And, Thirdly, -- The People of
England, under the Rules of that Government, and the protection of that Royal
Family, enjoy such advantages, not only of Riches, but of Knowledge and good
Conversation; that all the little Monastical Arts and Devices of Monks and
Friars, can never overreach, or impose upon them; but if we could ruin that
Family, their Government would soon fall, and nothing would more effectually
have done it, than the Bill of Exclusion, had it passed.

Well! and What then, replied the Gentleman, looking a little sternly upon him?

Why! then, (said he) England should have been an Island of Jesuits?

An Island of Devils, (said the Gentleman frowning) You will never have done,
until you have ruined us; our condition was pretty tolerable, before such
perfidious Traitors as you are, justly provoked the Government (to which you
have been so injurious) to Enact severe Laws, and Statutes against us: It Is you
that have imbroil'd all the rest of Christendom, and now you envy that so small
a spot of ground should enjoy the blessings of Peace. For by this infernal
stratagem, you would again involve us in the miserable Confusions of Civil
Wars, that so no part of the Earth may be free from your wickedness; and no
place in Hell too hot for your reward.

What do you mean, Sir, ( said the Jesuit) What! are you turned Heretic?

No, Sir, (replied he) I acknowledge that I am a Roman Catholic, yet I detest
such barbarous and unnatural Doctrines and Practices the very Venomous
Conceptions of Father Parsons, who was not only the worst of Jesuits, but a
Bastard to boot; and I have here with me a poor Indian Savage, that can indeed
speak English, but has scarceshak't of his Soot and Grease, and is just polisht
enough for the common Civilities of life; and I dare venture my reputation,
that as soon as you shall acquaint him with, and make him understand such a
Proposition, that he will naturally abhor and condemn it.

All this while, there stood waiting behind him, a tall man of a true Philomot
complexion, but a very lusty Fellow: -- Co^^^, Come hither, (said the Gentleman
his Master) come hither to this man. --

At this he fell a shuddering, and went backwards; so that his Master stepped to
him, and took him by the Arm; but then he drew back until his breech almost
touched the ground, spreading out his hands, and staring like a wild Bull. I
pray Master! (said he) I am afraid* indeed I am not Christian enough yet. --
What do you mean, Sirrah, said his Master? -- Is not this Sir, said he, Tanto?
Tanto! ( said the Jesuit) What is that? -- That is (replied the Gentleman) the
Devil or the Tempter: but Co^^^, Why do you fancy this man to be Tanto? -- --
-- Why? then he is a Presbyterian Christian as you call 'um, and I tell you,
why I am afraid of him. My Father knowing that I was tampered with one of them,
(like this man) at Boston in New England, beat me almost to death for it,
telling me, that he would learn me to kill my Father, and to kill my King. Well
Coree, (said his Master) tell me one thing, do you Indians love your King? And
do you love his Son for his sake? And when your King dies, and goes to the
Green Fields behind the Hills; has his Son his Matts, his Skins, his Canoes,
his Feathers, his Bracelets, and all his fine things. -- Yes! yes, (said he)
All, All. -- -- And if the King ( said his Master) has no Sons; do you Indians
love his Brother, if he has one? -- -- O yes (said he) and his Brother has all
his Whigwhams, his Woman's, all, all; and then we go lay our hands on our knees,
and he lays his head on his shoulders, and then we sing and dance, and go out
to sight for him, and to hunt for him; and indeed, if it were not for our
Kings, we should utterly destroy one another. Now although the Massachusetes
are several Nations; yet every one takes their Kings part, and do what he
commands, and honor him as much as he can, and so keep together, and defend
one another. Nor is it only the Custom of the Massachusetes in New England,
but the Paroisti' s in Florida are honored so too. When English men came first
to New England, our people used to say, that King James was a good King, and
his God a good God, but our Tanto naught. But when they heard that they killed
that Kings Son, when he came to be King; they said, that they were all Tanto's,
and could not endure them, but said, that you sent thither the worst Christians
you had: for in all places the Indians love their Kings, and his Brothers, and
his Sons; and do but ask those that have a Plantation called New York, and they
will give you a better account than I can, for I was very young when I came
first among the English.

That place (replied the Gentleman) is so called from his Royal Highness the
chief Proprietor: and then turning to his Indian, hark you, Coree, thou art
Christian enough to encounter that Tanto Devil; therefore beat him soundly, and
tell him, I bid you do so.

The Jesuit seeing the Indian coming up to him in good earnest, began to run
for it; however, he soon overtook him, and gave him half a dozen American
Complements with his Indian Bill in exchange for his Bill of Exclusion.

As soon as they were gone, I am very glad, Sir, ( said I) to see this Jesuit
so disappointed.

I do not question, Sir, (said he) but you may find a great many called Roman
Catholics, of my mind as to the Doctrine of Submission and Obedience to the
Civil Magistrate: And I do declare, that I from the bottom of my heart do abhor
all Traitorous Positions, and Practices, tending to the ruin of the King and
his Government, and look upon them as Hellish and Damnable.

Truly, Sir, ( said I) it is a very wicked Age, wherein men arrive to that
height of disobedience, that the lives of Princes, should lie at the mercy of
every discontented Russian, and that their unquestionable Rights should depend
upon the Wills and Fancies of every scribbling crackt-brain Politician. But
these are the Ascarides, the very excrementitious Vermin of the Body Politic,
and deserve no other Answer, than what a Louse or a Flea receives for biting a
man; however, because to the Infamy of Vermin, they have added the Venom,
subtlety and malice of Serpents: I think it not amiss to pluck them out of
their holes, and expose and show them. But oh! have a care you don't abuse an
ingenious man and a good Scholar, (cries the meek hearted) Well! there is no
great fear of it! For I think a Serpent is never a whit the more amiable for
his poisonous gay speckles; and I do declare, that if a person that is
incorrigibly seditious, should at last write a Treasonable Book for the which,
by the Law, he deserves to be hanged, (and for the which he must be hanged,)
let him be never so good a Scholar; I think, that all the mercy he could expect
in this world, should be, to have the many Seditious Volumes he has read,
hanged at his heels, to dispatch him the sooner. But if these Politicians and
Casuists escape hanging, they do the more admire and applaud themselves; not
considering all the while the great wickedness a man commits that writes an ill
Book, by which he may be said to sin after he is dead; nor the great mischiefs
they do the living, by poisoning the minds of the unwary people, and
disordering and disturbing the Affairs, and Councils of Princes.

Surely (said Seignior Christiano) no Prince in the World ever had a greater
trial of his patience, wisdom and goodness, than our present Gracious Sovereign
has had about this Bill of Exclusion: Nothing more inhumane could be proposed,
than that He (to satisfy their unjust Complaints) should offer so
unseasonable, so unreasonable an injury to his Royal and only Brother, whom the
loss of his other Brother and Sisters, the sufferings of his Father, and his
own merits had so much indeared him; contrary to the Laws of natural Justice
and Honesty, and to the Fundamental Laws of this Hereditary Monarchy. And
although at the very first thought, and suspicion of such thing, his Majesty at
the very first rejected it, as we may gather from his speech on Saturday
November. 9th. which was soon after a debate arose in the House of Commons, for
an Adress to be presented, that his Royal Highness should withdraw himself from
his Majesty's Person, and Counsels; Yet we presume, that in his Royal and
serious Meditations, He considered the Righteous Judgments of God in all Ages,
that have fallen upon them who thought themselves either the Richer or Safer in
the Possessions of injur*d Princes; that therefore, it would be an injury even
to that person that should next succeed upon his removal. That He considered
the Fatal consequences of his Fathers compliance in the Case of the Earl of
Strafford; But that this was of much greater Consequence: we presume, that in
his wisdom, He foresaw the malicious designs of a restless Faction, who
endeavored to wound him through the sides of his dearest Brother: That he
foresaw the many dismal Calamities that would unavoidably fall upon the People,
and that of his goodness he was resolved to prevent them: under which his Royal
wisdom, and goodness we now enjoy all the comforts of this life, and the best
opportunities of obtaining a better; For which this present Age is bound to
love and honor him, and for which those to come, will certainly magnify and
extol him: and suppose God should so order it in his Providence (whose will
must be done) that none of his Loins shall sit upon his Throne; Yet we, and all
good Subjects, do hope and pray, that after a long and prosperous Reign here on
Earth, He that is the King of kings, will infinitely recompense him with an
immortal Crown of Glory in Heaven.

THE Fourth VISION OF GOVERNMENT.
The CONTENTS.
The wicked Policy of raising a mean or evil opinion of the Sovereign in the
minds of the Subjects. The trivial and unreasonable occasions of such an
opinion, a pleasant instance thereof in the Case of the Salique Law; it is
condemned by an Hermaphrodite. Better that the Sovereignty should be in one
Woman than in five hundred men. The Sovereignty of England in a single Person.
The Heresy of the Whiggish Lawyers. Those that write of the Antiquity of
Parliaments, and those that vilify them, are Commonwealths men, and enemies
both of King and Parliament. The Characters of several Commonwealths-men; good
advice to them. A Panegyric upon the King, the Duke, the Royal Family, and all
the True-hearted Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, and Commonalty of this Realm, an
hearty Prayer for them.

THe Garden Gate that was set open, gave us a very pleasant Prospect into the
most solitary, and shady Walks, fit for Owls, and Politicians to hatch in; at a
small distance from us, we observed a very Diminutive Non-con, taking the
fresco after the labor of the day; and pulling his Handkerchief out of his
pocket, he drew out with it a Scroll of Paper, which fell to the ground without
his notice. Seignior Christiano following softly, took it up, and as soon as I
came to him; Here are his Notes, said he, smiling, without doubt here is a
great deal of stickling stuff in them, let us for Diversion peruse them. We
found a great deal of their war like Divinity, such as raised the late
Rebellion. But in the midst of all the bundle, we found a ticket rolled up very
hard, and at first opening, thought it had been a blank, but it proved to be
the most virulent and lewd Libel against the King, in a few lines, that ever I
read in my life. -- Here (said Seignior Christiano) here is the Peace and Purity
of the Gospel wrapped up together; the Devil certainly wrote them, when he stunk
of Brimstone; don't put them in your pocket, they will set your Breeches on
fire.

I do assure you, ( said I) I have heard the Cub of a London Tub Preacher, when
he was a Schole Boy, repeat these very Verses, when I am sure you might as soon
have persuaded him to be circumcised, as to have said three lines of the
Litany: So early do these Wolves instruct their whelps to bark, so early are
they Catechized in the Doctrine of Slander and Reproach; That one would think,
they hold it to be Man's chief End, to despise Dominion, and speak evil of
Dignities: And so diligently do they afterward practice it, that it seems to
be not only one of the Liberal Sciences of Fanaticism, but you would conclude,
that they maintain Throwing of Stink Pots, to be necessary to Salvation.

It is a wicked piece of Policy, very necessary to Rebellion, (replied Seignior
Christiano) it is forbidden by the Law of Moses, by the Doctrine and example of
our Savior, and his Apostles: but our Politicians value no Laws of God, or
Man; and (knowing that if a Prince do not reign in the hearts of the People,
that they will be apt to forget those Laws too, and lift up their hands against
him,) have therefore spread about such swarms of Libels, Invectives, false
reports, unjust Aspersions, and Reflections upon the King, his Ministers, his
Councils, his Affairs both by Sea and Land, at home and abroad.

A man truly, Sir, ( said I) should have a great care how he gives credit to
some reports.

He had need, as he tenders the Salvation of his Soul (replied Seignior
Christiano) have a care of hearing the least evil spoken of his Prince, or of
entertaining the least dishonorable thought concerning him, lest he be
insensibly wheedled into that disobedience, which is the prevailing sin of this
unnatural and perfidious Age.

It Is strange ( said I) it should be the prevailing sin of this Age, under so
good a Prince.

' It Is so (replied he) and it has too much prevailed upon the pretenses of
doing honor to God. But if they honor not the King, whom they have seen, how
can they be said truly to honor God, whom they have not seen? they honor God
by Rebellion, just as they love their Brother, by Sequestration. But, Sir, so
very prostigate are the loose fancies of some men, that they suffer their
Allegiance to flag, by letting their thoughts sink into a mean opinion of their
Sovereign, because he is of the same Common Nature, of the same Composition of
flesh and blood, with the rest of Mankind; Not considering, that though he be
but a man by nature, that He is as the Angel of God, and a King by his grace.
By his grace (I say) who out of the Abundance of his Mercy, is pleased to
govern us by one, who can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are
out of the way; for that He himself also is compassed with infirmity. Should
the destroying Angel keep his residence amongst us with Armies of Locusts, with
the Nusances of Plagues and Pestilences, and with whole troops of the
Messingers of sudden death, to execute the Sentence speedily upon the
offenders; should he awe us with flaming Lightnings, and loud thunders, we
should say unto our King, as the Israelites did to Moses, Exodus 20. v. 19.
speak thou with us, and we will hear: but let not God speak with us, lest we
die.

It Is certain, ( said I) that the wickedness of a Prince, can never justify
the rebellion of the People; but it is as certain, that the most virtuous, the
most just, the most Prudent Prince in the World, can never utterly avoid the
revilings of some, or the murmurings of others. But Honi soit qui mal y pense.
I am sure, that what ever evil opinion any Subject has of his Sovereign,
arises from an heart much more evil, from the complicated evils of discontent,
ambition, pride, false zeal, or covetousness. And what ever mean opinion others
may at any time have, arise from a wrong one. Some are as Romantic in their
Fancies, as those Fables and Legends, that speak of no Princes, but what are
born with Roses, Crowns, and Flowers on their Breasts. Others again, are as
ridiculous in their relations of monstrous Excrescencies and deformities in the
Bodies of those they account Tyrants; the Jesuits reported, that Queen
Elizabeth had a great black Beard; and others could not endure the thoughts of
the Sovereignty being in a Woman. Thus some Fantastical prejudices or other,
possess and corrupt the fancies of men, that have not that due reverence and
esteem for their Sovereign, which they ought to have; and upon as light
occasions on the other hand, are moved to the highest expressions, even of
extravagant Veneration and duty.

We now saw a tall young man walking all alone toward a thick, and shady
Grove, but so discomposed, and so desperately melancholy he seemed to be, that
we feared he had been going to lay violent hands on himself; for he oft-times
drew his Sword half way out of the Scabbard, then putting it up again, smote
himself on the Breast, then biting his lips, and turning himself several times
about, we perceived that his eyes sparkled, his visage was pale, and being now
near enough to him, we could hear him say -- Perfidious, dissembling,
treacherous, and cruel Woman. Woman! did I say, Viper, Toad, Serpent, an Angels
face, but a Devils heart, Sirens voice, Crocodiles Tears, Basilisks eyes; I Will
rend her from my soul, though I pluck my Heartstrings in pieces with her. O
Nature, Why have thou made such a Plague for us as Woman? How came they by this
fatal power over us? Why should we love them? Why should we obey them? What!
woman rule? Damned tyrant Woman! What! Harpies, and Furies set on Thrones? From
this moment I wage eternal War with all the Sex: and by this light, with this
hand will I pluck her down (be she what she will) that sets up her self above
the most contemptible wretch of a man that has but half an Arm, and but one Eye.

You are in the right, indeed ( young man) replied a Jesuit that was just by
him. It is not fit, it is not natural for a Woman to rule and govern; should
they sway the Scepter, that hold the Distaffe? Should a Woman be Sovereign?
when a man is the head of the Church?

The young man answered him not a word, but was on a sudden very strangely
altered, for pulling his Hat over his Eyes, hanging down his head, and almost
in a swoon, the Tears gusht in full streams from him; and he said, -- My dear
but cruel Orinda! unkind Orinda, what have I done, to deserve your scorn and
hatred? indeed I know not what I have done; but that I may never offend you
more, adien! for ever adieu! from this Moment I go into everlasting Banishment;
in yonder dark Shades, and solitary Rocks, will I sit and mourn with the
faithful Turtles, and there

Spend the remainder of my lingering Years;
'Till I at last dissolve in Sighs, and Tears.
What Psalms! Psalms? Cried the Non. Con. (who dropped the Libel) and was come so
near as to hear these last lines; What! Psalms, quoth he? A Godly Youth, a
Godly Youth, I warrant him. -- No, Sir, said Seignior Christiano, He is not so
merry (poor Youth) He is troubled in mind, pray do you comfort him up if you
can.

To comfort the Afflicted, is not only my Business, but delight (said he) and
then applied himself in a long Harangue of incoherent and impertinent Cant. --
-- The Youth took no manner of notice of him, but now and then sighed, and
said, Orinda! -- As soon as he perceived his malady, he changed his note.

Fie, Fie, (said he) What ruin your self for a Woman; are there not others as
good as she, as Beautiful? And if any of them prove kinder, is it not better
for you? You are a man of parts, that may be very serviceable to your Country,
come, come with me, I Will help you to as good a Wife as your heart can wish for;
some Women will be cruel; Queen Mary was a grievous Persecutor, not fit to
govern; a very Jezabel, says Calvin, and one that burnt Protestants, with
their Books and Writings.

The Youth sat leaning on a Bank, answering nothing; at last, a Messenger came
to him with a Letter, which, we suppose, brought more comfort in it, than any
of us could give him; for he had not the power to read it altogether, but when
he had done, he was so ravished and transported with joy, as never was poor
Malefactor when unexpectedly reprieved from a most cruel death, just ready to
be inflicted upon him; for he trembled with excess of joy, his color came and
went, now he stood fixed like an Image without life, and then kneeling down: My
dearest, sweetest, Sovereign Queen, and Goddess (cried he again weeping) I Will
love thee, I Will obey thee all the days of my life! A thousand Beams of
gladness dart through me; I am all over Sunshine, I Will do homage to the very
Wormholes of thy Footstool. With this he kissed the ground, and then arising up,
and looking sternly on the Non. Con. and the Jesuit, he laid his hand upon his
Sword, and said; Traitors, Rebels, and Villains, speak one syllable more in
dishonor of that glorious Sex, and I Will cut you both into Atoms. But you, Sir,
that spoke against Queen Mary, assure your self, for what you have said against
her already, because a Woman, I am resolved, if ever I come to be Justice of
the Peace, I Will put the 35th. of Queen Elizabeth in execution, against all
those of your Faction, before any other Statute of any Kings whatsoever. -- Oh!
Sir, (said the Non. Con.) indeed, Queen Elizabeth was a very gracious Queen,
she was most worthy to Reign -- -- -- Truly, said the Jesuit, I am not so much
against all Women, I love them well enough, for I am sure we would monopolize
them all; I say the Queen of Sweeden was a most renowned and glorious Queen.
The Queen of the South shall not only be celebrated; but the North too, have
had a Queen of as famous memory, most worthy to Reign, because she refused it.
-- -- But mine! mine! (said he) is worth them all, and she shall Reign, and I
will live as long as I can, that she may long live, and Reign over me.

At these words the Youth very nimbly marched off; and as soon as he was gone:
Well! said the Jesuit, I do, and must say, that the Salique Law, which debars
Women from the Crown, is a very wise and good Law. -- -- So it is indeed ( sad
the Non. Con) and very fit to be put in execution upon Occasion; for Women are
foolishly silly and weak, and not at all fit to govern.

More fit than you are to preach, cried an odd kind of a person, as I thought
of the Epicoene Gender. -- Who affronted you, cried the Non. Con. staring upon
h --? You did, (said the Hermaphrodite. You have injured the better part of me,
which is Woman; you say they are foolish, weak, and not fit to govern; which I
tell you is contrary to the Law of Nature, to the Laws of this Realm; and most
of all, contrary to my Own Experience. For when my Manhood has a mind to be
reserved, I find that almost every Drab can pump it out of him; but my
Womanhood can keep her Counsel, better than she can hold her water; when my
Manhood discovers his love or hatred, openly, violently, and foolishly, my
Womanhood can more easily hide and cover them, than the freckles and wrinkles
on her face. It Is my Womanhood makes my Manhood, witty, wise, and valiant; and
in my self I find by experience, that the Women influence, direct, guide, and
govern all Men living; and since I cannot endure two Principles of Sovereignty
in the same Soul, and that the Nature of my Body inclines most to the Female
Sex, I have therefore rightly placed it in the Woman.

They were so confounded with this Positive Conviction, from one of the
Doubtful Gender, that they both of them sneakt away; and as soon as they were
gone; that Sovereign (said I) that pleases them, shall be Sovereign it seems as
long as they think fit, and none else; For they measure the Rights of Princes,
by the rule of their own Interests; and whether the Sovereign be Man or Woman,
it is all one to them, if either Her, or His Majesty, do not favor them, so as
to let them have their wills, they are presently upon the Deposing Vein; and
rather than want Arguments to incite the People to it, they will make use of
old ones, or borrow of one another. Come for once and away, I Will tell you what
a strange fancy I have now in my head. I do fancy, That the time will come,
when the Spawn of these very Presbyterians, Independents, etc. who now at this
time, do so magnify and cry up the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, will join with
the Jesuits in defense of the Salique Law; and wherein they will as much extol
and commend the Reign of King Charles the Second. However, the great Game is,
that the Sovereignty of England should not remain in one single Person, Man, or
Woman; for they are for transferring it to a great many.

Well! for my part (said Seignior Christiano) I should not like well to see
three or four hundred Suns shining in England at once; it is a good Temperate
Climate now, but then it would be too hot for me. For I must tell you, that it
is much better for England, that the Sovereignty should be in One woman than in
five hundred Men. And I wonder, that the Jesuits, who call the Virgin Mary the
Queen of Heaven, and adore her more than our Savior himself, who is the King
of Glory, should not pay the Homage of Sovereign Honor to that Sex on Earth,
to which they pay Divine Worship in Heaven. But our Politicians, who say in
their hearts, there is no God there, would have no King here; They think a
great many heads is better than One; and one Man's, much better than a great
many Women's. However the simple, and honest Christian is very apt to think that
God (who is the fountain of all Wisdom, and by whom Kings and Queens, are made
Nursing Fathers, and Nursing Mothers of his Church) does not limit his Spirit
to either Sex. That he can enrich one single heart, with his Heavenly Grace;
that it shall prove more instrumental to his Glory, and our Good, than the
Worldly Wisdom, and Policy of all Mankind: and on the other hand, let those
Politicians look into the 29th Chapter of Isaiah, at the 13th. and 14th.
Verses, (a Prophet is as good as a Politician, because he foresees what will
come to pass, they only design what they would have come to pass) and they will
find, that God says; Because their fear toward me, is taught by the precepts
of men; therefore behold, I will proceed to do a mavelous Work amongst this
People, even a mavelous work, and a Wonder; for the Wisdom of their Wisemen
shall Perish, and the Understanding of their Prudent shall be hid.

This, Sir, ( said I) would have been a good Text to have Preached upon before
the Wittena Gemot, or meeting of the Wisemen at S. Margarets in Westminster,
about the Year 1641.

Oh! (replied Seignior Christiano) it had been a Malignant Text, and the
Preacher would have been committed to the Custody of the Black Rod. For they
were then scrambling for the Sovereignty, to share it amongst themselves;
however they soon lost it, by the same Principles by which they Usurpt it; and
whilst they kept it, they made so ill use of it, that had the Protestants in
Queen Mary's Reign, been then alive, they would have commended her, as much as
the Fanatics have done Queen Elizabeth. So dreadful was that Judgment when
inflicted upon England, which was anciently threatened to the Israelites, for
their rebellion against their Sovereign; Hos. 3. 4.
the Children of Israel shall abide many days without a King, and without a
Prince, etc.

Lord, Sir, ( said I) if it was dangerous to preach then upon such a Subject,
before the Wise Men at Westminster; it is in vain to preach it now to some
people: for they, very learned in the Law, will tell you, that they did not set
up another King, a Jeroboam, (to which that Text relates) but that they more
prudently transferred, or, at least, fixed the Sovereign Power in a Parliament;
and therefore will say, What signifies your old fashioned Divinity, to the
Learned in the Law?

Those Lawyers (replied Seignior Christiano) learnt their Seditious Principles
in the State, from Schismatical and Heretical ones in the Church. And they that
maintain that the Sovereignty of England is not in one single Person, are as
great Heretics for Lawyers; as the Archontici, the Marcionites, the
Heracleonites, the Colarbasians, or Valentinians, were for Divines; and they
were Heretics who were condemned for holding several Beginnings.

Truly, Sir, ( said I) I think here comes one of these ancient sort of
Gentlemen, you talk of. For we now overtook a Comical old Fellow, in such a
Garb as I never before had seen; he had a great Ruff-band on, which needed no
imbroidery, for it was made up of old Saxon Manuscripts; and the Trimming to
his Clothes, was old Parchment tassels, tagg'd with Wax, upon which was the
Impression of King Arthurs Tooth, and of the Fangs of all his Knights.

This is a pleasant Antiquarian, (said Seignior Christiano) let us brush the
Cobwebs off him a little, and make our selves merry with him.

We needed not to seek long for an opportunity, for he immediately came up to
us, saying, Gentlemen, my Business in this World, is to vindicate the honor of
our English Parliaments, from the Calumnies of those, who say, That the Commons
of England were introduced, and begun, An. 49 H. 3. Therefore pray come along
with me into yonder Castle, and there I will show you all the ancient, and
undeniable Records under the British, Saxon, and Norman Governments. -- -- We
willingly followed him, until he brought us into a very large Room, where there
was Provender enough for the Rats and Mice of twenty Generations. He had now
pulled his Hat off, and made a low obeisance to an heap of musty Parchments,
when a bold Fellow came up, and with a great deal of scorn, kicked them all
about the room. You old fop, (said he) look you here, I have in this Cabinet of
mine, a set of Antiquities worth a thousand loads of your moldy Parliament
Rolls. Here is, said he, the Tongue of that Parrot, that was first Speaker to
the House of Commons in the Parliament of Birds; and here are two of his
Speeches: Here is the Ancient Charter of the City Mouse, which he forfeited for
eating too far into an Holland Cheese; Here is a Tobacco stopper, made of Log,
the first King of the Froggs: What do you talk of your Records, and Parliament
Rolls, and House of Commons; a fart for your House of Office?

We did certainly expect, that the Antiquarian would have blead him alive, to
have made new Vellum of his skin, for the affronts he put upon his old
Parchments. But what was extraordinary strange, we could not discover, that he
was in the least angry with him, at which we much wondered; and therefore I
examined those Parchments, and found them to be the same which Mr. Petyt of the
Inner Temple, had made use of, for Asserting the Ancient Rights of the Commons
of England, Printed in the Year, Eighty. And therefore ( said I to Seigntor
Christiano) the writing that Book at a Time, when the just Privileges of
Parliament were not in the least called in Question; but on the contrary, when
not only the Kings Prerogative, but his life also was in Danger by a
Conspiracy, formed among several that were Members of that House, was just as
if one should have written of the Antiquity of the Sea of Rome, and of the
Grants of our English Kings, to several Popes, at that very Time, when the
Popish Plot was first discovered.

Why, truly, (replied Seignior Christiano) it is pity, but that Mr. Petyt
should have the same reward the next Parliament, which that last Parliament
would have bestowed upon such an Author; and that he may not want company,
some hope, that the next Parliament will take the Ignoramus Jury into
consideration; it being a case, according to Mr. Lambard, his own Antiquarian,
not within the reach Archion. f. 105.
of any standing Law, or Statute, and in which the Parliament has Jurisdiction.

But, Sir, (said I) I further remarque upon that Book, that whilst he pretends
to assert the rights of the Commons, he hinders the main Ends of Parliaments;
What a noise does he make of Baronagium, Generale placitum, and Communitas
Regni, and several other denominations by which the Common Council, or
Parliaments, were expressed? But not with any design to the right ends, for
which they were called; One great end, according to his own Quotation out of
Preface. f. 43.
Knighton de Event. Angl. is, ut Inimici Regis and Regni Intrinseci, and hosts
extrinseci destruantur and repellantur; that the Domestic and foreign Enemies
of the King, and Kingdom, may be destroyed and repelled. And in order to this,
it is very requisite, that the King should have those that are all Loyal
Subjects in that Great Council; that He should be supplied with moneys to
defray the Public Charges; and therefore what signifies a great many of the
Records he has quoted? and that in particular of the 34 E. 1. unless he had
designed that the last Westminster, and Oxford Parliament, should have
considered Onera Domino Regi incumbentia, as that Parliament did, by which
dutiful Considerations of his Parliament, King Edward I. became a Victorious
Prince; for he awed France, subdued Wales, and brought Scotland into
subjection; of whose King and Nobility, he received Homage. But a King, it
seems, may be made Glorious at a cheaper rate, than Victorious: and our
Antiquarian forgot in his Quotation, that honest old Rule; Incivile est
particulam aliquam Legis sumere, non perspect a tota Lege. For he should as
well have had respect to the end of their meeting, as to the particular Persons
that were there, had he written as became a Loyal Subject, and an honest man at
that time; and I do not at all question, but he who seems so tender of wounding
the Peerage, would be the first, were it in his power, that would turn the
Bishops out of the House of Lords; although for the blood of him, he cannot in
all his reading, bring the Burgesses into the House of Commons, but must
stumble over Archbishops, and Bishops, by the way,

I suppose, (replied Seignior Chr.) He Dedicated that Book to the late Earl of
Essex, for the same reason, that the last Edition of Gods Revenge against
Murder, is Dedicated to the late Earl of Shastsbury.

At this, both the Antiquarian, and He that kicked about his Parchments, joined
together, and came up to us with a great deal of Fury; and had not I by chance
caught hold of his venerable Ruff, and threatened to demolish that reverend
relick, we had not parted without a fray; but he thus receiving some damage at
the first onset, they compounded the matter, and so we parted pretty quietly.

No sooner were we got from them; But you see, (said Seignior Chr.) they both
agree against any one that defends the Government; and in the main design, of
changing this Ancient Monarchy into a Commonwealth. For they who vilify
Parliaments, (if they do it not out of a rash and inconsiderate humor) do it
with an ill design to make the King suspected by his People; and so at last,
would have no King; and they who give to Parliaments that power that does not
belong to them, give them power to destroy themselves, and so would have no
Parliaments: a true notion of a Commonwealth, destroys the very being both of
King, and Parliament; for he that diminishes, or takes away the Prerogative
of the King, takes away the very Power of Parliament, even when He pretends to
give them the Kings Prerogative. So they that fought for King and Parliament,
in the late Wars, fought against them both, as appeared in the conclusion, and
England can never be a Commonwealth again, until their be no King, and then
there will ipso facto, be no Parliament.

As soon as we were out of the Castle, we saw a world of people coming toward
the Gates, so that I fancied, that we were formally Besieged: but it seems,
they only came thither for Intelligence, as their Custom was once or twice a
week. Upon which, we fell in among them, and found people of all Qualities, and
Conditions, but most of the commonsort, and a great many Women I do not know.
But methoughts I found my self strangely uneasy among them, for they differed
very much from men of Debonair, and civil conversation, they had such a
dreaming way of talking, such leering, and suspicious looks, that I never saw
so much ill Nature together in a crowd, all the days of my life; and almost
fancied, that they had a particular smell with them. Seignior Christiano, (who
saw me in a musing quandary) taking me aside, if there was (said he) but a
small strinkling of Laplanders, and Canibals among them, they would be the
compleatest Body of Commonwealths-men under the Sun: However that they may not
want some Foreigners to illustrate them, they have a few Calvinistical and
busy Walloons pricked in among them.

Have they not a few Rattoons, and Baboons too ( said I?) Truly they have as
much reason to be altering, and changing the Government, as any Walloon of them
all. Is it not an horrid shame and scandal, that they who are naturalized by
the favor of the Prince, and have here gained good Estates under the
Protection of his Laws, should grow insolent and mutinous* and join with Rebels
to ruin him and his Government?

You know the monstrous gratitude of a Factious Fanatic, or you know nothing,
(said Seignior Chr.) how many men whose dullness his Majesty has covered with a
Title of Honor, and a Gold Chain, have in requital, acted as if they designed
the old Game of binding Kings in Chains? ' It Is nothing certainly, but the
Spirit of ingratitude, pride, ambition, covetousness, or revenge, that makes so
many Commonwealths-men in the Kingdom of England. I could give you the exact
Characters of these men, their particular rules of Education, and their
behavior in their several Employments, but they will not singly stand the
shock of a reprimand, and I have no time at present to do it, therefore I will
in general advise them all.

We being now got up a little hill, and they all before us. Men, Women, and
Children (said he) Tag, Rag, and Bobtail; since the good old Cause is in so bad
a condition, that you can never expect to turn this Kingdom into a Commonwealth
whilst ye live, and think that without one, you can never die in peace. Let me
advise you all, to make a step to a certain place at the Head of the River
Nilus, where Sir John Mandevil in his Travels, tells us, the People themselves
have none; but that like Flounders, they wear their eyes, and mouths in their
Breasts; these would be fit Companions for you Commonwealths-men, for those who
will have no King, or no Bishops, are properly called (...) men without heads;
truly solks, Niceph. l. 18. c. 45.
' it is not sit ye should stay here, for ye have made your selves such monsters
of men, as the world never knew: You that stickle so for a Commonwealth, have
taken such wicked courses to procure one, as are condemned by the Laws of all
the Commonwealths that ever were since the World began; the Gallant Romans,
under Consuls and Tribunes, scorned to make use of treachery, breach of Faith,
secret Assassinations against their most dangerous, and formidable Enemies in
Time of War (or at least they were forbid in the Civil Law) but you have added
the invention of Blunderbuzzing against your own Gracious and good Prince in
Times of Peace. Perjury, of which you have been so scandalously Guilty, was a
crime so detestable to all Nations; Sanderson de Jur. oblig. Prael. 7.
that a learned Casuist tells us; Perjurium autem vel ipsis etiam Ethnicis
inter gravissima illa Crimina est habitum, quae credebantur Deorum Immortalium
Iram non in Reos tantum, sed and in Posteros ipsorum, imo and in universas
Gentes accersere. Perjury, even by the very Heathens, was reckoned among those
highest crimes, which were thought to stir up the anger of the Immortal Gods;
not only against those that were Guilty of it themselves, but also against
their Posterity; ay, and against whole Nations too. I will not either name, or
number the great follies and impieties, that you upon this score have
committed; the greatest of all is, that you will not acknowledge them to be
what they really are, very evil; but have a care of the woe that is threatened to
them, that call evil good, and good evil: Let me advise you no longer to
believe that to be Faith, which is Faction; let me advise you, not to think
that to be Religion, which is Rebellion; let not your Gain, be any longer your
Godliness; and do not imagine Covetousness, to be a saving Grace; or that
laboring for War, is the way to Peace; change either your Country, or your
Conditions: if you stay at home, study to be quiet, learn to live in peace; in
peace! A blessing so so much the greater to you, by how much the less of it all
other Nations under the Heavens do now enjoy. This little world alone, like
another Goshen, sees, and feels the brightest influences of the Sun, when as
all the habitable World besides, is a Land of Darkness, of Darkness that may be
felt; loud Thunders, killing Lightnings, and deadly Hail, are one continued
storm from the East to the West, from the North to the South; the Sword of God
and man is drawn to scourge the sinful Age; Rivers are stained with Blood, and
devouring Locusts cover and infect the Earth; but none of these Plagues come
nigh your dwelling. You have no hardened or Tyrant Pharaoh to deserve them, and
therefore do not ye your selves bring them. Let no croaking Froggs come with
noisome Petitions in your Kings Chambers; but above all, do not Kill the
firstborn of all the Land, lest at last you bring a deluge of Miseries upon
you, a Sea, a red Sea, a Sea of Blood to overwhelm you.

By this time, on large Plains upon our right hand, methoughts I saw mighty and
vast numbers of the Loyal and true hearted Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, and
Commonalty of this, and other his Majesty's Kingdoms, and Dominions, making
their several Addresses to his Sacred Majesty, congratulating his Majesty's,
his Royal Brother's, and Kingdoms safe deliverance from the late Barbarous
Conspiracy. I was so extremely pleased with so noble a sight, that I almost
wept for joy, and could not forbear breaking into these expressions. I envy not
those who either saw Solomon in his Glory, Caesar in his Victories, or Augustus
on his Throne, since I this day see our Gracious Sovereign King Charles the
Second, triumphing in the hearts of his People; a Prince who to their virtues
has his great Fathers and his Own too shining in the most Illustrious instances
of his Valor, Conduct, and Wisdom. But why do I attempt to speak his praises!
the rising and setting Sun must do it, which sees those far distant Countries,
that are happy under his Government, and therefore strives to enrich them with
plenty, which he influences with peace; however we see here before our eyes,
those in whom both himself, and we all are happy, his Royal and illustrious
Brother James D. of York, a Prince of rare and singular virtues, who has filled
the Earth and Seas with his Victories, and the whole World with his fame; we
see the rest of the Royal Family, which we hope will be as numerous as it is
truly great, being inricht with the virtues and Blood Royal of all the Princes
in Christendom, and springing from the most ancient Royal Lineage in the World;
we see the great wisdom of our Royal Sovereign in his choice of all his chief
Ministers both in Church and State; who every one deserve a Panegyric, but
that their good deeds proclaim them better than our best words: we see our
Monarchs glory, and the Kingdoms honor in the loyal, liberal, and valiant
Nobility; in the true hearted numerous, and charitable Gentry; in the loving
honest, and obedient Commonalty. We see the public glory, honor, justice, and
piety of the King, and all his loyal Subjects, in the many magnificent and
pious works of Charity; and we hope that all the people of the Land seeing
these many, these great and good examples, will for the future become loyal and
obedient under so gracious a Sovereign, peaceable and quiet under so good a
Government, holy and just under such righteous Laws.

At this, Seignior Chr. kneeled down, and that (said he) these things may come
to pass, we will use better means than the Politicians of a wicked World, and
therefore as good Christians with the Church, let us Pray:

ALmighty God, whose Kingdom is everlasting, and power infinite, have mercy
upon the whole Church, and so rule the heart of thy chosen Servant Charles, our
King and Governor, that he (knowing whose Minister he is) may above all
things, seek thy honor and glory; and that we, and all his Subjects (duly
considering whose Authority he has) may faithfully serve, honor, and humbly
obey him in thee, and for thee, according to thy blessed word and Ordinance,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, who with thee and the Holy Ghost, lives and
reigns ever one God, World without End.

At this, such infinite multitudes cried aloud, Amen, Amen, that it was like
the noise of many Waters, or the sound of those loud Thunders at the delivery
of the Law; at which magnificent and glorious noise, all the Vision fled away,
and I awakt.

FINIS.
AN ADVERTISEMENT, Of Six very useful and necessary Books, lately Published,
and sold by Obadiah Blagrave at the Bear in St. Paul's Churchyard. viz.
1. BLagrave's Introduction to Astrology, showing the use of an Ephemeris, and
how to erect a Figure of Heaven, to any time proposed; also the Signification
of the Houses, Planets, Signs, and Aspects, with plain Instructions for the
Resolution of all manner of Questions in Astrology.

2. The works of Sr. George Wharton Knight, the most excellent Philosopher and
Astronomer, Collected in one Volumn.

3. The Sea-man's Tutor, explaining Geomety, Cosmography, and Trigonometry;
with diverse Requisite Tables of Longitude, and Latitude of Seaports; Traverse
Tables of Easting and Westing, Meridian miles, Declinations, Amplitudes,
Refractions, Use of the Compass, Calendar, Measure of the Earth Globe, Use of
Instruments and Charts, compiled for the use of the Mathematical School in
Christ's Hospital, London, his Majesty Chapter 2d. his Royal Foundation.

4. A General Treatise of Artillery, or great Ordnance, containing a Definition
of Geometry, the Names and Description of great Guns, and of their Parts; of
the mixture of Metals for Ordnance, of Powder, of Shot, and its Vent, of the
Measures of Artillery or Guns, of the several Natures of Artillery; with a
Description of a Stupendous Bridge, made by the Prince of Parma; of the
General proportion of the Bores of Guns, of the Culvering, of Fieldpieces, of
Cannons of Battery, etc. Writ in Italian by Tomaso Morety, Ingineer to the
Republic of Venice, Translated into English by Sr. Jonas Moore Knight, with an
Appendix for making Artificial Fireworks, Illustrated with diverse Cutts.

5. The Practical Gauger, being a plain and easy Method of Guaging, all sorts
of brewing Vessels, whereunto is added a short Synopsis, of the Laws of Excise,
by John Main.

6. The Countryman's Treasures, showing the Nature, Cause, and Cure of all
Diseases incident to Cattle, viz. Oxen, Cows, and Calves; Sheep, Hogs, and
Dogs. With proper Means to prevent their common Diseases and Distempers; Being
very useful Receipts, as they have been practiced by the long Experience of
Forty years, and all approved of. Fitted for the Use of all Farmers and others
that deal in Cattle, by James Lambart. With Tables of the several Diseases
therein contained.


