THE DIFFERENCE Between the OLD and NEW COVENANT Stated and Explained: WITH An
Exposition of the Covenant of Grace in the Principal Concernments of it.

By SAMUEL PETTO Minister of the Gospel.

Isaiah 55. 3. I will make with you an everlasting Covenant, even the sure
mercies of David. LONDON, Printed for Eliz. Calvert, at the Sign of the Black
Spred-Eagle at the West end of St. Paul's. 1674.

TO THE READER.
IT is a matter of highest concernment unto the souls of men, to have a special
acquaintance with the Covenant of Grace, the great Charter which all spiritual
and eternal blessings are holden by, and the way and means wherein they have
their conveyance, or are derived to them.

There are many useful Treatises already extant on this subject; but still
there are some weighty points referring to it as with Jesus Christ, and
especially concerning the Old mount Sinai Covenant and also the New, which have
need of farther clearing, for the unfolding of many Scriptures, the
establishing the faith and promoting the comfort of Christians. If it might be
the fruit of my present undertaking to contribute any thing this way, or to
give light into those glorious mysteries so as God might be honored thereby, I
should have my aim.

In order to the further opening of some matters insisted on in this Treatise,
I shall add that which follows.

As the Covenant of Works was made with the first Adam and all his seed in him,
promising preservation in life, upon condition of man's own perfect obedience to
the will of God, Genesis 2. 17.

So, the Covenant of Grace, was made with Jesus Christ (not merely as God, but
as to be incarnate, or designed to be Mediator) as a second Adam, and with a
Gospel seed in him, promising all spiritual blessings, even eternal life and
salvation upon the condition or consideration of his undergoing the curse, and
yielding perfect obedience to the Law on their behalf, Isai. 53. 10, 11. Romans
5. 6. to the end.

In this large sense, it compriseth that between the Father and the Son for our
redemption which was full of grace, and did flow from the free favor of God to
poor sinners, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Tit. 1. 2. as well as that to or with us, viz. the
New Covenant, for the application of what is promised thereupon, which some
speak of, as if it only were the Covenant of Grace.

Thus its constitution was from eternity, Tit. 1. 2. though its revelation was
in time to Adam, Abraham, David, etc. Genesis 3. 15. and 12, etc.

Now, that being the condition of the Covenant of Grace, that the righteousness
of the Law should be performed, or all the demands of it as to duty and penalty
answered by Jesus Christ; hence it was necessary that there should be some
means for his coming actually under our very obligation: to that end, the Lord
in infinite wisdom made a revival or repetition of the Covenant of works as to
the substance of it (with a new intent) in the Covenant at Mount Sinai (which
did run upon Do and Live, Gal. 3. 10, 12.) not that Israel should have eternal
life, by their own doing; but that Jesus Christ should be born under the very
Law that we were obliged by, Gal. 4. 4. Not merely to make a valuable
satisfaction by something in lieu of it (for his taking our nature, and making
intercession or other works of his, being of infinite merit and value, might
then have served the turn without his sufferings) but as that word, Genesis 2. 17.
required, to undergo the very curse, and to fulfill the very righteousness of it
in our stead, which he did accordingly, and herein especially consists our
redemption. Gal. 3. 12. Gal. 4. 4, 5.

The fulfillng the Old and confirming the New Covenant are the immediate
effects of his death. He stood therein as the Mediator not of the Old, but of
the New Testament, Heb. 9. 15. therefore he died, not merely to procure a New
Covenant, or that God might with honor deal with men upon new terms, but to
make good the terms or conditions of the New.

The Mount Sinai Covenant (with reference to the matter of it) may be said to
express the Legal Condition of the Covenant of Grace, as to be fulfilled by
Jesus Christ; even as the New Covenant holds forth the blessings promised
unto us that condition being performed by him. These are matters so distinct,
as I hope none will take offense, that I (as I have explained my self) speak of
the Old and New as two distinct Covenants when compared each with other, as
Gal. 4. 24. Heb. 8.

Seeing I do not assert, that at Sinai to be a Covenant of works for eternal
life to Israel, upon their obedience to it, as some would have it, rather its
reference is wholly to that of grace, though it be not the whole of it.

Neither do I assert two Covenants of Grace or ways of salvation for substance
distinct. But whereas it is usually judged that the Old is one and the same
with the New, differing from it only in some circumstances and accidents, as
rigorous exaction of duty by fear, terror, etc. I on the other hand think that
spiritual blessings were dispensed out by the Covenant with Abraham, and though
Isreal's obedience to the Moral Law, was on another account, a fruit of holiness
and sanctification, yet as the same obedience had relation to the Mount Sinai
Covenant, so it ushered in only temporals to them: even as a child owes
obedience to his Father by a natural obligation, but if a Father should promise
an estate upon some acts of the same obedience, then they would be clothed
with a double respect, or have a double use; so here.

The Mount Sinai Covenant being thus opened, many Scriptures will be explained,
and it will be discovered, what those works of the Law are, which we are so
often denied to have justification by: viz. All works performed by our selves
as the least of a righteousness unto justification, (or which comes to the
same) as a condition giving right and title to Salvation. Act. 15. 1. Romans 9.
30, 31, 32. Phil. 3. 9. It is only the Obedience of Jesus Christ to the Law
that avails to these ends. The Apostle industriously proves, that men have
not such eternal mercies by their own works, morla or ceremonial either without
or in conjunction with Jesus Christ, Romans 3. 20. and 9. 3. Gal. 3. 11, 21. Gal.
5. 4. the seeking to be justified or saved thereby is opposite unto true
sanctification; whence discourses thereof are often interwoven in the Epistle
to the Romans and Galatians. It Is true, the very works of the Law of Moses are
most particularly opposed, because the controversy of that day with the Jews
and Judaizing professors of Christianity was concerning these: yet if men give
any other works the same place and office, by acting upon a legal ground, they
become as works of the Law, and the Apostles arguments are equally forcible
against them.

For, he thus reasons, That cannot be a justifying righteousness in our
present fallen estate, 1. Which is not perfect, for the least sin is enough to
condemn, Romans 3. 20. Gal. 3. 10. Nor, 2. which is our own, of our own working
out, Romans 10. 3, 5. Nor, 3. Which leaves any place for boasting, Ephesians. 2. 9.
Romans 4. 2. Nor, 4. which is opposite unto grace, Romans 4. 4. And upon these
accounts, all Evangelical Works are excluded out of Justification, for they are
imperfect, they are our own subjectively; they would leave room for some
boasting, if acceptance to life were upon these, seeing it should be by our
giving unto God: also the way were opposite to grace, for if the condition were
never so small, yet being performed, the reward might be claimed upon our act,
and so would be of debt, not of Gospel Grace; Romans 4. 4. The works of Abraham
and David after conversion are excluded out of justification, verse. 2, 3, 6.
which argues, that although Evangelical obedience kept in its due place, does
not derogate from the grace of God, yet it does, and is opposite to it, if
introduced into justification. So that [Gospel-grace] does not consist in a
bare abatement of the rigor of the Law, nor in making a bargain with us (for
the sake of Christ) to accept of our faith, repentance and sincere obedience,
instead of that which is perfect: but it stands, in excusing us from a
personal performance of that righteousness which is the condition of life and
admitting Jesus Christ to answer the Law in our stead. For, the grand
difference between the Law and the Gospel is, the one justifies by our own,
the other by another righteousness. If man himself be the Doer for life, that
is the righteousness of the Law, which says, Romans 10. 5. the man that does
them shall live in them. In opposition to it, that of the Gospel is called [the
righteousness of faith] verse. 6. and of God, verse. 3. because it is to be
sought out of our selves, in another, in the free promise; and that which we
are the subjects of is to be disclaimed here, Phil. 3. 9. Romans 10. 3. The
asserting it to be by any of our personal performances, gives them the very
place of works in the Covenant of Works, which is anti-evangelical and
introduces some merits as well as perfect works would have done. The being
enabled by grace to them does not hinder meriting, any more than (as one says)
my furnishing a man with my tools to work with, hinders his deserving a reward.
All ability that Adam had in innocence was from the favor of God, and what he
was to do was duty. Faith it self is not the least of that righteousness; it is
an act of obedience, but as such it is not said to justify, nor as it works
by love, although it does so work, Gal. 5. 6. Nor as a condition of life (as I
have elsewhere manifested) but only as a means for the applying Christ and his
righteousness; much less can any works of ours be a part thereof. The new
creature avails to being crucified to the world, Gal. 6. 14, 15. i. e. as a
means, but it is not said that it avails to justification.

To justify, is, to declare a person to be righteous; the true God cannot pass
a false sentence, therefore we cannot have justification without having a
righteousness: this cannot consist in any act of ours as faith, repentance or
obedience, as is already manifested; therefore it must be of another working
out, the very righteousness of Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 18, 19. 1 Cor. 1. 30. And
if his obedience (being to the Law) may be called a legal righteousness, yet as
the same is applied by faith, it is to us an evangelical righteousness. All the
question then is, whether evangelical works are not of the same use in
justification that faith is of? have they not the same place and office there,
that faith has? I answer negatively, they have not; for often we read of the
righteousness of faith, never of the righteousness of love in that business. We
are said to be justified by faith, not (in the same sense) to be justified by
love or works.

It Is true, there is a necessity of Evangelical works to testify our faith,
obedience, and thankfulness to God, but they are required, not as conditions,
but as effects and declarations of our justification. Things are said to be
done, when they are manifested, as, Romans 3. 7. and 4. 15. A tree is known by
the fruits. And thus not only open acts, but those that are secret (when
regular) have an aptitude to evidence faith, and that a person is justified,
even when they are not actually seen. Paul speaks of being justified before
God by receiving or applying the righteousness of Jesus Christ in the free
promise, this is only by faith. James speaks of being justified by
manifesting to a man's self or others that it is applied, this is by Evangelical
works, and not by faith only. Thus by offering up Isaac, the person of Abraham
was declaratively justified, as it did show his faith to be true, verse. 18.
(Genesis 22. 12.) and not his working, but his believing is said to be imputed to
righteousness, Jam. 2. 23. if this be justification in the sense of Paul, yet
it is by faith [and he was called the friend of God] there is justification
declared by works, as God acted kindly toward him, so he acted in a friendly
way toward God. He is a vain man that contenteth himself with a faith that
stands in a bare assent to some propositions of truth without the power of
them upon his heart, verse. 14, 19, 20. That is a dead faith, which does not
profit, is not attended with salvation which remains without works, verse. 17,
20, 26. therefore it is not the same true faith which any are justified by, but
another thing. That unfruitful faith which is blamed here, certainly was as far
from justifying them as it was from saving them, and so is not the faith which
Paul insisteth upon, for by that men were justified, and that in order before
works, for they cannot be performed in an instant, though they certainly
follow: but the justification and faith which they are put upon and called to
declare by works, these are of a Gospel stamp.

The Lord Jesus having fully performed the Law as the condition of the
New Testament, hence it becomes absolute to us. If improperly a duty, a way,
or means to the enjoyment of some blessings of it, be called a Condition, I
contend not. But a Condition properly is more than a causa sine qua non, it is
a cause that has a moral efficiency in it; for the fulfilling of it is that
which gives right, and upon which a man has a title to what is promised, and
without it none; and so it is a moral efficient cause of the enjoyment of the
good promised in a Covenant. Faith and repentance are great duties; but nothing
performed by us can be such a cause or condition in the New Covenant.

There is Absoluteness, 1. In the form of the New Covenant. 2. In the actual
admission into it. 3. In the freedom of those under it from the curse of the
Old, and in their participation of the blessings of the New.

1. Wherever the form of the New Testament is given forth, it is in an Absolute
way [I will, and ye shall]. Heb. 10. 16, 17. Heb. 8. 8. to the end. He
insisteth upon it that now Jerem. 31. 31, 32. was made good, and this purposely
to draw off the Hebrews from the Old Covenant which they did too much take up
in, and to put them upon looking unto the New. Other Scriptures may discover
what is our duty before and after being actually interested in the blessings of
it; but the nature of the Covenant is most fully expressed here in these Texts,
which speak of the great matters or promises contained in it, of the Mediator
and subjects of it. The tenure thereof must be fetched from these places where
the Covenant is purposely insisted upon, rather than from others, where only
one promise is named, and it not so much as mentioned. And here, it is not
called a purpose or prophecy, but a Covenant or rather Testament, and is so
absolutely held forth, as God undertaketh all. He promises as well that they
shall be his people, as that he will be their God He promises not only that he
will remember their sins and iniquities no more, but also that he will write
hi^ Laws in their hearts, i. e. give a frame of faith and new obedience these
are as absolutely promised here as any other matters, and therefore believing
and obeying cannot properly becauses or conditions, but are fruits and effects
of the Covenant, by its being accomplished upon them. Their duty i^ necessarily
implied, yet as it stands here in the Covenant, the design of i^ plainly is,
to express the work of God what he will do for them, how he with furnish and
capacitate them to discharge it toward him.

2. The actual admission of all that Jesus Christ stood for, into the New
Covenant, or the bringing them under it is absolutely determined: he had an
absolute assurance that his undertaking should take effect on all those that he
designed therein, Isai. 53. 10, 11. He shall see his seed; all that he
traveled for, and therefore they must be effectually brought into Covenant
with him. There was no condition that his obedience had dependence upon, or
upon which it was to be accepted for such souls, otherwise not. He did not
suffer at any such uncertainty, but for those which were assuredly to become
the heirs of promise.

Yea, the making Covenant with us, is challenged by the Lord as his work, Isai.
53. 3. and 61. 8. I will make or cut an everlasting Covenant with you, so Jer.
31. 31, 32. Jer. 22. 40. Ezekiel. 16. 8. Heb. 8. 10. God has undertaken to bring
under the promise, and make an application of it. Attendance upon means is
duty, but it is not said, that men do make the Covenant with God or bring
themselves into it by an act of theirs, but God makes it with them, they do
but take hold of Gods Covenant, Isai. 56. 4, 6. The will of God is not
determined by any act of man. When God will work who shall let him? what he
undertaketh shall be absolutely accomplished; hence as those under the Old
Covenant who were to be redeemed are represented under the name of Israel, so
also are those under the New to whom all is to be applied; the same are the
subjects of both.

3. Those that are actually in Covenant have an absolute freedom from the curse
of the Old, and a like Promise of the blessings of the New. Jesus Christ has
not only suspended, but redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. Hence we are said not to be under the Law and to be
dead to it, Romans 6. 14. and 7. 4. Gal. 2. 19. Christians then have not only a
conditional freedom from the curse of the Law in this life, but such as is
absolute; and if they should believe themselves to be under it, they should
believe a lie. Romans 8. 1. Yet Divine threatenings are of great use, not only to
the unregenerate, but even to believers, to strike them into a filial fear, so
as to deter them from sin, which has such punishment annexed to it, and this
when they see themselves secured from it; even as an ingenuous Child will be
afraid upon hearing his father threaten another for a fault and will beware of
committing it. The non-elect are formally under the curse of the Law and
vindictive Justice. The Elect before conversion, are not only materially under
it, but the Laws sentence of condemnation is against them. Believers are so
freed from it, as their sicknesses, death, etc. are but materially the same
mentioned in the curse, and turned into blessings to them.

Also all the Promises of the New Covenant are absolute to all that are under
it. Heb. 8. 6, etc. No act of ours induces an obligation upon God to vouchsafe
salvation to us. That great blessing of the Covenant, Justification, is by
faith, not said to be by it as a condition, and the same may be said of other
blessings thereof; yet I deny not but figuratively that may be ascribed to
faith which belongs to Jesus Christ alone. The absoluteness of the Covenant
is not attended with any such consequence, as that then man is at liberty, but
God is not: for, such as are yet out of Covenant, or want a personal interest
in the blessings of it, even all men are under a Divine Law, and an obligation
to obedience, else they could not be charged with sin, as they are, Romans 3. 23.
and 5. 12. where there is no Law there is no transgression, seeing sin is the
transgression of the Law. 1 John 3. 4. So then, the obligation unto duty does
not arise merely from entering or coming into Covenant; and that is so far from
taking off the tie that it superaddeth strength to it; but no man is at
liberty, whether he be in or out of Covenant.

As to the way of the Lords entering into Covenant with men, it is thus:

He by his Spirit in the Gospel reveals, and gives Jesus Christ (for he is
the first saving gift) and all the Promises are vouchsafed in and with him.
Coloss. 2. 6. 1 John 5. 12. Romans 8. 32. Ephesians. 3. 6. 2 Cor. 1. 30. 2 Pet. 1. 4.
The same New Covenant or Testament has various effects.

As the Spirit works effectually by the Promise of it upon the souls of men,
so it is a Covenant of life and grace to them: it is by the New Testament that
the Lord says to any souls live, and that first grace is wrought in them;
Ezekiel. 16. 8. and 36. 26. Heb. 8. 10. 2 Cor. 3. 6.

As the Lord by giving and promulging the Promises, obliges or puts himself
under engagements to make them good to men, so it is a Covenant to or with
them, because they obtain personal interest therein so as to have a ground to
claim many privileges thereof: thus often the Covenant was renewed with
Abraham after his being in it.

As by the same Covenant or Promise the Lord obliges himself to all acts of
Communion, and expressions of love, and kindness suitable to or that can be
expected in a conjugal relation, so it is a Marriage Covenant with them: the
same instant they are enabled to consent by faith (Heb. 8. 10. Joh. 1. 12.) to
receive and enjoy the blessings promised as a necessary fruit and effect of the
Covenant. It is promised therein that they shall be his people, they shall
resign up themselves to the Lord. He has undertaken that one (i. e. one by
one) shall say, I am the Lords, Isai. 44. 3, 5. A consent is promised by the
Lords as well as any other matter. So that our engaging our selves to God (or
Covenanting with him) is not constitutive of the Covenant of grace, but
executive, namely that which is produced in the execution of it, and may often
be repeated or renewed by distinct engagings. God dealing with men as
reasonable creatures that act out of judgment and their own choice, urges
duty (as believing, repenting, etc.) by arguments from the advantage of coming
up to it [All that believe shall be saved] and the danger of neglecting it,
such [shall be damned] as Mark 16 16. Romans 10. 9. Rev. 3. 20. Such general
propositions do not express the full tenure of the Covenant, but only are means
toward the execution of it for, the invitations extend to all Nations, Matthew.
28. 19. Mark. 16. 15. (since the death of Christ not before, Psalm. 147. 19,
20.) Whereas the Covenant is only with the Israel of God, Heb. 8. 8.

I shall add no more at present to this, but that my design in all is, the
right stating evangelical duty, and the asserting the doctrine of free grace,
which as it is the most Christ-exalting, so it is the most sin-mortifying,
soulhumbling and abasing, and self-emptying doctrine: it is not the Law of
works, but of faith that excludes boasting. Coloss. 1. 18, 19. Romans 6. 1, 14.
Tit. 2. 11, 12. Romans 3. 27.

[Reader, the following Treatise has been diverse years prepared and not one
leaf added to it since October 1672. which I mention for a special reason]. My
desire is, that all which I have said for clearing up of the mind and will of
God in this great matter may be weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, and
received as it holds weight there. And that thy sharing in the blessings of
the everlasting Covenant may be promoted hereby, shall be the prayer of him who
is,

Thy Servant in the work of the Gospel, S. P.
Mon. 4. day 20. 1673.
Christian Reader,
THE ensuing Discourse contains a sober endeavor for the declaration and
true stating of the nature and difference of the two Covenants of Works and of
Grace. A subject this is which, by reason of the weight and use of it in the
whole business of Religious Obedience, has been attempted by many, and
wherein, by reason of the difficulty of it, in conjunction with their own
Prejudices, not a few have miscarried. Neither do I know of any who have yet
handled it with that fullness and perspicuity as to shut up the way unto the
diligence of others in the investigation and declaration of the Truth, or to
render Labor in the same kind either useless or superfluous. The stores of
heavenly wisdom, grace and truth which are treasured up in the Divine
Revelations concerning Gods Covenants, are far from being fully exhausted or
drawn forth by the labors of any in this kind, although very many have already
brought to light excellent and useful instructions in the mind of God and the
duty of them who do believe. But the thing it self is so excellent, the mystery
of it so great, the declaration of it in the Scripture so extensive and
diffused throughout the whole body of it from the first to the last, as also in
its concernment unto the whole course of our faith and obedience, that there is
a sufficient ground whereon to justify a renewed search into the mind of God
therein as revealed in his word. There is no doubt, but the greatest product of
Divine Grace, Goodness and condescension, next unto the sending of the only Son
of God to take our Nature on him, with the direct effect and consequence
thereof, is this of his entering into Covenant with the Children of men; nor
has any thing a greater tendency unto the advancement of his own glory. God
might have dealt with mankind in a way of sovereignty or mere dominion, as he
does with the remainder of the creatures here below; but then it must be
acknowledged that in such a way of rule and procedure there would not have been
that evident demonstration of the divine excellencies, his goodness,
righteousness and faithfulness, as ensues upon the supposition of his
condescension to take mankind into covenant with himself. And thence it is that
he never did nor ever would treat with any of that race any otherwise or on any
other terms. Wherefore when the first Covenant was broken by the entrance of
sin, God had no other relation unto mankind but that of a supreme Ruler and
Judge, to reward them according to the penalty threatened, and established in
the Covenant. But as for any advantage in a way of Love, Peace and Goodness
there was none remaining until he had made and established a New Covenant to
that end and purpose. And this fully discovers how great a concern there is of
the glory of God in the Covenant which he made with us and proposes unto us,
seeing he never declared or intimated any other way of gracious or acceptable
intercourse in him; and the effects of i^ do issue in eternity. Moreover this
dispensation of God in making a Covenant with our first Parents, was the
greatest evidence of the pre-eminence of that nature where with in time we were
endowed, and only demonstration of our being capable to be brought unto eternal
enjoyment of him. For God herein admitting us into an intercourse with him by a
declared Rule of his own Goodness and faithfulness manifested that we were
capable of eternal rewards which he proposed unto us in himself. And these
things make the investigation of the true nature of the Covenant with God first
made with Adam, and the terms whereby it was made, both necessary and
profitable. For although that Covenant is ceased by the entrance of sin, as
unto any spiritual or eternal advantage unto us; yet is it as revealed, still
instructive in the wisdom and goodness of God, as also in the excellency of
that state and condition in which we were created, with the honor that God put
upon our Nature, whence directions unto due apprehensions of God, and our
selves may be taken or derived. But as to the New Covenant which is in and with
us in Christ, and so is comprehensive of the whole work of his Mediation, it is
the only instrument of our present relation unto God, of his communicating of
himself in a way of Grace, Love and Mercy unto us, of our fixing faith, trust
and affiance on him, and yielding obedience unto him, as also of the bringing
of our souls unto the eternal enjoyment of him. The knowledge hereof therefore
is necessary to every one who thinks it necessary for him to endeavor an
acquaintance with God or Christ, the present state or future condition of his
own soul. It is therefore doubtless a labor worthy of acceptance in any whom
God has given light unto in this Mystery of his Wisdom and Grace, and ability
for the declaration thereof, to endeavor the direction and instruction of
others in the Truth and Doctrine hereof, where in all our faith, obedience,
present comfort, and future happiness do depend. But yet further, besides these
two solemn stated Covenants, the one suited unto the preservation of the state
of integrity wherein we were created, and the other to the renovation of the
Image of God in us through Jesus Christ which we had lost by sin, there is
mention in the Scripture of sundry particular intervening Covenants that God
made with his Church, or single persons, at several seasons. Now whereas they
did all partake of the Nature of a Divine Covenant in general, so were they
emanations from and particular expressions or limitations of one or other of
the two solemn Covenants mentioned; for a Covenant of another kind absolutely,
or more Covenants God never made with mankind. But yet under the Old Testament,
while the wisdom of God was to be hid in its own mysteries; and not clearly
brought forth to light, there was such a mixed dispensation, revealing for
certain ends, the Notion, Sense and Power of the first Covenant and preparative
for the introduction of the full revelation and declaration of the latter by
Jesus Christ, who was in all things to have the pre-eminence, as that it is not
easy to discern and distinguish what belongs unto the one in them and what to
the other, or from whether of them they are to be denominated. Here therefore
is a blessed field of sacred Truth, wherein humble, sober and judicious persons
may exercise themselves, to the great benefit and advantage of the Church of
God. To state I say a right the Nature of a Divine Covenant in general, with
its Essential Properties, which must be in every one that is so, to manifest
the true difference that is between the first and second Covenant which God
has made with us, in themselves, and their Nature, with their different
effects and ends, to declare what Properties, Doctrines and Ends of the first
Covenant or Covenant of Works, with what of the Nature, Power and Efficacy of
the second Covenant or the Covenant of Grace God brought in and declared in
that dispensation under the Old Testament, wherein there was a mixture of both,
though one only established in power, to manifest what there was of Christ in
the Law, and how the whole power and sanction of the first Covenant was through
the Law conferred upon Christ, and in him fulfilled and ended, is a work
deserving the most diligent travel of those who are called unto the teaching of
the Mysteries of the Gospel. And in these things with sundry other of an alike
importance has this Worthy Author labored, if I am not much mistaken, unto
good success. And as his design is to extricate things which seem perplexed, to
give light into the whole doctrine of the Covenants by declaring the proper
Order and Method of the things contained in them, with their respect one unto
another, that the grace of God in the Covenant of Grace may be exalted, and his
faithfulness with his holiness in the Covenant of Works both in and by Jesus
Christ, the end of the one and the life of the other; so the Reader will find I
hope that satisfaction in these great and deep inquiries which he will have
occasion to return praise and thanks to God for.

John Own.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. OF a Covenant in general and the distribution of the Covenant into
that of works and of grace. page 1^ Chap. 2. Of the Oneness of the Covenant
with Jesus Christ and us. p. 1^ Chap. 3. Of Christ as the Sum of the Covenant.
p. 36. Chap. 4. Of the date of Covenant mercies. p. 48. Chap. 5. General
Inferences from the whole p. 53 Chap. 6. Of the Old and New Covenant what they
are, and how distinct. p. 6^ Chap. 7. Of the Nature of the Mount Sinai
Covenant. p. 10^ Chap. 8. Of the Sinai Covenant, whether ceased or continuing?
p. 170 Chap. 9. Of the good that was in the Sinai Covenant. p. 189 Chap. 10. Of
the Differences between the Old and New Covenant, and the excellency of the
later above the former. p. 195 Chap. 11. Of the time of first coming into
Covenant. p. 262 Chap. 12. Of the evidences of interest in the New Covenant. p.
288 Chap. 13. Of the Use of Absolute Promises. p. 299 Chap. 14. Of those that
are called Conditional Promises. p. 312
ERRATA.
Page 1. Line 7. Read vouchsafing: p. 3. l. 14. and p. 36. l. 11. add the: p.
17. l. 10. for [door,] (...) [doer] p. 34. l. 30. r. fail: p. 59. l. 24. for
attended, r. attending: p. 69. l. 29. and 70. l. 1. r. worser p. 91. l. 6. r
betterness: p. 97. l. 27. for this, r. thus p. 104. l. 27. r. 2 Timothy 1. 9. p.
155. for course, r. curses p. 171. l. 14. r. Mal. 4. 4. p. 222. l. 12. r. by
his: p. 224. l. 10. r. Tact. Sacr. p. 226 l. 26. add [4] p. 230. l. 24. for it,
r. in: p. 245. l. 23. blot out [to be]:

THE Great Mystery OF THE COVENANT OF GRACE.
CHAP. I.
Of a Covenant in general, and the distribution of the Covenant, into that of
Works and of Grace.

THE All-wise God that he might magnify his loving kindness toward miserable
man in vouchsaving him fellowship and Communion with himself, in all ages had
this admirable contrivance of dealing with him, not in the way of prerogative,
but in the way of Covenant. When man was in a state of innocence, there was a
Covenant of Works wherein he put himself under engagements to him, to continue
him in life, if he kept his standing and remained obedient. And also man being
in a fallen estate, he chooses still to Coverse with him in the way of a
Covenant, not as made with the first Adam, but with Jesus Christ as a Second
Adam, and with all his Seed in him.

There are many Scriptures which give clear intimations of such a federal
transaction between God the Father and Jesus Christ the Son, in order to the
recovery and everlasting Salvation of Sinners: even where we do not find the
very notion or name of it. Thus Isa. 53. 10, 11, 12. There is a mutual
agreement, something to be undergone by Jesus Christ, he is to make his soul an
offering for sin; something promised to him thereupon, he shall see his Seed --
So Isa. 42. 6. Here are the parties Covenanting, the Father and the Son, not
men but I the Lord who cannot err in my appointments, who am faithful and able,
even the almighty God, I have called thee i. e. Jesus Christ, and will give
thee, the speech is turned and directed to him, thee, who art my only beloved
Son. Here is the Fathers designation and sealing of him (John 6. 27.) to the
mediatorial employment, promising him much upon his undertaking it, and his
acceptance of this office and voluntary submission to the Will of the Father
in it, so I come to do thy Will, etc. Heb. 5. 4, 5. Psalm. 40. 7, 8. John 10.
17, 18. And these together amount to or make up a Covenant between them; for
what more can be necessary thereunto? Here we have the matters or things
promised viz. all that conduce to the compassing the great end of salvation.
Was man under alienation from God? Behold it is promised, I will give for a
Covenant; no way imaginable whereby this wide breach could be made up, but by a
Covenant; and that of Works being broken, man would not be trusted any more,
and therefore now Jesus Christ as a Surety undertaketh all necessary for the
ending and making up the difference, and the retaking and restoring his Seed
into Divine favor again for ever, so as he is even the Covenant of the people,
all the condition of life on their part to be performed is found in him. Yea,
he has undertaken the removal of all obstacles and impediments within, that
would hinder their attainment of Covenant mercy, he is given for a light of the
Gentiles, he takes away the inward blindness that is found with them. No
sinfulness or unworthiness may be a discouragement, for behold all is in a way
of free grace [I will give thee -- ] Christ himself the fountain of all is
freely given, and the Father is upon the highest determination and resolution
for bringing all to effect I will give thee --.

So there are many promises made to Jesus Christ of assistances and all
requisites to the mannagement of this great work I will hold thy hand i. e.
will assist and be thy helper, as Isa. 41. 13. and many promises of success and
of his being Victorious over all his enemies, and having the Heathen for his
inheritance, etc. Psalm. 2. 8, 9. Zech. 9. 10. Psalm. 72. 8. Dan. 7. 14. upon his
obedience: all which plainly argue a Covenant between the Father and the Son.
It is implied also in the ascribing to him the working out of redemption; for,
unto that is requisite an agreement between parties. The Father promises that
upon the payment of such a price by his Son, such Souls should be ransomed and
set free; Jesus Christ consents yea pays it and thus becomes a Redeemer,
this amounts to a Covenant.

But in order to the further clearing of this matter, I shall consider a
Covenant in general, and then its distribution into that of Works and that of
grace, the interest of Jesus Christ in the latter, and also the date of it.

The Word [Covenant] in Hebr. (...) Berith, is taken either [properly] for a
mutual contract or agreement between two parties, and is differenced from a Law
which is without obligation on the Lawgiver or Commander, and from a single
promise, which is without stipulation from him to whom it is made. Covenant may
be thus taken, when applied to the whole Covenant of grace between the Father
and the Son, for therein was stipulation.

Or Covenant is taken [figuratively] in Scripture, either for a bare Divine
promise, as Genesis 9. 9, 10. that was with every living Creature, many of which
were incapable of contracting with God, or of making any stipulation. So
Covenant is taken for a bare sign or seal of it. Genesis 17. 10. Also for a part,
as the moral Law which was but a part of the old Covenant, is called the
Covenant. Exodus 34. 28. Deuteronomy. 9. 9, 11. 15. Thus Covenant and promise may be
used promiscuously, a part for the whole. Romans 4. 13. Gal. 3. 17, 18, 19. and
thus figuratively Jesus Christ himself is called [the Covenant] Isa. 42. 6.

The Covenant of God on the behalf of man is twofold, and is thus
distinguished.

The Covenant
1. Of works; with the first Adam and his Seed. 2. Of Grace. 1. With Jesus
Christ the Second Adam for all his, from eternity. 2. With his in and with him
in time, considered in its. 1. Legal Condition, typical manifestation, and
servile temporary administration at mount Sinai. 2. Evangelical disposition as
to matter and form. viz. Spiritual promises, free and lasting dispensation, and
all this considered in its. 1. Prima y revelation, and renewing with the
Fathers, as Abraham, David etc. before the incarnation of Jesus Christ. Gal. 3.
14, 16, 17. under the old Testament when the Messiah was promised, and
privileges in him. 2. Ratification, consummation or perfection, after the
incarnation of Christ under the new Covenant or Testament Heb. 8. and 9.
wherein the Mediator is exhibited, and privileges coming and to be applied
absolutely by him, more clearly enumerated.



Or thus, The Covenant of God on the behalf of men is twofold, and is thus
distinguished.

The Covenant.
1. Of Works, with the first Adam and his Seed in him. 2. Of Gracein its 1.
Constitution with Jesus Christ the Second Adam, and his Seed in him, from
Eternity, consisting of Promises and agreements for their (i. e. his Seeds)
recovery from a state of sin and death to a state of righteousness and life, in
and by him. 2. Declaration and manifestation as with us, in and with Christ in
time, and thus it is considered in its. 1. More private dispensation whilst the
Church was Domestical, or in families as to its. 1. Primary revelation and
promulgation to Adam. Genesis 3. 15. 2. After Secondary renewing execution and
application to the Patriarchs as Abraham, etc. Genesis 12. and 15. and 17.
2. More Public dispensation when the Church became Congregational as to its.
1 Legal Condition, and administration in the mount Sinai Covenant. Exodus 19.
and 20. 2. Evangelical disposition viz. Absolute Promises and unchangable
administration in the new Covenant Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10, 11.



The first part of this Division is, Generis in Species, viz. into Covenant of
Works and of grace.

The Second part viz. the Division or distribution of the Covenant of grace is
threefold. 1. Accidentis in Subjecta, viz. with Christ as principal and with us
in him. 2. Effecti in suas causas, and that extrinsecal and intrinsecal, viz.
legal condition, Evangelical disposition. 3. Accidentis in accidentia, viz.
primary revelation, ratification.

1. There was a Law or Covenant of Works made with the first Adam and his Seed
before the fall: in that state man was to seek eternal life in the way of his
own obedience. Then God was upon those terms with man [Do and live] for that
Divine threatening of death. Genesis 2. 17. In the day thou eatest thereof thou
shall surely dye, does strongly imply a promise of enjoying life, if he were
obsequious, else he might have said, if I eat or eat not, it is all one, yet I
am liable to death.

Doubtless as the threatened death was intended purposely to deter from eating,
so the hope of life, was also a persuasive to this forbearance.

Yea the tree of life confirms this; man was made an exile, out of Paradise.
Genesis 3. 22. Lest he put forth his hand and take also of the tree of life and
eat and live for ever: such an act of banishment would have been needless for
prevention, if it had never been intended for such an end to establish man in
life in case he had kept his standing. Some Divine Law or Covenant therefore
there must be this way. Some may doubt, whether this was a Covenant of Works,
because here is only a threatening of death upon eating the forbidden fruit.
Genesis 2. 17. upon disobedience to that one positive Law or Command; and perfect
obedience unto all moral Commands, not so much as mentioned, nor death
threatened to the want of it.

I answer, Man in his first Creation was under a Natural obligation to an
universal compliance with the Will of God: Eccles. 7. 29. God has made man
[upright]; this rectitude of nature imports an exact conformity to the Divine
will, it is opposed here to all those inventions, evil devices, new tricks,
vain and crooked Counsels, which were the inlets to all iniquity. He was
created in the image of God [Gen. 1. 27.] which did not consist merely in the
faculties of the soul, as understanding, will, etc. but in gifts of
illumination, righteousness, and holiness. Coloss. 3. 10. Ephesians. 4. 24. There was
an inscription of the Divine Law upon Adams heart, yea even the Gentiles by
nature show the work of the Law written in their hearts Romans 2. 14, 15.
although this is exceedingly defaced and obliterated by the fall of man, yet
not wholly raced out or extinguished.

Now there being such original righteousness, a Law of nature that obliged man
(as soon as created) to all moral obedience, it was needless for the Lord (in
entering into Covenant with him) to make a repetition of that Law without, which
was antecedaneously written in lively Characters, with a deep impression as a
Law within.

All therefore that was necessary unto the making or forming of it into a
Covenant of Works was, the Addition of some positive Law or Command, as a test
or trial of obedience to the whole, and this we find in that Supervenient
Command of not eating of the tree of knowledge. Genesis 2. 17. under the highest
penalty of death it self in case of disobedience. This is the more evident,
because this positive percept, was of such a nature and so intwisted with the
other, as Adam could not fall by transgressing of it in eating of the forbidden
fruit, without a violation or breaking of all the moral Commandments and
involving himself in all sin and iniquity thereby. Christ himself, is giving
the sum of the Law, in these two, of due love to God and the neighbor Mat. 22.
37, 38, 39. Now, the trial of love is by keeping his Commandments. John 14. 21,
24. and by eating that fruit, Adam transgressed his Command. Genesis 2. 17. and
gave an evident proof of his want of love to God, and to his neighbor also,
thereby murdering not only himself, but all his posterity with him.

Yea though it seemed a small and indifferent thing in it self, yet there was
the sum of all sin, in that first transgression, which the Apostle compriseth
in three things. 1 John 2. 16. All that is in the world, the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eyes and the pride of life. And Genesis 3. 6. The woman saw the
tree was good for food, in this pleasing of a carnal appetite, was the lust of
the flesh, and pleasant to the eyes, here is the seeking to satisfy undue
desires, the lust of the eyes, and to be desired to make one wise, or as the
Serpent suggested verse 5. to be as Gods, that is ambition, or, pride of life.

It might be manifested, how all or most of the Commandments were broken by
this act; here was infidelity, not believing the Word of God, and seeking to
Deifie himself, against the first Commandment; Adam's preferring the voice of
his wife, yea of the Serpent, before the Word of God, against the Second, a
conferring with Gods enemy about his word (a part of his name) without due zeal
for his glory against the Third, a not resting from his own work against the
Fourth, Eve out of her place in eating without her Husbands advice and consent,
against the Fifth, a running under a Divine threatening of death to many
thousands, yea millions of men, against the Sixth, a giving way to an
inordinate sensual appetite in eating the forbiddem fruit, against the Seventh,
a taking what was not his own, being reserved by God, against the Eighth, a
receiving a false accusation against God. Genesis 3. 5. against the Ninth.
Uncontentedness with the state and Condition God had placed him in, aspiring to
be higher than he saw it mere, against the tenth Commandment. And thus there
was a Universal disobedience in Adams eating the forbidden fruit, (there is the
seed of all sin in Original sin) and therefore such an exact obedience to the
moral, or natural as well as to the positive Law, was required there, as
rendered it a Law or Covenant of Works.

But man cannot now obtain happiness and Salvation by his own doing according
to that, for it is said to be Ephesians. 2. 9. Not of Works lest any man should
boast. So that Jesus Christ is not given for the renewing that old Covenant of
Works with us again, as the way to eternal life, though the matter of it is
drawn into the Covenant of grace, to be performed by him for us, as may be
further manifested afterward.

2. There is a Covenant of Grace, provided for the recovery of some by Jesus
Christ, from a state of sin and death unto a state of righteousness and eternal
life. All that conduces to Salvation, is of grace Ephesians. 2. 8. By grace ye are
saved. Romans 11. 6. If by grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is
no more grace. But if it be of works, then it is no more grace, otherwise work
is no more work. The way of Salvation is here ascribed unto grace, the holy
Spirit gives us both the terms of the distinction, by making grace and works
such opposite terms, as one excludes the other: that therefore made with the
first Adam was a Covenant of Works, that for restoration by Jesus Christ, is a
Covenant of Grace, see verse. 26. 27, 28. Romans 6. 14. The accepting of Jesus
Christ in our stead, to be our second Adam was as by Covenant, so of mere
grace, as well as what is promised to us through him; they together make up but
one Covenant of grace.

Some call the former a Covenant of amity or friendship, because God and man
were in perfect amity, and a Covenant of nature, because natural integrity did
capacitate to perform it; but these do not so fully express the nature of it,
seeing the promised life therein was to be by working.

Some call the latter a Covenant of faiths and there is indeed an opposition
between the Law of faith and the Law of Works, i^ the matter of justification.
Romans 3. 27, 28. That particular privilege of the Covenant viz. Justification,
is by says, and not by the works of the Law; but in a distribution, these are
not the most distinct members o^ the whole Covenant; seeing Faith, is but
particular blessing and fruit of it, hence that cannot be expressive of the
whole nature thereof: that is not the opposite Condition, or does not take the
place that works had in that Covenant with the first Adam; it is rather what
was done or suffered by Jesus Christ that supplieth this. Isa. 53. 10, It is
therefore improper, especially unless by faith, be meant the righteousness of
Jesus Christ applied thereby, rather than that particular grace for application.

And note, that in the Epistle to the Romans and Galatians, justification is
said to be by faith in opposition only to works, not to Jesus Christ or free
grace. If we should give faith the place that was given by the false Prophets
unto works, we should be culpable and egregiously cross the mind of the Apostle
in this matter as well as they did. Some Grace in that Covenant with the first
Adam, do no more make it coincident with or deny that in and with Christ to be
a Covenant of Grace, than some Works (viz. Evangelical) in that with Christ,
does deny that with the first Adam to be a Covenant of Works; or than some
faith in God, required in the Covenant of Works (viz. the believing that word
Genesis 2. 17.) does deny that which they call the Covenant of faith to be so.

It must therefore be said, it was not Gospel grace, or faith in a Mediator
that was found in the Covenant of Works, and so as properly as this may be
denominated of Works, so may the other be called a Covenant of grace,
especially seeing the Gospel is called the word of grace. Act. 14. 3. Act. 20.
32.

As to the several parts following in the distribution of this Covenant of
Grace, some of them carry evidence with them, as what is said of primary
revelation, renovation, consummation, etc. the other will be further cleared in
the sequel; yet thus much I would say here, for the clearing of them.

That the Covenant of grace was made with Jesus Christ, that Text does witness,
Isa. 42. 6. for the Father is contracting with him, yea all the Covenant of the
people is firstly with him; he not only removes obstacles that would hinder
their fruition of federal blessings as an interested Friend (whose name is not
in a Covenant) may do among men; but he is the great Covenanteer [a Covenant of
the people]: the promises are primarily made to him on the behalf of men; and
he makes the first claim to all, as his own right, his own due by a grant or
Covenant under the hand and seal of the Father to himself; this will be proved
in the next question.

That also the Covenant is made with us in Christ, is no less evident.
Believers are of the seed of Abraham and David, and of the house of spiritual
Israel to whom the promises run, they may lay claim to them in their head. Gal.
3. 9, 14, 29. Romans 11. 27. Ezekiel. 20. 37. Jer. 31. 31. Heb. 8. 8.

If any doubt of the second distinction, into Legal and Evangelical; let them
know, I am far from thinking that the mount Sinai dispensation was a Covenant
of Works to Israel; as if the design and intendment of God therein had been to
afford eternal life to Israel upon their own doing: but yet, it is called [the
Law] Romans 10. 5. Gal. 3. 10, 13, 17. Even in way of opposition to the promise
verse. 12. Yea. verse. 8. God -- preached before the Gospel to Abraham. --

Here the Covenant with Abraham is expressly called Gospel, and that in
contradistinction from the very Sinai dispensation, which is called the Law;
undeniably he speaks of the Law, not as given to Adam before the fall (for
then man himself must have been the door for life, and not another for him) but
as given at mount Sinai 430: Years after that promise to faithful Abraham.
verse. 17.

So that the Covenant of grace, is rightly distinguished, by legal and
Evangelical, for the holy Spirit here gives us both parts of the distinction,
speaking expressly of that at mount Sinai as one member of it; yea he makes
these so opposite, as he says verse. 12. and the Law, is not of faith, and so
is not the Covenant of grace, but yet the Sinai Law appertains and refers
to it, viz. as holding forth the Condition thereof to be fulfilled by Jesus
Christ.

CHAP. II.
Of the Oneness of the Covenant with Jesus Christ and us.

THe Covenant of grace was made or established not only with us, but jointly
with Jesus Christ and us in him so as both are within one and the same
Covenant. For, the great transactions with Jesus, yea even the giving and
sending of him, and his accepting the office of a Redeemer and undertaking for
us, these are all of grace, as well as what is promised to us through him,
therefore the Covenant of grace, must take in all that conduces (otherwise
than by a mere Decree) to our restoration and eternal Salvation. And in Isa.
42. 6. the Father is contracting with the Son, I will [give thee] for a
Covenant of the people; therefore that with the Son and with the people belong
to one and the same Covenant.

Indeed as that which partaketh of the nature, or is a part, is put for the
whole, so that with the people alone, even here, bears the name of a
Covenant, as being within the grand contract with Jesus Christ as a branch and
parcel thereof, yet both together make up that one Covenant of grace, as
appears thus.

1. There is no Scripture Evidence for making these, two Covenants, one of
Surety ship or redemption with Jesus Christ, and another of grace and
reconciliation made with us: that distinction which some use, is improper, for
the parts of it are coincident, seeing that as with Jesus Christ was out of
mere grace also: John 3. 16. And it is promised that Jesus Christ should be
given for a Covenant, therefore it is of grace that we are redeemed by him, 2 Timothy 1. 9. There was grace before the World was, and that must be in the
Covenant as with Jesus Christ: which was for the reconciling the World unto the
Father. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. Coloss. 1. 20, 21.

It is true, Christ only is our surety and Redeemer, not we in our own persons;
yea he is our head, our Lord, and King, and on that account of his standing in
those different capacities he has some peculiar precepts and promises
appropriated to him, which are not afforded to us in the same manner or degree;
yet this hinders not the Oneness of the Covenant with him and us: as, it is
promised unto Abraham, that in him all the Families of the Earth should be
blessed, that he should be a Father of many Nations. Genesis 12. 3. and 17. 4.
Which promises are of a higher nature than are made to us (for every Believer
is not the Father of many Nations) yet we are within the same Covenant that was
made with Abraham. Romans 4. 11, 12, 13. Gal. 3.

As in Covenants between Princes, some Articles may be concerning prerogatives
or royalties that are peculiar to them in their public capacities, which the
people share not in but in them, as striking sail, etc. other grants may
concern the people in their private capacities, as Merchants, Mariners, etc.
yet Prince and people within the same contract. So doubtless there may be
diverse grants to Jesus Christ in his public capacity in the office of a
Mediator, other promises made to his Seed; yet King and Subjects, head and
members, are within one and the same Covenant; as the principal debtor and the
surety within the same obligation. Gal. 4. 4, 5.

Indeed the same Covenant of grace, may be distinguished, as it is made with
Jesus Christ, and, as with us, yet not to intimate two distinct and complete
Covenants, but two Subjects of the same Covenant. As with Jesus Christ, it had
its constitution from eternity, before we had a being, as with us, it has its
application in time after we exist. I had rather therefore distinguish one and
the same Covenant of grace into these two parts. 1. For redemption and
reconciliation; this as with Jesus Christ for us. Gal. 3. 13. Tit. 1. 2. 2 For
Application; this as with us in him. Heb. 8. 10.

From eternity Jesus Christ was a Mediator undertaking the Covenant; but in
time is executing and interceding for our participation of it.

2. The Covenant of grace was made with Jesus Christ as a public person, a
second Adam, and therefore with all his Seed in him: the Covenant of Works
being violated, Jesus Christ was appointed as the means for restoration and
recovery. He was our David, King of Saints Isa. 53. 3. Luke 1. 32. and so
represented many Subjects, he was a common parent, having a great Spiritual
Seed. Isa. 53. 10. The first Adam, was a figure of him that was to come. Romans
5. 14. i. e. of Jesus Christ, and wherein it is specified, as the first
standing for his Seed derived unto them, sin and misery, death and
condemnation; So the second, standing for, and representing his Seed, deriveth
unto them, righteousness, justification and eternal life. verse. 15. to the end.
1 Cor. 15. 45, 47.

Thus they are compared together and Jesus Christ the Second, preferred before
the first.

If the first Adam had never fallen, it is not imaginable that he should have
enjoyed life by one Covenant and his posterity by another; their life would
have been by keeping as their death was by breaking one and the same Law of
Works: So, Jesus Christ the Second Adam and all his spiritual Seed enjoy
justification and life by one and the same Covenant of grace, We are quickened
together with him, Coloss. 2. 13. i. e. as our common person standing in our
stead.

3. All in the Covenant as with us is undertaken for and promised in the
Covenant as between the Father and the Son, and so together make up but one
Covenant. For, his being the Covenant of the people, implies, that all
promised to or to be performed by the people, it is secured in the contract
with Jesus Christ. Whatsoever was requisite unto our restoration, redemption,
and reconciliation, he agreed to work it out. Isa. 53. 10. there were the same
objects and end in that as with him, and that as with us. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. 1
Cor. 6. 20.

Yea all necessaries also for application is in the Covenant as with him. Is
Justification and the giving of a new heart promised to us? Jer. 31. 31. The
same is promised to Jesus Christ. Isa. 53. 11. By his knowledge (i. e. by the
knowledge of him) shall my righteous Servant (i. e. Jesus Christ) justify many
-- and he shall see his Seed, and be a light to the Gentiles. Isa. 4. 2. 6.
Which implies newness of heart, and having God for their God.

4. All blessings afforded in a Covenant way to us, were primarily granted to
Jesus Christ, and therefore the Covenant is jointly with him and us: as Mr. R.
observes, Christ is first justified and acquitted from the guilt of sin, and
then we. Isa. 53. 11. Christ first Sanctified and filled with the Spirit and
then we. Isa. 42. 1. He first glorified and then we. Heb. 1. 2. Romans 8. 17.
Jesus Christ is our great Fcosee in trust, he has all the riches of grace and
glory granted to, and vested in him to our use and behoof, both have them by
the same Covenant.

Indeed he has the precedence, he excels in dignity and power, he is the
firstborn among many brethren. Romans 8. 29. the first born from the dead.
Coloss. 1. 18, 19. All fullness dwelling in him; all is firstly granted into his
hands and in the Second place to us. If we would obtain any Spiritual gists,
any graces, any comforts, any glory, we must be beholden to him, borrow all
from his store, receive all from his hand. The Divine Spirit is from him Joh.
16. 7, 8. All grace from him. Romans 16. 20, 24. 1 Cor. 16. 23. Repentance from
him, Act. 5. 31. He is exalted to give repentance and the forgiveness of sins.
Faith it self from him. Heb. 12. 2. Which argue that all flow from the same
Covenant. The Name of Jesus Christ is in the Covenant, he is the principal
party there, to whom all the promises are primarily made on our behalf.

5. Union with Jesus Christ is the only way to promised blessings, and
therefore the Covenant is made jointly with him and us: 2 Cor. 1. 20. Not only
[some] but [all] the promises of God in him are yea, and in him amen. Twice in
him; none of the promises are made immediately to us, but all invariable,
unchangable, in their making, and in their performance or accomplishment, yet
it is, in him.

I might argue also, from Jesus Christ his receiving the same signs with us,
Baptism and the Supper, and why were they applied to him, if he were under one
Covenant, and we under another?

6. All the ancient Covenant expressures run jointly to Jesus Christ, and also
to Relievers which are his Seed: the promises to Adam, Abraham, David, etc.
were not so many distinct Covenants of grace; they were but various gradual
discoveries of the same Covenant according to the variety of occasions in the
several ages, every new one being for some new end and bringing with it a
further degree of manifestation, and all run to Jesus Christ and us.

1. That gracious promise revealed to Adam primarily runs unto Jesus Christ,
as to the blessed Seed, and then to us in him: wretched man having eaten of the
forbidden fruit, what could he expect every moment but the execution of that
dreadful Sentence. Genesis 2. 17. In the day thou eatest dying thou shall die.

O what unexpressible astonishment must needs seize upon his guilty Soul on
this account, there being no contrivance by any Creature wisdom, no way open,
either for the escaping the stroke of Divine wrath or for standing under it;
for, how should a feeble Creature bear up, or avoid being crushed under the
weight of an omnipotent arm?

Now, behold in the cool of the day, when the shadows of the evening were
coming upon undone, fallen man, then was the first dawning of a day of grace,
says God Genesis 3. 15. I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between
thy Seed and her Seed, it shall bruise thy head, etc. The bowels of Divine
compassion did so tenderly roll toward him, that he could not pass one day,
without some intimation of his love and revealing his gracious intendments
toward him.

Indeed this was immediately spoken, not to Adam as a promise, but to the
Serpent as a threatening, yet was uttered that Adam might over-hear and Spell
out Something of a promise in it. But, Jesus Christ is primarily this Seed of
the woman which bruiseth the Serpents head; For, it is he that stands
Conqueror over all the enemies of Salvation, sin, Satan, death, and Hell, he
procures their utter overthrow, destroys the works of the Devil. 1 John 3.
8. Vanquisheth and overcomes him. Revel. 12. 9. Christ is chiefly intended by
it. Believers are Victorious only in and by Jesus Christ, they overcome by the
blood of the Lamb, and so the promise is jointly to him and them.

Many matters in this first discovery of the Covenant did lie dark and were
hidden, it not discovering distinctly, what Seed of the woman it should be, nor
the way or means, to this or that he should be God as well as man, and how this
should be brought about, which were afterward revealed.

2. The Covenant with Abraham was jointly with Jesus Christ and us: there was a
gracious promise (which says might hang upon) as early as the days of Adam;
this was a promise of a blessed Seed to be given for man, but the Covenant with
man concerning it, seems to be dated, not from Adam, but from Abraham. Gal.
3. because the Lord was pleased to deal with Abraham in a more familiar way
than with others before him, putting himself under Covenant engagements to him.
Genesis 12. 3. In thee shall all the families of the Earth be blessed, and Genesis 17.

They must needs be at a great loss about the Seed of the woman, of whose
posterity it should come, and it was the chief additional excellency of this
federal expressure to assure Abraham that the Messia should come of his Seed
according to the flesh. Genesis 22. 18. In [thy Seed] shall all the Nations of the
Earth be blessed, and thus that which was more general in the former to Adam,
is here more particular, for it is restrained to this family, and it was an
advantage to know the family which he should come of. There were other promises
made to him, as concerning the land of Canaan, and that the Lord would be his
God. Genesis 17. 7. The latter was hinted before, to another person Genesis 9. 26.
Blessed be the Lord God of Shem. It is observed by some, that Shem, was the
first man in all the Scripture that had this honor. It is not expressly said
that he was the God of Adam, or of Noah, but the God of Shem. Now this becomes
more general, he will be the God of Abraham and his Seed.

And this [Seed] expressly is Christ, Gal. 3. 16. Now to Abraham and his Seed,
were the promises made, he says not unto Seeds as of many, but as of one and
to thy Seed which is Christ, So verse. 19. Whether it be taken for Christ
mystical or as a public person yet Christ is firstly that Seed, and it is as
clear as the Sun, that not only Christ but Believers also are the Seed in the
same Abrahamatical Covenant. Gal. 3. 7, 26. especially. verse. 29. and if ye be
Christ's then are ye Abraham's Seed and heirs according to promise. What can be
more evident? Believers are also of the Seed, and so the Covenant with Abraham
runs jointly to Jesus Christ and them.

3. The Covenant made with David runs jointly to Jesus Christ and us: Psalm.
89. 20, 28, 29. I have found my Servant David -- my Covenant shall stand with
him. Abraham was not a King, but David was, and the Covenant was made with him
in that capacity, as the great additional excellency thereof: and it typically
holds forth Jesus Christ in his exaltation to regal dignity. Herein are some
things appliable only to Jesus Christ, as verse. 27. and often he is called the
Son of David, and it is promised Ezekiel. 34. 24, 25. I the Lord will be their
God, and my servant David a Prince among them. This was long after David was
dead, and therefore must refer to Jesus Christ. And also this Covenant with
David extended to that Seed which would break statutes and sin against the
Lord. Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32. Which cannot refer to Jesus Christ, but to us; and
thus that Covenant expressure did run jointly to Jesus Christ and us.

4. The New Covenant runs jointly to Jesus Christ and us; for he died as
Mediator not of the old but of the new Testament. Heb. 9. 15. Which he could
not have done, if he had not been under it.

As an additional excellency of the new, Jesus Christ is mentioned, not as
undertaking, but as actually exhibited or come; and his being the Mediator, and
the new Covenant it self whereof he is the Mediator, are distinct things, yet
both within the Covenant of grace. Indeed whatever promises there are, for
application of blessings to us in Christ, are included in the new Covenant,
that extends to all matters of his ministration, as already in that Office:
bu^ the promises are all firstly made to Jesus Christ and to us in him.

Corol. 1. Hence, the Covenant of grace is very extensive; it takes in all the
promises made to Jesus Christ and to us; yea all the ancient promises of a
blessed Seed to come, did belong to that Covenant, in lie^ of which, we have a
Mediator actually exhibited, and also the new Covenant. It may be questioned by
some, whether all the promises still in force, in the Book of God do belong to
the Covenant of Grace, because so few are enumerated where it is mentioned, as
with us. Genesis 12. and. 17. Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12.?

But seeing all are made and fulfilled in Christ, hence they must all flow as
living streams from that Fountain. The Covenant of grace with Jesus Christ that
is the great Charter that we hold all our privileges by; and all the promises
do some way or other appertain to that.

Some Promises are Constitutive, of the Covenant, as those between the Father
and the Son concerning a Seed; others are executive or referring to the
execution and application of it. Isa. 53, 10, 11. Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12.

Some are principal and concerning the end eternal life. Heb. 8. Heb. 9. 15.
Gal. 3. 8, 9, 18. Others less principal, concerning the means, internal, the
Spirit and faith, or external as ordinances.

Not only Spiritual, but even promises of temporal blessings, as of succor and
relief in particular cases and conditions in outward straits and distresses,
yet these belong to the Covenant of grace. Psalm. 105. 39, 40, 41. He spread a
cloud for a covering, here is protection; a fire to give light by night, that
intimates direction; he brought quails and satisfied them with the bread of
heaven, here is gracious provision; he opened the rock and the waters gushed
out, this speaks miraculous refreshment and consolation. And whence was all
this care over them? verse. 42. For he remembered his holy Covenant and Abraham
his Servant. All these then were to be deemed Covenant mercies. Where had the
Lord particularly promised any such extraordinary relieves unto Abraham or his
Seed? O he witnessed himself to be their God, and promised the land of Canaan,
and that implies all mercy and means necessary for them in the pursuance of
the Call to it. So that all protections, preservations, provisions, all for the
sustaining upholding and succouring of the people of God, yea even their lowest
mercies, have a tincture of Covenant-love to put quickness into them. So,
returns of prayer in a day of outward affliction are in remembrance of his
Covenant. Psalm. 106. 44. 45. 2 King. 13. 22, 23.

Yea observe, in some places where the Covenant is mentioned, there are
promises added (and so belong to it) which in other repetitions of it are left
out. As Jer. 32. 38, 39, 40. One-ness of heart and way and his fear in their
hearts, are promised in the Covenant, yet are omitted in the recital thereof.
Jer. 31. 31, to 35. And the Word Covenant is omitted, and yet many promises
thereof are mentioned. Ezekiel. 36. 25, to the end, as appears by the identity
of some with those expressly in it elsewhere. So, that, we are not to confine
the Covenant of grace to those mentioned in the new Covenant; all the promises
to us are some way comprised in it.

Corol. 2. Hence, there is infallible certainty in, and grounded consolation
issuing from, the Covenant of grace, seeing it is made jointly with Jesus
Christ and us.

All the promises are his right as well as ours, and so can never fail. Is
Jesus Christ the Seed of the woman, who has assurance of being victorious over
the Serpent? Genesis 3. 15.

So are Believers: yea they are of the Seed of Abraham and David, interested in
the same promises. Gal. 3. 19, 21.

If any thing be a Condition of the Covenant of grace, it must be so, of the
promises to Jesus Christ, as well as of those to us, that taking in all, and
being jointly with both and principally with him and with us but in him, as his
Seed: and so faith cannot be it, for the promises were not made to Jesus Christ
upon Condition of our believing, but upon what he himself should do and suffer;
rather therein he has a promise, assurance that we shall believe. Isa. 5^. 10.
he shall see his Seed. It would highly derogate from the honor of the Lord
Jesus to say, that the efficacy and effect of all his undertaking had
dependence upon any act of ours, as that of believing.

It is by the efficiency of the Word of the new Testament that faith is given.
Romans 10. 14, 15, 16, 17. Act. 13. 47, 48.

Yea the gift of faith is promised in that, of writing his Law in their hearts.
Heb. 8. ^0. and therefore by its Obligation; for it is a contradiction to speak
of a promise without Obligation for performance unto the persons to whom it is
made; and what matter is it, whether it be upon an Obligation to the Sinners
themselves, or to another (to Jesus Christ) their Feofee in trust for them; it
is by the new Covenant which is made to them, and that of grace is jointly with
Christ and them.

Believers are not only the objects for, (...) concerning whom he promises to
Jesus Christ that he will do them good (as bruit o^ inanimate Creatures are
improperly said to be in Covenant with him) but the Subject^ to whom he
promises special blessings i^ Christ, so as the promises are directed to and
may be claimed by them; Jesus Christ had an interest therein; they are his
right as we as theirs; and this is no damage, but (...) advantage, as giving
assurance that they wi^^ be made good to a Tittle. Jer. 33. 20, 21 If you can
break my Covenant of the day and my Covenant of the night -- then may all so my
Covenant be broken with David my servant. Long before the prophesying o^
Jeremiah, David had been in the dust, and yet the Covenant with him holds
still and it being made with Jesus Christ who is our David, hence the order of
nature, the intercourse and revolutions of night and da^ might as readily fail,
as any promises mad^ to him be disanulled or go unaccomplished; yea, he will
sue them out for us, when by reason of inward cloudings and darkness (even
about an interest in them) we cannot lay any claim unto them our selves. He
should be a loser, if they should not be fulfilled, he should lose his right as
well as we ours, Christ and we having a joint interest therein. Had Christ
assurance of being Victorious over the Serpent, we also have assurance of
standing Conquerours over him in Christ, by the same promise, and that under
the same notion of the Seed of the woman. So that this is a bottom of
everlasting consolation, that Jesus Christ and we, are within one and the same
Covenant.

CHAP. III.
Of Christ as the sum of the Covenant.

THe Covenant of grace running primarily to Jesus Christ and to us in him, so
as he not only makes it with, but even is, the Covenant of the people. Isa.
42. 6. It will be necessary to inquire, What interest Jesus Christ has, or how
and in what place and Office he stands in reference to the Covenant.

1. Jesus Christ is the very foundation which Evangelical Covenant is built
upon; as he is our life. Coloss. 3. 3. 1 John 5. 20. the cause of it; So he is
the Covenant. i. e. the very basis of it, as 1 Cor. 3. 11. For other foundation
can no man lay, then the is laid, which is Jesus Christ. The Covenant of Works,
was founded upon something in man, his concreated ability and natural strength;
all the obedience of the first Adam (if he had stood) and the fruits thereof,
would have been resulting from the sufficiency of his own power and free will,
and he failing all the fabric fell.

But the Lord has established another glorious Covenant, and this is built
upon what is firmer and of greater strength, even Jesus Christ; this stone that
is laid in Zion, is a tried stone. Isa. 26. 16. A sure foundation. Now the
structure of our Salvation will never fall, because it has such a sure
groundwork, able to bear up the weight and stress of all that is laid upon it;
No other can be laid. He is the only foundation of all the promises, of all the
graces, of all the obedience, of all the peace, of all the comfort, of all the
glory that is promised. That with Abraham before his incarnation, was confirmed
of God in Christ. Gal. 3. 17. He was the Mediator of Abraham's Covenant, and
therefore that had in it the same for substance with the new.

Indeed, Jesus Christ is the foundation of all the blessings, and special
privileges in the Covenant as with us. If the Lord be a God to any, it is in
Christ, if their iniquities be forgiven it is in the blood of Christ, if the
Divine Law be written in their hearts, it is by the finger of the spirit of
Christ; thus he lies at the bottom of all, and so is the Covenant of the
people.

2. Jesus Christ makes way for our enjoyment of all federal blessings, by
standing in manifold relations to the Covenant.

As he stands between God and us as a middle person to make reconciliation,
so he is the Mediator of the Covenant. Heb. 9. 15. There was a wide breach that
we could never have made up; yea such a variance as there was no possibility of
our approaching to God to enter upon a Treaty of Peace, much less to procure
our own reconciliation; sin raised such an enmity as the Lord would have been a
consuming fire to us, if we had come near to him: now the Lord Jesus interposed
and took up this case, undertook to compose and put an end to this difference
There were iniquities in the way to hinder our fruition of promised mercies,
but he took an effectual course for the removal of these. He is the Mediator of
the new Testament; to what end? for the redemption of the transgressions that
were under the first Testament. Satisfaction was made by him to Divine Justice
to the full, he answered all the demands of the righteous Law, and so wrought
out reconciliation for us.

As he undertook for the parties at variance, so he was the surety of the
Covenant. Heb. 7. 22. Jesus made a Surety of a better Testament. The Lord would
not take our bond for that great debt which we had contracted and were never
able to pay. It was now with us as with a poor man under an arrest for a vast
sum, unless there can be procured an able sufficient man to enter bond with
him, he must to prison without hope of being released any more: so the Law of
the righteous God arrested us, for infinite breaches thereof; it exacted a
great and yet most just debt at our hand, which we (being already bankrupts)
were never able to answer: it required a debt of infinite suffering, the just
due of our sin, which if laid upon us, would sink us for ever; for the wages of
sin is death. The Lord demanded a debt of perfect obedience, universal
righteousness, unto life, which we were never able to yield; and now unless one
able and sufficient will undertake and be bound for us, there is no possibility
of escaping the prison of Hell, the chains of infernal darkness, the
everlasting wrath of the Omnipotent God; under this misery we must have layen
without hope of recovery: this was our state upon the fall of our first
parents, and in this strait and distress, one not of our procuring, but of his
own grace offering it, even Jesus Christ stepped in, and became a surety for us
to pay our ransom, to answer our debt to the utmost farthing, he put his name
into our Obligation was made under the Law, to redeem those that were under the
Law. Gal. 4, 4.

Yea he became God's surety to us, to free us from all doubtings about the
fulfilling of the Covenant to us; he undertook and promised that he would lose
nothing that was given him. John 6. 39. But would raise in up at the last day,
i. e. to everlasting Salvation; for others shall be raised up also unto
Condemnation, but these unto eternal glory.

As he ratified and confirmed all, so he was the Testator of the Covenant. Heb.
9. 16, 17. Where there is a Testament, then must also of necessity be the death
of the Testator, for a Testament is of force after men be dead -- Nothing less
than death it self was threatened upon the first transgression (Genesis 2. 17.)
that must be endured if ever Sinners be recovered unto a fruition of eternal
life: and now behold the matchless love of Jesus Christ; says he, I will die
in their stead, to save them from eternal death, and thus he has turned it
into a Testament, a new Testament, fealing it with his own blood.

As he acts for our obtainment of the blessings promised, so he is the
Messenger of the Covenant. Mal. 3. 1. The Messenger of the Covenant whom ye
delight in, behold he shall come.

We should have been without a knowledge of this grace, altogether strangers to
it and unacquainted with it, if he had not revealed it to us, and so we should
not have made out after, but come short of those spiritual blessings of the
Covenant: but now Jesus Christ himself travelleth with these blessed tidings,
he makes a report of all the federal transactions between the Father and him
in order to our Salvation, he opens all those soul-ravishing Mysteries, and
all those precious promises, yea the way to our participation of those blessed
privileges, and so he is the Messenger of the Covenant.

As he seeks to satisfy us of the reality of God in all those federal
transactions, so he is the w^tness of the Covenant: Isa. 55. 4. Behold I have
given him for a witness of the people -- When poor sold hear the tidings of
Covenant love in the heart of God toward them, they are ready to suspect it is
too good news to be true; are apt to be incredulous here, are hardly persuaded
to believe the truth thereof, at least as to themselves; now Jesus Christ
condescendeth so far as to take upon him the Office of a Witness to assure of
the truth of all; yea now he is in heaven he does not throw up that Office, he
continues still in this work, and sends down news from heaven thereof Revel.
1. 5. and 3. 14. He is the faithful Witness still; as if he should say, I lay
in the bosom of the Father, I have seen all transactions, all passages, I know
how the heart of God stands toward this Covenant work, if my word may have
any credit with you, I testify (says Jesus Christ) that the Father is real
herein, and the work is done, the Covenant is struck, yea ratified and sealed
with my blood.

When souls are full of jealousies concerning the willingness of God to give
entertainment to them, and admittance into Covenant grace, and to deal with
them in a Covenant way, though they cannot peep into Heaven and look into the
bosom of the Father, and read all things there, yet Jesus Christ stoopeth so
low as to take upon him the Office of a faithful Witness, to give assurance
thereof.

As he is our Spiritual head and the blessed Seed, so he is a party contracting
in the Covenant: he is the chief Seed of Abraham and of David, Gal. 3. To whom
the promises are made. verse. 19. Matthew. 15. 22. All is assured to him, as well
as to us, and his standing on our side as a party with us in the sme Covenant,
as it is an honor, so it is a comfort to us, in that it gives assurance of
its accomplishment to a tittle, for the Lord will not fail his only Son Jesus
Christ of any thing which he has promised to him: and he being a party it were
an injury to him, if any thing were unfulfilled.

As he is the Substance of the Covenant, so he is said to be the Covenant of
the people; and well may he bear this name he standing in all these relations
to it.

3. Jesus Christ was the principal promise of the Covenant: this denominates
him the Covenant, his being really the chief part of it, or thing firstly
promised in it, and all other things for his sake. Thus he primarily was the
Seed of the woman that was promised to break the Serpents head. Genesis 3. 15.
Heb. 2. 14. 1 John 3. 8. He is that Seed of Abraham in whom all the Nations are
blessed. Genesis 22. 18. Gal. 3. 16. He is the royal Seed of David to be
enthroned, of whose Kingdom there shall be no end. Luke 1. 32, 33.

Indeed this is a grand privilege of Gospel times, that what was of old the
great thing under promise to come viz. a blessed Seed, a Messiah, is now turned
into a performance, and he now stands actually a Mediator, in stead thereof.
All the prophesies were of him. Act. 10. 43. To him give all the Prophets
witness -- Of the Scriptures he says, Joh. 5. 39. They are they which testify
of me, as if they said nothing else but Christ, Christ, and thus he is the
Covenant.

4. Jesus Christ is really to us all that which under any ancient Covenant was
typically represented unto men; and so he is Substantially the Covenant of the
people: as Dr. Sibs observes, Christ is all to us which was held forth of old
either in personal types, he is the Second Adam, the true Isaac, Joseph,
Joshua, Solomon, Melchisedeck -- Or in real types, he is the true brazen
Serpent that cures sin-stung souls which by an eye of faith are looking to
him. Joh. 3. 14, 15. He is the true Manna, bread of life, to all those that
believingly feed upon him. Joh. 6. 31, 33, 35. He is the true sacrifice, the
Paschal Lamb; our hearts being sprinkled with his blood, the destroying Angel
shall pass over us. He is our true Tabernacle, true Altar, and true Ark, all
typified by these, is really fulfilled in him.

5. Jesus Christ is the excellency, marrow and sweetness, yea the sum and
Substance of all that is under promise, and so he is the Covenant of the
people: indeed he is the very storehouse where the promises are treasured up.
All mercies from the Father, must have their conveyance to us through the hands
of his Son. Yea Jesus Christ is the very quintessence, the chief in, the very
life of all the mercies themselves, and all come with him. Romans 8. 32. How
shall be not [with him] also freely give us all things. It is Christ that
puts fullness into other things, and adds sweetness to them, they are
imbittered, and as nothing if without him. The promises (though full in
themselves yet) are empty to us unless taken with Christ; all privileges
empty, all enjoyments empty, unless taken with him; hence he is said to be all
in all. Col. 3. 11. He is all in all graces, all in all peace, in all promises,
in all comforts, in all glory.

6. Jesus Christ does all that is necessary for the procurement of all federal
blessings; and so he is the Covenant of the people: as he is the resurrection.
i. e. the cause of it. John 11. 25. So he is the cause and procurer of all
federal blessings. Not only shall he [make] a Covenant with the people, but
[be] a Covenant of the people. i. e. All that is required in a federal way from
the people, that Jesus Christ shall be so them: if the Father demands it of
them, they must not present him with any duties or performances of their own
for acceptance unto life, but with Jesus Christ, he is their Covenant to
perform all for them, which they are obliged to, in order to that end. Says
the Lord, I will not enter into Covenant or deal in an immediate way with them
as with the first Adam, but I will take a surer course, I will give thee for
that end, thou shall undertake all the matters therein; even for thy Seed; I
will look to thee for the performance thereof, and thus he is the Covenant of
the people.

All that is promised to Jesus Christ, or to us, it is upon his obedience. Isa.
53. 10, 11, 12.

Not by the obedience of every one for himself, but by the obedience of one. i.
e. of Jesus Christ many are made righteous. Romans 5. 19. Justification of life,
and remission of sins are procured by him. verse. 18. Romans 3. 24. And so
reconciliation or promised peace. Isa. 53. 5. The Chastisement of our peace was
upon him. We must for ever have stood at enmity, if he had not stepped in for
the procurement of our peace, hence he is our peace. Ephesians. 2. 14. Not only the
Author and Procurer, but even the sum of it. So the promise of propriety in,
and Communion with God, has its procurement, and takes effect only upon the
obedience of Jesus Christ: all are afar off from God, under the greatest
estrangement till made nigh by the blood of Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 2. 12, 13. the
promise of the Communication of Sanctifying grace, of giving the Law into the
heart, is from him. Isa. 53. 10. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Yea the promise of Salvation and
eternal life takes effect from him; his death was for this end. Heb. 9. 15.
That they which are called might receive the promise of the eternal
inheritance. And thus he is for a Covenant of the people.

CHAP. IV.
Of the date of Covenant mercies.

IF it be inquired when the Covenant of grace was made between God the Father,
and Jesus Christ the Son? it must be answered, it was from eternity, it was an
eternal Covenant: indeed the actual giving him for a Covenant, was not till his
incarnation; it is mentioned as a future thing, he was promised before, but
given then; Whence Isa. 42. 1, 2, 3. etc. is applied to him when he had taken
our nature. Matt. 12. 17, 18. etc.

Also the first revelation of it was. Genesis 3. 15. In the promise of his
becoming the Seed of the woman, to bruise the Serpents head. That argues a
fore-agreement or consent to grapple with the Serpent, but does not give the
first date to the Covenant; So as the first declaration of the Covenant of
grace was there, but the Constitution or making of it was before all time, even
from eternity: this appears; for

1. There were mutual operations or actings of the will of God the Father and
Son from eternity, concerning the restoration of lapsed man, which amount to a
Covenant: For, what more is requisite thereunto? it is revealed that such a
Compact was between them, Isa. 53. 10, 11, 12. Isa. 42. 1, to 8. God works
all things after the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1. 11. Therefore so great
a transaction was not without it: and the Will of God is Eternal; for he does
not begin to Will or Nill that which he did not before. According to their
distinct personality, the Will of the Father was, that the Son should in
fullness of time, take our nature, do and suffer, all necessary to the
restitution and recovery of the Elect: the Will of the Son ecchoed back and
answered to that of the Father, accepting the Office; and this distinct acting
or new habitude (as Dr. O. calls it) of Will in the Father and Son toward
each other, is beyond a bare decree that the thing should be, and so it is an
Eternal Covenant.

2. The designation of Jesus Christ to and his undertaking of the Mediatorial
Office (which amount to a Covenant or agreement) was before all time: For
Ephesians. 1. 4. He has chosen us in him, i. e. in Christ. And when? Before the
foundation of the World. He is (though not the Cause yet) the Medium or means
for the execution of election; that did not run upon an uncertain means, and
therefore there was an agreement concerning it from Eternity. Yea as to his
Mediatorial employment he is said to prae-exist all creatures. Prove. 8. 23. I
was set up [or anointed, i. e. to be King, Priest and Prophet] from
everlasting, or eve^ the Earth was, verse. 24, to 31.

3. Many did believe (Heb. 11.) and so Salvation was obtained in the times of
the Old Testament by Jesus Christ through a Covenant of Grace: To say that they
were saved by virtue of a mere decree, were to assert that their salvation was
obtained one way, ours another, and would render the Covenant superfluous,
vain, and needless, if some went saved without it; and it is against Rev. 13.
8. which says he was a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world; their
partaking of the fr^^its and benefits of his death (before it actually was)
could be no other way but upon assurance, that Jesus Christ would in due time
take our nature and suffer death: this assurance could arise from nothing but a
Covenant wherein Jesus Christ promised to do it, and the Father trusted the Son
for a due performance of it. This Covenant the^ was before his incarnation, and
so must be made with him personally considered, or as the second person in the
Trinity, and consequently from Eternity; for no acts between them as God but
are eternal. The Father and the Son as so, do not begin to act toward each
other what they did not before, there was therefore an eternal Covenant,

4. There were some reciprocal or federal actions of the Fathers giving Souls,
and the Sons receiving of them, antecedaneous to Faith, Joh. 17. 2, 6, 12. That
he should give eternal Life to as many as thou have given him. This deed of
gift is for the same end that the Covenant of grace serves to, viz. that they
might enjoy eternal Life, Joh. 6. 37. All that the Father gives me, shall come
to me, i. e. shall believe, verse. 35. this free giving is first, and believing
after, and therefore seems to be Eternal. This donation, is an act of the
Divine Will, granting of persons to Jesus Christ that they might be ransomed or
redeemed: right to receive and take them is relative to it, and therefore (I
think) differs from Election: For, the reason of that stands not in such a
grant, but in a distinct act of the same will, viz. in Divine love with
separation, severing some to salvation with a refusing of others. This giving
then, is a sederal act from all Eternity.

5. Some federal matters are declared to be from Eternity, Tit. 1. 2. In hope
of Eternal Life, which God that cannot lie promised. When? before the world
began. And we are saved and called, not only according to his purpose, but
grace which was given us in Christ, 2 Timothy 1. 9. But when? before the world
began. All promises of eternal Life, and all such grace, belong to the Covenant
of Grace, and these were then made or given not to us in our own persons (for
we had no existence so early) but in Jesus Christ. As it would sound harsh to
interpret the word promised thus decreed to promise, so it were as absurd, to
render either Text from the beginning of the world, the word being. (...) ante,
before, not since. I ask, is it to be rendered so as to Election or Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 1. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 20? if not, let us own this truth, that in the
Covenant of Grace, Eternal Life was promised, and grace given in Jesus Christ
from all Eternity.

CHAP. V.
General Inferences from the whole.

Corol. 1. HEnce, we may behold infinite condescension that the eternal God
will deal or treat with us, in a familiar Covenant way: What an honor is this?
by his prerogative and Sovereignty he could have commanded all duty from us,
without promising any thing to us; but behold the Lord has put himself under
everlasting engagements to his people, that upon the account of his
faithfulness, they may expect (through Christ) all mercy needful in all estates
and conditions. When they are under great sufferings (as Israel of old) this
Covenant may be of encouraging use, Exodus 2. 23, 24. God remembered his Covenant
and bad respect to them. When under temptation to think that Divine wrath and
displeasure will go out against them, it is of succouring use, Isa. 54. 9, 10.
As readily might the waters of Noah return, and as easily might the Mountains
depart, as the Covenant of his peace be removed. When under pressing wants, it
is of relieving use, ^ Chron. 6. 42. Remember the mercies of David thy servant.
When looking Death in the face it may be of comforting use 2 Samuel 23. 5.
Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting
Covenant. These were the last words of David, verse. 1. So that this
unchangeable Covenant may make a dying man lift up his head with rejoicing. His
house was not duly ordered toward God, and yet he could bear up with this
against all his failings, unworthiness, undeservings.

Corol. 2. Hence, there are transcended excellencies in the Covenant of grace,
far above what are found in the Covenant of Works: For, here the Father is
promising unto the Son, that he should be a Covenant of the people, the
excellency of this might be evinced from its properties, it is a free,
gracious, holy, well regulated, sure, and an everlasting Covenant, 2 Timothy 1. 9.
Luke 1. 72. 2 Samuel 23. 5. Isa. 55. 3. These things being largely handled by
others, I do but touch upon them.

Also the vast difference between those Covenants of Works and of Grace clear
this. This Covenant of Works was made with the first Adam, and with all his
seed in him, without a Mediator, requiring perfect, personal obedience, by his
natural concreated power, with free will to stand or fall, implicity, promising
life upon keeping and threatising death and a forfeiture of all upon breaking
of it, Genesis 2. 17. It speaks nothing of remission of sin, upon the deepest
sorrow and repentance: if Adam could have wept day and night, and even tears of
blood; yet that promised nothing, not the least mercy or favor after its
violation, nothing but death to be expected from it; which speaks the misery
of all who are in a natural condition, and not come under a better Covenant.

But the Covenant of Grace, is made with Jesus Christ the second Adam, and with
all his seed in him, as their Mediator to make it conciliation, and work out a
righteousness for them, so as now the promise is sure to all the Seed, 1 Timothy
2. 5. Romans 4. 16.

The Father is Covenanting with Jesus Christ as a more glorious head than the
first Adam, promising to give him to be a Covenant of the people, to stand on
their side: this must argue a pacification in that he who was God, (the person
offended) would be God-man, a redeemer, so as he and the people make but one
party in this Covenant; yea, he wrought out that righteousness which is unto
justification of life, Romans 5. 18, 19.

In handling the subject of the Covenant, the clearest way is, to compare the
Covenant of Works with the first Adam, and the Covenant of grace with Jesus
Christ the second Adam together; so the two Adams are paralleled, Romans 5.

And also to compare, the old Covenant at mount Sinai, with the new Covenant,
as Jer. 31. v. 31, 32. The jumbling of these together has occasioned darkness
in many matters; these differences being rightly stated, in a secondary way any
of them, might be compared, with less danger of miscarrying.

Corol. 3. Hence, it is rich grace and special favor to be in the number of
the people that were Covenanted for, between the Father and the Son; seeing
none are freed from the sentence of death and condemnation or saved, but in the
way of a Covenant of grace, Ephesians. 2. 8. 2 Timothy 1. 9. The being under that, is
not a privilege that betideth all; it reaches some and not others: For, there
is no Covenant expressure that extends now to all mankind without exception,
that Genesis 3. 15. implies, that some are the Seed of the Serpent, as others are
the Seed of the Woman; all the world are not the Seed of Abraham or David, nor
the house of Israel and Judah, with whom the new Covenant is made Jer. 31. 31.
The Fathers act of donation was not of all without exception, Joh. 17. 9. I
pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given me -- The Antithesis
or opposition, does strongly prove, that some are of the world, and these are
not given unto Jesus Christ, nor prayed for by him. It would sound harsh to
say, either that he Covenanted with the Father to die for and redeem some that
were never given him, or that he would not intercede and pray for some that he
did redeem; and the giving act was absolute, not upon the condition of our
believing. For, Job. 6. 37. All that the Father gives me shall come to me. All
them that were given shall certainly believe (and so shall be saved, Mark 16.
16.) and therefore some were never given to him. Impetration and application
are of equal latitude and extent, Romans 5. 10. From reconciliation which is by
the death of his Son, the Apostle argues unto Salvation with a much more. All
those therefore that it was purchased for, shall certainly have it applied to
them, and be reconciled in their own persons.

Yea in the great Charter, the Covenant as between the Father and the Son an
effectual application of sederal blessings is absolutely promised, Isa. 53. 10,
11. He [Shall] see his Seed, and he [Shall] see of the travail of his Soul and
be satisfied, and he [Shall] justify many. How many [Shalls] are here, and on
this account, because he [Shall bear their iniquities]. All then whose
iniquities he did bear, he shall convert and justify. He has the highest
assurance that he should enjoy the very Seed which he traveled for: it was not
a mere conditional satisfaction that he made; upon his death all matters became
absolute: the very persons were appointed, and an unalterable determination of
the Father concerning their conversion, which cannot reach unto all men without
exception, for then all should certainly be saved. So Isa. 42. 6, 7. It is not
only promised that he should be a Covenant [of the people] the Jews, but also
[a light of the Gentiles]; which imports a removing of spiritual blindness by
affording special illuminations: not only will he be redemption to the
Gentiles, but a light for the applying of it to all that he has redeemed. Yea,
he will bring them from the Prison, from their spiritual thraldom and bondage,
to sin and Satan, which denote effectual vocation, Acts 13. verse. 47, 48. Acts
26. 18. So that an effectual application of Covenant grace unto conversion is
absolutely promised to be vouchsafed unto all those that Jesus Christ did
undertake for; yet you see there, that the accomplishment hereof, is by ways
and means of his appointment, and the Lord does not mock or delude men, in the
general invitations and calls of the Gospel, any more than he mocked Pharaoh,
when he (by Moses) commanded him to let Israel go, and yet declared that he
would barden his heart, that he should not let the people go, Exodus 4. 21. 23.
The Lord by his Will of Precept commands all wherever the Gospel comes to
believe, and all which do believe shall certainly be Saved, Mark 16. 16. and
therefore he does not mock. The dispensation of the Gospel is the means which
he sanctifies and blesses to that end, for the working or begetting of Faith.
If any will neglect, abuse, and misimprove or make light of it, Mat. 22. v. 5.
and entreat spightfully the messengers that are sent with that blessed tidings;
or if they will be attended to their worldly matters, their Farms and Oxen --
They sinning against the means of grace, it is a putting a slight upon the
grace and salvation tendered in the means, and this leaves inexcusable and will
expose the sinners to just condemnation. They had power to forbear such acts of
sin against the means, though they had not power to render it effectual; and
who (either Speaker or Hearer) knows that he is not of that number, which
Jesus Christ Covenanted for and will make it effectual to? however, the Lord is
not bound to abat^ of his demand of duty, because of man's impotency and
(sinfully contracted) disability to obey.

All therefore ought to give utmost attendance to the general call of the
Gospel, as a matter of highest concernment to their souls for Eternity; and the
neglecting hereof is a despising of Jesus Christ and his benefits, Luke 10. 16.
And then no wonder if the wrath of God abides on them.

Corol. 4. Hence there were glorious transactions in order to the salvation of
the Elect, long before their believing: though the actual application of
federal blessings to them, is not one moment of time before the gift of Faith,
yet before that there are glorious advantages, arising from the Covenant, as
between the Father and the Son on their behalf.

Vertually and ex faedere all conducing unto happiness was secured for them
from Eternity; then there was not only a passing such an act as they cannot
eventually be damued (which is so far from proving an actual justification as
that) a mere decree of Election, would have been sufficient unto this, seeing
that must certainly have its execution, but by a federal act, so early was the
undertaking of Jesus Christ on their behalf; then was the Covenant made between
the Father and the Son, which had all blessedness in the womb of it, Tit. 1. 2.
Indeed he had not actually our sin upon him, nor was so justified before his
incarnation, Isa. 50. 7, 8. For, his coming in the flesh had been vain and
unnecessary, if he had been actually discharged before.

And this may show that our justification does not every way run parallel to
his; For, believers under the Old Testament were actually justified before
Jesus Christ was so: but so early the Elect did in some special way belong unto
God, being federally made over by him to Jesus Christ for gracious ends, Job.
17. 6. Thine they were, and thou gave them unto me.

And this was a great business, for he was appointed to be their
representative, and to pay their ransom money, so as when he did it, they were
virtually deemed as justified, yea sanctified and glorified there, not in their
own persons, but in him, Ephesians. 2. 5, 6. Has quickened us together with Christ,
and has raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus

Corol. 5. Hence, there was some love in the bosom of God toward the Elect
from all Eternity: Sending Christ himself (who is given for a Covenant and is
the sum of it) is the fruit and effect of it, Joh. 3. 16 God so loved the world
that he gave hi^ only begotten Son -- And if the Covenant was from everlasting,
then that Divine love, which is the Fountain and first spring from whence it
flows, must needs be so early also.

God does actually love the Elect before they are regenerate or can actually
believe, with a love of benevolence or good will, though not with a love of
complacency and delight. He bears love, to their persons, though not to their
qualities and actions, nor to their state and condition. Yea, God owneth them
not only with electing but with redeeming love, Romans 5. 8. God commended his
love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. This
extolleth his love, and makes it surmount all others, that he gave his Son to
die for them, whilst they were in a state of sin and misery. There was some
federal love so far as to give them unto Jesus Christ to be redeemed by him,
Job. 6. 37, 39. So as to own them as the persons which should share in
Covenant grace afterward when others were left out. The love of God is an
unchangeable and eternal act of his Will, ever one and the same, admits of
no increase or decrease in him; he does not begin to love any person that he
hated before, be changes not, Mal. 3. 6. But to help our weak understandings,
according to his acting toward us, and to the change that is made in us, and
as we partake of his benefits, so he is said to let it out to us, 1 Job. 3. 1.
Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed on us, that we should be
called the Sons of God. Thus the Lord loves not his creatures equally, or all
alike, but some more than others; the regenerate more than the unregenerate,
and those most, who share most in the effects of it, both for this life, and
that which is to come. From Eternity, although God had not a love of
approbation to the state of the Elect unconverted, yet he had a love of
commiseration unto their persons, Psalm. 103. 17. But the mercy of the Lord
(which has miserable creatures as the proper objects of it) is from
everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, etc. Before the foundations
of the earth were laid, he considered them as possibly miserable, and was a God
of mercy. Then he had such a love of benevolence to them as certainly issues
in a love of beneficence or soul enriching bounty, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. But God who is
rich in mercy for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead
in sins, has quickened us together with Christ, etc. Here the first operations
of Divine grace, the recovery of a soul out of a dead state unto spiritual
life, the first quickenings of a soul from the death of sin are made the issues
of Divine favor, they spring from mercy and rich mercy, from love and great
love.

Corol. 6. Hence, the Covenant of grace as made with Jesus Christ, h^d the
precedence, was before the Covenant of works, that was first, this after: For,
though there was a Divine Decree concerning the Creation and the Covenant of
Works to be in time, yet that was not actually made so early, because Adam (who
was to be the head of it) was not then existing, had not a being for it to be
made with. Whereas, Jesus Christ (who was the head of the Covenant of grace)
was not only really existing but undertaking from Eternity. The Covenant of
grace, (without any incongruity) may be asserted, in its constitution and
making to be first, or before the Covenant of Works, though in its execution
and application it comes after, and presupposes the breaking of it: As a
healing balsam may be prepared, before the wound is made, and a salve before
there be a sore, although the applying thereof be afterward: So, the Covenant
of grace was made from Eternity, not actually with us in our own persons, but
with Jesus Christ for us, as our great Feoffee in trust, though we then were
unborn and had not a being.

Corol. 7. Hence, the whole contrivement of the Covenant of grace, must be
ascribed to God alone, seeing it was from all Eternity. No creature was then
existing to have any hand or stroke therein: there was none to counsel, advise,
or persuade this way. It was conceived in the heart and bosom of God, and none
but he had to do in the concluding of it, and so he is alone to be magnified
and extolled therein. A Christian, as one transported, may cry out on this
account, as Isa. 25. 1. O Lord I will exalt thee -- for thou have done
wonderful things, thy Counsels [of old] are faithfulness and truth. Now, there
is no room for our boasting, nothing to be ascribed to our selves, God alone is
to be admired in Covenant grace, seeing it was working toward as from all
Eternity, 2 Timothy 1. 9. It is said to be, not according to our Works. The
Eternity of our mercy is exclusive of our duty as any cause of his affording of
it. This puts a glory upon Covenant grace and love, that it is ancient,
before the world began.

Corol. 8. Hence, there is stability is Covenant mercies, seeing that compact.
which gives assurance thereof was from all Eternity Says he, Psalm. 25. 6.
Remember, O Lord thy tender mercies and thy loving kindnesses Why? For, they
have been ever of old. The antientness thereof, is a good argument to urge for
the obtainment of them. We may have hope to receive, what the Lord was so early
determined to give out, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The foundation of God stands sure. The
apostasy of eminent professors is a great temptation unto many sincere
Christians: they are apt to say, If such glistering, shining Stars fall, good
Lord how shall we stand? But to help against it, he tells us, the foundation
that is steadfast, firm, unmovable, it stands sure, by the Covenant of grace
they are granted to Jesus Christ from all Eternity, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Such eternal
acts of God are firm and stable, abiding for ever, will secure against
defection or falling away; Satan shall never utterly prevail against them;
grace shall never utterly be overthrown or extinguished. [Having this Seal; the
Lord knows them that are his.] He has set his mark upon them, and where ever
they be, he can distinguish them from the world; as he knows them by number,
so also by mark, or scal, and when he makes up his jewels, not one of them
which are his shall be wanting.

Corol. 9 Hence, there is a bottom of consolation for all that are within the
Covenant of grace, in that it was established from all Eternity: O how may it
fill them with comfort, that their salvation stands by an eternal act of God,
that cannot be revealed, altered, or changed, yea by a Covenant act, wherein
the fai hfulness of God ^s engaged for the affording of it, even by the Fathers
gift. How often does Jesus Christ mention them as given to him, Joh. 6. 37, 39.
Joh. 17. 2, 9, 12. as if he delighted, and gloried in, or boasted of, this
giving act. How may this secure them against all fears of everlasting
miscarrying, that they are given to Jesus Christ from all Eternity? For, he
will never forseit his Fathers gifts, nor displease him so as he should
withdraw them from him; they will be gifts without Repentance. This eternal act
will never be recalled, which may make for their everlasting Consolation.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Old and New Covenant, what they are and how distinct?

HAving cleared the Covenant of Gr^^ as to the transactions between the Father
and the Son from Eternity, and as to the first revelations of its grace to the
Patriarch^ as Abraham and David, etc. before the incarnation, wherein the great
thing promised, was that blessed Seed, so as al^ blessings were to be expected
only in him: We now come to consider,

First, that Dispensation which held forth the way and means whereby Jesus
Christ came under our obligation, and by answering of it, confirmed the
Covenant of Grace and this is contained in the Old Covenant made at mount Sinai.

Secondly, that Dispensation whereby the special blessings and privileges
(which an the issue of his obedience) are imparted to us, and this is the New
Covenant.

The Apostle compares these together i^ diverse Chapters in the Epistle to the
H^brews, and says of Jesus Christ, Heb. 8. He obtained a more excellent
Ministry by b^ much also he is the Mediator of a better Covenant -- Which
implies, that there is another Testament, viz. that at mount Sinai, when they
came out of Egypt, ver. 9. which the Aaronical Priesthood appeartained to, that
is worse; but it is the excellency of Jesus Christ that his ministration is
conversant about a better Testament; that has the pre-eminence on this
account, as being established upon better promises. And the opposition is not
laid between the Covenant of Works, as with the first Adam, and the New
Covenant, but between that at Sinai and the New. The word for Covenant is (...)
Testament, it notes a disposition or declaration by way of Will or Promise,
and may be the act of one or more. Indeed the Hebrew word Berith is used, Jer.
31. 31, 32. and the same expressed by (...), Heb. 8. v. 8, 9, 10. But the
Apostle intimated that a Testamentary disposition is intended by it, Gal. 3.
15, 17. As if Jesus Christ by fulfilling the condition of the Covenant of grace
had turned it into a Testament, the blessings of it being now legacies
absolutely promised to us in the New.

It will be necessary here to inquire, what is the worse Covenant, and what is
this better Testament which is compared with it?

Answ. 1. The worse Covenant is that Conditional Divine grant of blessings upon
the obedience required in the Law of Moses, Or, that Old Covenant which was
made amount Sinai: This is undoubtedly it which is compared with the other;
For, it is that which the Levitical Priesthood did belong to, which the
Priesthood of Christ is compared with, as is manifest, Heb. 7, and 8, and 9.
Chapters. It is that Covenant which the Lord made with the Fathers in the day
when he took them by the hand to lead them out of the Land of Egypt, Heb. 8.
verse. 9. And therefore undeniably it was the Sinai Covenant, for then that was
made with them, Exodus 19. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. etc. In the third month when
the Children of Israel were gone out of the Land of Egypt, the same day they
came to the wilderness of Sinai; and both the matter of the Covenant and manner
of its promulgation, we see in that and the following Chapters.

It is a conditional grant, it promises nothing but upon the condition of
obedience, Exodus 19. verse. 5. [If] ye will obey my voice and keep my Covenant,
then ye shall be a peculiar treasure -- All is upon an [If] So Levit. 26. verse.
3, 4, etc. [If] ye walk in my Statutes and keep my Commandments and do them,
then will I give you rain, etc. The like in many other places; all Promises run
there upon the condition of keeping his Commandments.

The whole Law is generally distributed into three parts, viz. Moral, Judicial,
and Ceremonial; no Precept but may be referred to one of these; and obedience
to all of them is required as the condition of this Sinai Covenant, or all are
comprised therein.

1. The Moral Law is such a principal part of it, as it bears the very name
of the Covenant, and the Table thereof are called the Tables of the Covenant,
Exodus 34. verse. 28. Deuteronomy. 9. verse. 9, 11, 15. Yea the terrible appearances of
God in thundrings and lightnings, and the noise of the Trumpet, was at the
promulgation of the Moral Law, before the Ceremonial was given forth, Exodus 19.
verse. 16. Exodus 20. 1, to 19.

So that the first constitution of the Sinai Covenant was only of the Moral
Law; it is very observable that Moses having rehearsed these very Commandments,
Deuteronomy. 5. he closes up thus, verse. 22. These words the Lord spoke unto your
assembly in the mount out of the midst of the fire, of the Cloud, and of the
thick darkness [and he added no more] i. e. in making this Covenant, he added
no more than these Moral Precepts, although he reserved to himself a liberty to
add the Coremonials afterward, yet for the present he did not; indeed virtually
they were contained therein, but not actually before the discovery of them, any
more than Gospel Institutions which Israel was not obliged to, until revealed,
and after that were equally reducible thereunto. The holy God, that he might
tame their rebellious Spirits, he comes in this terrible way, requiring exact
obedience to the Moral Commandments [and added no more] At the first hand, he
revealed no way for their relief and succor, yet then, before any Ceremonials
were added, it made a Covenant, verse. 2. Even when the people could see nothing
but wrath and a curse before them, they were forbidden coming up into the Mount
upon pain of death, and so were not admitted to familiar converses with God,
must have dreadful tokens of a Divine presence, as a consuming fire, and in
that respect the Sinai Covenant is opposed to the New, Heb. 12. verse. 18. to
verse. 25. For ye are not come to the Mount that might be touched and that burnt
with fire, etc. That is, ye are not come to Mount Sinai and the terror of that
Old Covenant, but ye are come to Mount Sion -- To Jesus the Mediator of the
New Covenant.

2. The Judicial Laws belong to it: these are called Judgments, Exodus 21. 1.
and obedience unto them is urged therein upon as strict terms as to the other,
Levit. 18. ver. 4, 5. Ye shall therefore do my Judgments -- Ye shall therefore
keep my Statutes and my Judgments, which if a man do he shall live in them, I
am the Lord. Here keeping his Judicial Laws is urged as necessary unto Life.

3. The Ceremonial Law also appertains to the Sinai Covenant: For, the
Apostle mentions the Levitical Priesthood and Sacrifices, etc. as belonging
to the Old Testament, and prefers the Ministry of Jesus Christ before it,
even in the Text, in that he is a Mediator not of the Old but of the New
Testament, Heb. 7, and 8. Chap. Heb. 9. ver. 1, 2, 3, etc. ver. 15.

These Ceremonial Laws were called by the name of Statutes, containing
Institutions of worship, and are urged also on as strict terms as the Moral,
Lev. 18. v. 5. Ye shall therefore keep [my Statutes] and my Judgments, which
if a man do [he shall live in them]. These Positive Precepts [his Statutes] run
upon those terms [do and live] and therefore belong to the Law in the strict
sense, Romans 10. ver. 5. Yea exact obedience to these ceremonials is required on
pain of the Curse, Deuteronomy. 26. ver. 27. compared with Gal. 3. verse. 10. So Levit.
26. verse. 2, 3, 4, 14, 15. He injoyneth reverencing his Sanctuary, and keeping
his Statutes and Judgments, threatening death upon the neglect thereof; and
Verse 46. These are the Satutes and Judgments and Laws which the Lord made
between him and the Children of Israel in mount Sinai, by the hand of Moses:
and also he closes up the Book of Leviticus thus, Levit. 27. verse. 34. These
are the Commandments which the Lord commanded Moses, for the Children of Israel
in mount Sinai. By which it is evident, that those Laws contained in that Book
of Leviticus (of which many are ceremonial and judicial as well as moral) do
belong to the Sinai Covenant. So also do some contained in the Book of Numbers,
compare Numb. 19. verse. 3, 4. with Heb. 9. verse. 13. and 13. verse. 11. And also
some contained in the Book of Deuteronomy, for the Apostle mentions that as
part of the Law, Gal. 3. verse. 10. which is drawn from Deuteronomy. 26. verse. 27. I do
not say that all things in those Books are to be esteemed as parts of the Sinai
Covenant: For, some matters are not of a federal nature, as the taking the sum
of the Congregation, Numb. 1. the order of their Tribes, Numb. 2. the stories
of their murmuring, Numb. 10. verse. 33. to the end, Numb. 11. verse. 1. etc. of
Miriams case, Numb. 12. of the Spies searching the Land, Numb. 13, and 14. of
the rebellion of Korah, Numb. 16. of Balaam and Balak, Chap. 23, and 24. of
Isreal's journeys, Chap. 33. and many other stories, as Deuteronomy. 1, and 2, and 3.
These are not included in it: but whatever scattered up and down in those
Books, has the nature of such a Covenant in it, whereof obedience is the
condition, that is to be deemed as belonging to the Sinai Covenant.

The Ceremonial Law came in by way of addition to the other, after an apparent
interval, upon their desiring a Mediator, that might receive the Law for, and
declare it to them, Ex^d. 20. 19, 24, 25, 26. and Exodus 21, and 22, and 23,
Chapt. There was a solemnization and ratification of all, upon the peoples
promising to fulfill it, Exodus 24.

God himself uttered the Moral Law to the people with great terror, but the
Ceremonial (although it did after belong to the Sinai Covenant yet) was
revealed to Moses in the Mount, without those thundrings and lightenings which
the other was attended with. I have wondered what should be the reason of these
additional things.

But I consider that temporal mercies being promised by that Covenant unto
Israel upon their perfect obedience, they would have been hopeless of enjoying
these, if such a typical expiation and atonement had not been provided, that
their sins might not hinder their arriving at them. So that Morals,
Ceremonials, and Judicials did belong to, (and with the promises and
threatenings annexed, made up) the Sinai Covenant.

Answ. 2. The better Covenant, is an absolute Divine grant by way of Promise,
of those great blessings which come in by the mediation and Ministry of Jesus
Christ: as its excellency, it is said to be that whereof he is Mediator, and so
it is the New Covenant or Testament, Heb. 9. 15. and 12. 24. That it runs
upon absolute terms may be seen Heb. 8. 7. to the end. And it is declared that
it is not according to the Old, verse. 9. Therefore the chief scope and design
of the Apostle in mentioning these promises, rather than any other, is, the
discovering, wherein especially the New is differenced from, and is said to be
better than, the Old.

Here are four grand Promises of the New Covenant instanced in, which are so
comprehensive, as all others made to us, are some way reducible to them.

1. The inscription of the Divine Law in the hearts of men, Heb. 8. verse. 10. I
will put my Laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts. In the state
of innocence, the Law was found in lively Characters there, but since the fall,
it needs to be transcribed or written over again. The Old Covenant had the
Law written upon Tables of stone without; not absolutely promised, and but
rarely found within; insomuch as the Lord even weepeth over them, Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
O that there were such a heart in them, that they would fear me and keep all my
Commandments. But in opposition to the Old, here the Lord undertaketh to write
it upon better Tables, even of the heart: importing his affording an inward
frame, disposition and inclination for an universal compliance with the Divine
Will; and then no sooner is any thing offered of a Divine stamp, but all the
faculties of the Soul, understanding, will, and affection, with the greatest
readiness, stand bent for a conformity to it; yea the Soul is carried forth
that way, not so much by legal external inforcements, as by internal powerful
obligations: that whereas the Old had a large Volume of Laws, Institutions, and
Ordinances, which they were commanded to yield obedience to: in the New all is
comprised in a little room, and turned into Promise [I will write my Law in
their Hearts]; the spiriting for all, is assured to them. Here the Promise
leads the way to the Obedience: And O how sweet is it, when it begins with
and is the fruit of a Divine Promise!

2. A mutual relation between God and Souls, Heb. 8. 10. I will be to them a
God, and they shall be to me a people. Here is propriety each in other. By the
Old Covenant they were externally interested in God: but as by that with
Abraham then, so by the New since, it is more absolutely promised unto some
that he will be their God; which must import that they shall have more sweet
converses and communion with him, under the New than under the Old, and have
higher manifestations of their enjoyment of him. And happy is that people whose
God is the Lord, Psalm. 144. 15. What then can they want? All Creatures are
theirs, yea Christ theirs, Grace theirs, Glory theirs, all the Attributes of
God theirs, his Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Faithfulness, Loving kindness, all
theirs, all his Promises, yea his All Sufficiency theirs, and what can they
desire more, than to have him who is all in all?

Also [they shall be to me a People] that is, I will own them in a clearer,
more eminent and glorious way, than under the Old. There shall be a greater
separation in their Spirit, and in their whole course from all corruption, from
Sin, Satan, the World, and a greater dedication unto God, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. and
2 Cor. 6. 17. Zech. 14. 19, 20. In that day every Pot in Jerusalem and in Judah
shall be holiness to the Lord: there shall be an Universal tincture of
holiness, Isa. 44. 5. and One (i. e. one by one) shall say, I am the Lords --
There shall be a more voluntary and free self-resignation unto him; yea when
they find their hearts stand off and hang back from God, it is under Promise
[they shall be to me a People] they may plead the Promise for enablement to
make over themselves in a fuller way unto God than formerly.

3. Special illumination is Promised, Heb. 8. verse. 11. They shall all know me
from the least to the greatest: There shall be an enlargement of their
knowledge and acquaintance with God and Divine things. It would seem rather to
exclude private teaching than public [they shall not teach every man his
Neighbor, and every man his Brother] but it is not absolutely exclusive of
outward teachings by instruments and means; but comparatively, it holds forth
how surpassingly excellent those discoveries under the New Testament should be,
above those under the Old; they far transcend and go beyond these, are more
eminent and universal: not only some but all shall know me, etc. Yet public
and private teachings were to be attended to, as means conducing to this end,
Mat. 28. 19, 20. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. and 6. 4. Col. 3. 16. Those teachings
then of the Divine Spirit, do not render the other void or unnecessary. Under
the Old they had some dark, typical, shaddowy representations of God and Jesus
Christ; under the New they shall have those that are more clear and outstrip
the other. Yea, it is under Promise [they shall all know me] and therefore they
are to make an improvement of that, toward the gaining a more eminent measure
of knowledge, than those in Old Testament times arrived at.

4. Remission or Pardon of Sin is promised, Heb. 8. verse. 12. For I will be
merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I
remember no more. That particle [for] argues it to be a reason of his
affording other federal blessings: he will write his Law in their hearts, for
he will forgive their sins; he will be their God, and they shall be his people,
for he will pardon their iniquity. Forgiving Grace is the very spring of other
mercies; that makes way for sharing in them, and nothing without that.

There was a typical forgiveness, in the Old Covenant, Heb 9. 9, 10, 14. and
10. 1, 2, 3, etc. but there is real Remission in the New, Heb. 10. verse. 16,
17. and by this, the whole of our Justification is noted out: whence the
Apostle, Romans 4. from the way of the non-imputation of sin, proves our
Justification to be by Faith, and not by the works of the Law.

But Pardon of Sin denotes,

1. Freedom from an obligation unto the punishment of the Law: for pardon is
opposed to guilt, which properly is obligation to punishment, Exodus 34. Pardon
our iniquity, and our sin, that is, do not hold us as guilty. It is noted by
not imputing sin, Psalm. 32. 2. that is, do not charge it upon us. It is called
a covering of it, a blotting of it out, as when a man crosses a debt Book; and
Heb. 8. 12. a remembering it no more, that is, he will not so remember it, as to
keep it upon record, and hold the person obliged to its penalty.

2. Pardon notes impunity, or a discharge from the punishment of sin: when
pardoning mercy is extended to a Soul, the Lord does give a freedom from the
punishment it self, that is due to sin, as well as from the obligation to it,
Numb. 14. 19. Pardon I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people, etc. i. e. do
not inflict deserved punishment, The Lord had threatened to cast them off, to
disinherit them, and kill them as one man, verse. 12, 15. M^ses intercedeth, and
the Lord answers, verse. 20. I have pardoned according to thy Word, that is, I
will not punish, and execute the fierceness of my wrath upon them, yet he
swears that they should not enter into the promised rest, verse. 21, 22, 23.
The Lord then may pardon, so as not to deal in utmost severity with a people,
and yet may reserve to himself a liberty to chastise them, by withholding some
desired enjoyments from them. Yea, in this sense, so far as he does not
chastise them, he may be said to pardon, when her (i. e. Sions) warfare is
accomplished, then it is said, as Isa. 40. 2. that her iniquity is pardoned, i.
e. the Lord will not visit for her iniquity as he did before, [she has
received of the Lords hand double for all her sins] not that her suffering had
given the least satisfaction to Divine justice for her sin, that belongs to
Christ alone; but she had experienced a large measure of fatherly chastisement,
and now being released from this, she is said to be pardoned, Isa. 33. 24. The
inhabitant shall not say I am sick, the people that dwell therein, shall be
forgiven their iniquity. As there is a freedom from sickness, and tokens of
fatherly displeasure, so in this sense, sin is said to be forgiven.

Now in the New Covenant, the Lords remembering iniquity no more, implies this
also, his not executing eternal wrath upon the sinner; nothing vindictive or
satisfactory to divine justice will ever be laid upon him: yea fatherly
chastisements will be taken off so far as may be good for him.

And now, what a rich treasury is this New and better Covenant? it has enough
in it to supply all the wants, to answer all the grounded desires of poor
Souls. If they want an obediential frame of heart; here it is promised [I will
write my Laws in their hearts]. If they desire interest in God, as that only
which will satisfic their immortal Souls; behold it is promised [I will be to
them a God]. Do they find a backwardness to giving up themselves to God? here
it is promised, [they shall be to me a people]. Do they find cause to complain
of spiritual blindness, darkness, and ignorance? it is promised [all shall know
me]. Does sin sadly threaten? it is promised, [their sins and iniquities will I
remember no more]. And O how miserable are all unbelievers, who want an
interest in this New Covenant; they have not this Law of Grace written within;
are without God and a due knowledge of him, strangers to forgiving Grace; in
these is the sum of all unhappiness.

Quest. Whether that better Covenant (wherein the ministration of Jesus Christ
does lie) be distinct from that at mount Sinai? Are they two Covenants, or but
one?

Answ. That New or better Covenant is distinct from that at Mount Sinai: it is
usually said, that they are two administrations or dispensations of the same
Covenant: I think, they are not merely one and the same Covenant diversely
administered, but they are two Covenants.

Yet to prevent mistakes, I would explain my meaning herein. I grant that the
Sinai Covenant had a special relation to the Covenant of Grace, and was of
great use thereabout. Also I am far from thinking, that there are two Covenants
of Grace, if thereby be meant, two ways to Life and Salvation specifically and
essentially different each from other. I conclude that the Elect were saved in
one and the same way, for substance and essence in all Ages, viz. by Grace,
through a Mediator, by Faith in him. The grand Covenant of Grace was made with
Jesus Christ, and us in him, and is essentially one in all times; so as no one
of those federal expressures to Adam fallen, or to Abraham, or to David, can
rightly be deemed the Covenant of Grace it self (unless summarily, or as an
Epitome thereof) but only discoveries of some small parcels and branches
thereof, and differ from it, as a part from the whole, or as a particular
Article from a whole federal transaction which consists of many more; yea
that compriseth all the Promises of furnishing Jesus Christ for the work, and
rendering him prosperous and successful in it, (Isa. 53. ver. 10, 11, 12.) as
well as Promises of what he will do for us, and one Article may be distinct
enough from another: As among men, a Father by an Indenture (containing many
Articles) may settle an inheritance upon his Son and his Posterity, and all
make up but one Covenant in the main; yet one Article may be distinct enough
from another, and any one may be called a distinct Covenant, when it is
compared with another; one Covenant may be concerning some condition to be
performed by the Son, another Covenant for the Father to acknowledge a Fine, or
give a further assurance, another to free from encumbrances; So the great God
settleth an everlasting inheritance upon some of the Sons of men, by one grand
Covenant of Grace made with Jesus Christ as their Head, which has many
Articles and matters belonging to it, distinct enough each from other; as, one
Covenant concerning a condition to be performed by men in their surety Jesus
Christ, this is that as Mount Sinai; another Covenant concerning the
privileges which shall be afforded by him, that condition being performed,
this is the New Covenant, Jer. 31. verse. 31. Behold the days come, says the
Lord, that I will make a New Covenant -- Here is a Covenant to give further
assurance and of what; and thus although the grand Covenant be but one, yet
these several Articles thereof compared each with other, are clearly enough
distinct, and so that at Sinai and the New are two Covenants; as may appear
these wales.

1. The Sinai Covenant is denied to be made before Isreal's coming out of Egypt;
and therefore must be distinct, or another Covenant from that which promised
special blessings in Christ; For, that was made with the Patriarchs, as
Abraham, Israe, and Jacob, etc. long before Isreal's deliverance out of Egyptian
bondage, Genesis 12. verse. 1, 2, 3, etc. Genesis 17. verse. 2, 7. The Apostle
asserteth the stability of the Covenant with Abraham and his seed, and proves
it on this wise, Gal. 3. verse. 15, 16, 17. This I say, that the Covenant that
was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law which was four hundred and
thirty years after cannot disanul -- Where he argues thus, That which was made
at Mount Sinai, coming after, could not disanul that with Abraham, which was of
a more ancient date or long before it. He speaks not of the moral Law barely
as a Rule of Life, for so, even before Abraham it was; immortalities were ever
sinful, and exposed those that were guilty of them unto dreadful Judgments, as
Sadom and Gomorrah to fire and brimstone, and the old World to a deluge of
Water; therefore he must speak of the Law considered as a Covenant given at
Mount Sinai, and thus it was not till four hundred and thirty years after that
with Abraham, and so these must be two distinct Covenants of vastly different
dates, else the Apostles argument, which is built upon their difference in
respect of time, is not cogent, it is of no force, if they be of the same date,
one as early as the other; for the false Apostles among the Galatians might
have said, the Law as a Covenant was as early as Abraham, for substance, though
not for form and administration; this had been enough to elude his plea, which
was grounded upon the time of it; especially seeing the Law was urged amongst
the Galatians not merely as to any circumstances in that new ministration, but
as to the substance of it; the question then being, Whether Justification and
the eternal inheritance were by the works of the Law, or by Grace, and in a way
of Faith? The Apostle argues that this federal transactiion at Sinai, not
having a being till Moses, so long after that with Abraham; hence it could not
establish another way of life opposite to that, viz. by works of the Law.

Also Deuteronomy. 5. verse. 2, 3. The Lord our God made a Covenant with us in Horeb,
the Lord made not this Covenant with our Fathers, but with us. The Sinai
Covenant is clearly intended here, by that at H^reb, (compare Deuteronomy. 4. verse.
10, 11, 12, 13. with Exodus 19. verse. 1, 8. 9.) and this is expressly denied to
be made with their Fathers; the Sinai Covenant then was not made with the
Patriarchs, not made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, or with any that lived
before the time of Moses; they that were alive at that day, are intimated to be
the first with whom it was made, it was not with our Fathers, but with us [even
with us who are all of us here alive this day]: those then, which before the
times of Moses were dead, had not this Covenant made with them, and therefore
it is distinct from that which was made with the Fathers Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, etc. He does not say, the Lord made not this administration of it with
our Fathers, or he made it not in this form, but the Lord stroke not this
Covenant, he denies the Covenant it self to be cut with them. It is an adding
to the word to put in (as some do) tantum, as if the meaning were this, not
only with our Fathers, but also with us. This is to say, it was made with the
Fathers, when the Holy Spirit expressly denies it. Such additions admitted
elsewhere in Scripture, would be found to be desperately dangerou^; and here
can by no means be allowed, seeing the Apostle gives it an after date, Gal. 3.
17.

2. The better Covenant and that at Sinai are contradistinguished, and so must
be two distinct Covenants, else the opposition were groundless, Jer. 31. verse.
31, 32 -- I will make a New Covenant -- Not according to the Covenant I made
with their Fathers -- i. e. not according to the Sinai Covenant; for that was
it which was made when they were brought out of the Land of Egypt. He does not
say, I will set up a new administration of my Covenant (though that had been
true) but a New Covenant; there is a plain opposition between Covenant and
Covenant, and therefore the New and that at Sinai must be two distinct, and not
one and the same in different forms: and the rather, because this New Covenant
is not opposed to the Covenant with Abraham, and to that with David, but only
to that with Moses and Israel at M^^ent Sinai. Let any instance be given of any
thing that is found contradistinguished in such a manner as these are, when
only some modification and different respects of the same subject is intended
to be signified thereby.

3. The bitterness of the Covenant were not a sufficient evidence that the
ministration of Jesus Christ is of greater excellency than the other, if they
were not two distinct Covenants: The Apostle proves that Jesus Christ has
obtained a more excellent Ministry, by this Medium, Heb. 8. verse. 6. By how
much also he is a Mediator of a better Covenant -- He does not say, Only a
better administration, but a better Covenant; and much of the force of his
Argument were lost, if the Ministry of those Levitical Priests and also
Christ's, were conversant about the same Covenant; but if they be two, then it
is very foreible; they ministered about one Covenant and Christ about another
and a better, and therefore his is the more excellent Ministry. Besides, it is
taken from his being [a Mediator of that better Covenant] which implies that
he was not then a Mediator of that worse Sinai Covenant (though of old
typified therein) which their Ministry related to. Indeed it had been a slender
proof of the excellency of his Ministry, if the better Covenant were the same
for substance with the worse, seeing then that at Sinai must be still
continuing, and so Jesus Christ not only in his Type, but in his own person
must be Mediator thereof, Ministering therein, which that Text does not give
the least countenance to, but there and also elsewhere Christ is called the
Mediator of the New Covenant in opposition to the Old, Heb. 12. verse. 18, 19,
20, 24. Heb. 9. 15. Even in the satisfying the Old by his death. And therefore
they must be two distinct Covenants.

4. The many Notes of distinction that are given of them, argue that they are
two Covenants: they are not only called the Old and the New (this possibly
might be said of the same Subject, as we say, the Old and the New Moon, and yet
one and the same Moon) but the first and the second, Heb. 8. verse. 7. If that
[first Covenant] had been faultless, then should no place have been sought for
[the second]. As Dr. C. says, That it should be affirmed of one and the same
Covenant, that this is the first Covenant, and that is the second, and yet
those two should be but both one, that is strange.

5. They are successive, the Second comes in the place of the First, and so
they must two distinct Covenants, Heb. 10. verse. 9. He takes away the First
that he may establish the Second. Nothing comes in the room and stead of it
self, but of something else; now the Second better Covenant comes in the place
and stead of the First; so as the one must be removed, and taken away, that the
other may be established, and so they must be two distinct Covenants: the first
is Old, and Heb. 8. verse. 13. That which decays and waxes old, is ready to
vanish away, Heb. 7. verse. 18. There is verily a disanulling of the Commandment
going before, i. e. of the first Covenant. The Old then is such as it is
disanulled and vanishes away, whereas the New Covenant cannot be disanulled,
never vanishes away; neither is it said that one administration vanishes, is
disanulled and taken away, that another might succeed (though this is true) but
one, viz. a first Covenant it self is taken away, that a Second may come in the
room of it.

6. They are expressly called [two Covenants or Testaments]: The Apostle
mentions Abraham's two Sons, the one by a Bondwoman who was born after the
flesh, the other by a Freewoman, who was by Promise, and makes this
application of it, Gal. 4. verse. 24. Which things are an Allegory, for these
are the [two Covenants or Testaments] the one from the Mount Sinai which
gendreth to bondage, which is Agar -- What can be more plain? Here it is
expressly affirmed, that there are two Covenants or Testaments, and neither of
these two was formally (though material one might be) the Covenant of Works or
of friendship made with the first Adam in his estate of Innocence, For, then
man himself must have been the worker for Life; and therefore of necessity
there must be two Covenants besides; and so it is no way incongruous to speak
of three Covenants, seeing that with Adam is generally acknowledged to be One,
and here the Scripture expressly speaks of two Covenants, and that with Adam
is none of them. It is not that signified by the Freewoman and her Son Isaac,
for that in opposition to the other is said to be free, and to be by Promise,
v. 23, 26, 31. Neither is it signified by the Bondwoman and her Son, for after
he said [these are the two Covenants] it immediately follows, verse. 24. [The
One from the Mount Sinai which gendreth to bondage, which is Agar]. So then,
not the Covenant of Works as made with Adam, but the Sinai Covenant is the
other here intended. And plainly he speaks of both according to Divine
Ordination or Institution, and concludes them so to be two Covenants: in this
Allegory, he does not mention them considered abusively according to the
intention of the Judaizing Prophets, but in themselves, verse. 21, 22. Ye that
desire to be under the Law, do ye not hear the Law, for it is written Abraham
bad two Sons, etc. therefore as they warrantably heard the Sinai Law, so it and
the free Promise made two Testaments.

Yea in the times of the Old Testament these were kept very distinct: hence it
is observable, that when the Children of Israel had sinned egregiously in
making the Calf, and the Lord severely threatened even to consume them, Exodus
32. 10, 11. Moses in interceding for them does not plead the Covenant newly
made at Mount Sinai, but that with Abraham, verse. 13. Remember Abraham, Isaac,
and Israel thy servants to whom thou swarest, etc. He saw he could not ground
his plea upon the Sinai Covenant already violated by them, and therefore he
flees to another founded upon free grace. So Deuteronomy. 9. 27. 2 King. 13. 23. The
Lord was gracious to them and had compassion on them, and had respect to them;
he does not say, because of his Covenant with Moses at Mount Sinai, but because
of his Covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc. So that whilst the Sinai
Covenant was in force, yet that with Abraham (which went before) was not
swallowed up in it or mixed with it, but remained entire and distinct still,
dispencing our blessings to the Subjects of it, they were not one and the same
Covenant in that day.

O then let Christians beware of mixing and confounding the Old and New
Covenant which are so distinct. It is the great design of the Epistle to the
Romans and Galatians to beat off from this mixture: both have their great use,
but they must have their due place, Gal. 4. 21. Ye that desire to be under the
Law, etc. there is a great aptness to legalize, or desire to be under the Law.

The false Prophets were ready to be branding Paul for an Antinomian; as if he
rendered the Law unprofitable by his Preaching the Doctrine of free grace; for
the taking off this aspersion he puts the question, Gal. 3. 19. Wherefore
then serves the Law? that is, if the Law does not, justify, why then was it
given? or what use was it of? He answers [it was added because of
transgression, till the seed should come to whom the Promise was made].

Where observe, how carefully the Apostle does distinguish these: he does not
make the Sinai Law or Covenant one and the same with the Promise, but something
added or put to it, a distinct thing; it was additional, and so not the Promise
it self, but yet was of admirable use, it was added [because of transgression]
say some, to reveal and discover sin, and lay restraint upon men that they run
not into it; but the Law in the hand of Christ is of such use to Believers
still; whereas he speaks of such a use of it as lasts only till the coming
of the promised Seed; and therefore I understand it thus [because or for the
sake of transgression] viz. that Jesus Christ by coming under it might make
full satisfaction for that transgression which man was in: it was added not for
Justification, but for transgressions sake, that its curse might be endured and
removed, and this additional use of the Law, was but till the promised seed
came, then it ceased, having its accomplishment in him: the Law was added that
he might finish transgression and make an end of sin, as Dan. 9. 24. And this
way was made, for the Divine Promise to pass upon us.

Now there is a sinful mixing these two Covenants, the Old and the New, which
are distinct,

1. When there is a joining any thing of ours with Jesus Christ in the matter
of acceptance unto eternal Life: this was the case of those Judaizing
Prophets, Act. 15 1. they taught [except ye be circumcised after the manner of
Moses, ye cannot be saved]. The like we have, Gal. 5. 2. If ye be circumcised
Christ shall profit you nothing. They expected advantage by Jesus Christ, else
this Argument would have been of no force to them, verse. 4. Christ is of no
effect to you, etc. They were therefore jumbling works of their own, and Jesus
Christ together, mixing these in the matter of their acceptance unto Life, and
this is intimated to be desperately dangerous.

Christians ought to perform all duty in conformity to Jesus Christ, in the way
to Salvation, but not in the least or that which justifies or saves. See what
earnestness and vehemence the Apostle uses herein, verse. 3. I testify again
to every man that is circumcised that he is a debtor to the whole Law. Where is
intimated, that an acting in any work upon a legal account, or on a legal
ground, is a putting our selves under the obligation of, and is all one as if
we sought life altogether by, the Law; For, if they were circumcised upon a
principle or opinion of its conducing to their Justification, they became
debtors thereby to the whole Law: though they did not think other services
required or themselves obliged to them, yet by one, they put themselves under
the bond of the whole. Thus then, if any should act in any Gospel Institutions
as Baptism, or the Supper of the Lord upon a like account as they did take up
circumcision, viz. with an opinion of their conducing to justification and
acceptance with God unto Eternal Life, they would thereby make themselves
debtors to the whole Law: So if they should give Repentance, mourning for sin,
self-emptiness, yea Faith it self, the same place, and act therein upon such a
ground as they did in Circumcision, Christ would be rendered of no effect unto
such Souls.

2. When there is a living in the Spirit of the Old Covenant, in dealing with
the Promises of the New; then indeed there is a mixing of the two Covenants
which are so distinct: The Old Covenant carried with it a Spirit of bondage and
terror, Romans 8. 15. Heb. 12. 18. And if Souls in looking to the Promise, carry
it as if they were conversing with God upon the burning Mount; eyeing chiefly
Divine wrath, dwelling more upon a Divine curse than upon the Grace of God in
the free Promise in looking for mercy; here is the Spirit of the Old Covenant;
so when souls are shie of the Promise and ready to stand at a distance from it;
when they carry it toward God, as if Jesus Christ had not satisfied the curse
of the Law, and yet in part look to the Promise.

The Old Covenant did run upon D^ and Live, intending that Jesus Christ should
be the doer in reference to Eternal Life; but when souls are like those who
were hired into the Vineyard, Mat. 20. verse. 1, 2, etc. when they are indenting
with God for their penny; when they must have such incomes and such enjoyments
from God in case they act in duty; when they seek the reward upon their own
doing; they may work hard and sink under their burden and have little thank
for their pains, as that Parable shows. When duty is not managed with a
Gospel Spirit, when the Divine Spirit is not acting the Soul by the Promise of
the New Covenant, it comes to little.

The Old Covenant did run upon condition, and so when Souls dwell upon
conditions performed by or wrought within themselves, and build their Hope,
Peace, and Comfort upon them, so as they look little or nothing to the free
Grace of God in absolute Promises, make but little use of these in comparison
of the other; then they are too much in the Spirit of the Old Covenant, and
mixing with the New.

CHAP. VII.
Of the nature of the Mount Sinai Covenant.

IT will now be asked, What manner of Covenant was that at mount Sinai, which
is called the worse Covenant? what kind of Covenant was it?

Sol. In general it was a Covenant of Works, as to be fulfilled by Jesus
Christ, but not so to Israel. Or,

It was the Covenant of Grace as to its legal condition to be performed by
Jesus Christ, represented under a conditional administration of it to Israel.

This is a knotty puzling Question in Divinity; for the clearer opening of it,
I must answer both Negatively and Affirmatively.

SECT. I.
Answ. I. NEgatively in four Propositions.

Prop. I. The Sinai Law was not given as a Covenant of Works to Israel. It was
designed to be a Covenant of Works as to be accomplished by Jesus Christ, as
will appear afterward, but the end of the Lord was not that it should be so to
Israel. For,

1. The nature of a Covenant of Works, and also the general current of
Scripture denies the Sinai Law to be such.

[A Covenant of Works] requires perfect personal obedience, promising life or
a reward of Justice thereupon, and threatening death upon the least violation
thereof.

This is evident from the Covenant with Adam in innocence, Genesis 2. verse. 17. He
obeying, it is implied he should live; he disobeying by eating the forbidden
Fruit; the sentence of death passes upon him: and apparently this is a true
description of a Covenant of Works, for whatever is opposite unto this,
speaks Grace: if Justification and Eternal Life be attained by another
righteousness or obedience (without their personal performance of it) there is
Grace herein; if the reward be not of Justice, it must be of Grace; if
imperfections and sinful failings be not followed with death, there is Grace in
that also.

Now the design or intendment of God in giving the Sinai Covenant, was not,
that Israel should by their own obedience obtain Eternal Life and Salvation.
Indeed the false Apostles in Gospel times did put upon personal obedience, they
urged Circumcifion and other works of the Law as necessary unto Justification
and Eternal Life; but in opposition to them the Apostle argues in diverse
Chapters in the Epistles to the Romans and Galatians, proving that they come by
a righteousness performed for us by Jesus Christ, Romans 3. verse. 20. Therefore
by the deeds of the Law (i. e. as performed by themselves) shall no flesh be
justified in his sight; it is verse. 28. Without the deeds of the Law, Gal. 2.
verse. 16. Gal. 3. verse. 10. As many as are of the works of the Law (i. e. as
performed by themselves) are under the curse, and verse. 11, 12. Gal. 5. verse.
2, 3. Yea, our Salvation is not of works, Ephesians. 2. verse. 8, 9. 2 Timothy 2. 9.
Adam forfeiting life when he might have had it on the terms of his own doing,
hence the Lord would never deal with man in that way any more. And lest any
should think that this was only since the Sinai Covenant was at an end, the
Apostle proves that our works are now excluded from the instances of Abraham
and David, Romans 4. verse. 2, 3. For if Abraham were justified by works, he has
whereof to glory but not before God; and adds, it is to him that works not,
verse. 5. and verse. 6. Even as David also describes the blessedness of the man
unto whom God imputes righteousness without works: Where it is plainly
intimated, that we are justified in Gospel times in the same way for substance
with them of old, and he expressly says, that this was not by works of their
own performance; no not by such as they came up to, after they were in a state
of grace, much less by any works of theirs before they did believe, else the
Apostles argument were not cogent; for the false Prophets might easily have
answered, that now in Gospel times we are not justified as Abraham and David
were, and so they might have waved whatever is urged from these instances;
seeing all that he says is built upon this very foundation, that we are
justified as they were: only this can hardly be evaded, that David (who lived
under the Sinai Covenant) yet is denied to be justified by works of his own.
Yea the Apostle excludes them even from the nature of a Covenant of works;
which is such a ground as denies lapsed man in any Age to be saved by his own
obedience, verse. 4. Now to him that works is the reward not reckoned of grace
but of debt. Therefore unless it could be said that those under the Sinai Law
had Eternal Life, not of grace but of debt, it must be said that they had it
not in the way of a Covenant of works.

2. Moses and the Children of Israel were antecedently under a Covenant of
grace, or before the making that at mount Sinai, therefore that could not be a
Covenant of works: In the very Preface, he says, Exodus 20. verse. 2, 5. I am
the Lord [thy God]: the Lord did not first become their God by that, but was so
before, as they were the seed of Abraham, and under that with him, Exodus 2.
verse. 24. and 3. verse. 6 7. I have seen the affliction of [my people] verse. 15,
16. And Moses himself entered into the same Sinai Covenant with the people,
Exodus 34. verse. 27. I have made a Covenant [with thee] and with Israel. Not
only with Israel but with him also.

Now it is not imaginable that the Lord would reduce them and Moses himself,
from Covenant of Grace, back to that of Works: Surely the Lord would advance
them highor rather than bring them lower. He is ever one and the same in his
Grace and Promises unto souls; no such unconstancy and changeableness is found
with him.

3. The Sinai Testament typically revealed mercy for sinful men, and therefore
was not a Covenant of Works; For, that being once violated and broken, holds
forth nothing of mercy to the smner, whatever his Repentance be; gives no hope
of Salvation, but denounedth Judgment, Death and utter destruction against
him; Adam having eaten the forbidden Fruit, that says, Genesis 2. 17. Dying thou
shall die.

Whereas the Sinai Covenant includes the Ceremonial Law as well as the Moral,
as is plain, Heb. 9. verse. 1, 2, 3, etc. The first Testament had Ordinances of
Divine Service and a worldly Sanctuary, a Tabernacle, Priests and Sacrifices,
offerings for the errors of the people, etc. Although these services did not of
themselves expiate sin and purge the Conscience, yet they did point out a way
wherein they might have an expiation of and freedom from sin, which a Covenant
of Works gives not the least intimation of.

Yea the Sinai Covenant was ordained by Angels, Gal. 3. verse. 19. in the hands
of Moses a typical Mediator; and this argued a variance between God and Israel,
else no need of any, and there is grace in a Covenant that does admit of any
way for the making up of such differences; there was abundance of Grace wrapped
up in many Types and Ordinances in the Sinai Covenant; yea it was confirmed by
blood and sprinkling, called the blood of the Covenant, Exodus 24. verse. 3, 4,
5. Which typified the blood of Jesus Christ, and therefore it was no Covenant
of Works, for that speaks nothing thereof.

4. There had been an utter impossibility for Israel or any other to have
attained unto Eternal Life and Salvation, if they had been under that at Sinai
as a Covenant of Works: For, they could never have performed the works which
were the condition of it, and so must have been hopeless of the benefit which
was promised thereupon, Gal. 3. verse. 21. If there had been a Law that could
have given life, righteousness had been by the Law. This clearly concludes
that righteousness did not come by the Law, i. e. as performed by us in our own
persons; and also, that the Law could not give Life, no Eternal Life to be
expected by it; and he speaks of the Sinai Law as is clear, verse. 17. and
therefore that could not be a Covenant of Works to Israel or us for Eternal
Life, Romans 8. 3. also proves, the Law could not free from condemnation, in
that it was weak through the flesh, and so no Eternal Life was attainable
thereby.

5. That way which the Lord had established with Israel for Life and Salvation
before the Sinai Covenant, was utterly inconsistent with that of Works, and
therefore that could not be a Covenant of Works, Gal. 3. verse. 18. For if the
inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of Promise. These two ways cannot
stand together; if it be by one of them then it is not by the other; they carry
a contradiction each to other. If Israel had the inheritance by the Law, i. e.
by works performed by themselves, then it could not be by the obedience of
another, of Jesus Christ for them: if it were by their own righteousness of the
Law, then it could not be by the righteousness of Jesus Christ entertained in
the Promise by Faith: one of these ways does necessarily subvert, overthrow,
and destroy the other, so as the same person at the same time cannot have it
both ways.

Now such an opposite way of a Gospel Promise was established with Israel, long
before the Sinai Covenant, Gal. 3. ver. 16, 17. They were the seed of Abraham;
and be concludes that the Sinai Law coming so long after, could not disanul
the Abrahamatical Covenant or Promise (wherein they had interest) which was so
long before it, and consequently it was no Covenant of Works to Israel, for
then it must necessarily have disanulled the foregoing Promise, as that
demonstration, verse. 18. does evidence.

SECT. II.
Prop. 2. THat the Sinai Law was not a mixed Covenant, for Eternal Life to
Israel. It was not partly a Covenant of Works to them, and partly of Grace. For,

1. It is an undoubted obstacle or hindrance in the way of Salvation, to be
seeking it in a Covenant of works, by personal performances; and therefore that
at Sinai could not be so much as in part such a one to Israel. The reason why
Israel obtained not righteousness (and so life) was, because they sought it not
by Faith, i. e. in another, in Jesus Christ [but as it were by the Works of the
Law] Romans 9. verse. 31, 32. He does not say they sought it altogether by their
own Works, but after a sort [as it were] and this obstructed and hindered their
arriving at it. Thus their coming short of Salvation is resolved into the same
cause, Romans 10. verse. 1, 3. They going about to establish their own
righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God. A
seeking Salvation then by our own Works (which are our own righteousness)
keeps off from a submission unto that righteousness which is necessary unto
Eternal Life; and therefore if it were a mixed Covenant, one part of it would
hinder another, as if the Lord in the same dispensation should pull forward and
backward, do and undo, put upon seeking Life, and yet on that which is a let in
the way to it, which were an impeachment to the wisdom of God for any to assert.

2. Legal works are excluded out of Justification and Salvation, in conjunction
with Jesus Christ, and therefore the Sinai Law could not be a mixed Covenant,
Gal. 5. verse. 2, 3. I Paul say unto you, that if you be circumcisied Christ
shall profit you nothing, verse. 4. Christ is become of no effect to you,
whosoever of you are justified (i. e. seek to be justified) by the Law ye are
fallen from Grace (Act. 15. 1, 11. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9.) This implies that they
urged Circumcision or Works of the Law, and Christ too for Justification and
Life; the Argument had been insignificant to them, if they had not expected
profit and advantage by Jesus Christ, and by the Works of the Law too: and the
Apostle concludes one of these to be exclusive of the other; a mixture of our
own Works is a falling from the way of Grace; a taking any of our services in
conjunction with Jesus Christ in that matter, is enough to shut out from all
benefit and advantage by Christ; he shall profit nothing if he alone be not
owned herein.

3. After a violation of a Covenant of Works nothing less than utter ruin and
destruction are threatened therein, Genesis 2. verse. 17. In the day thou eatest
thou shall die. There is nothing Promised by it ever after, whatever services
be performed, nothing but Death thenceforth to be expected from it, and
therefore the Sinai Law could not be a mixed Covenant; in regard Israel is often
accused by the Lord for breaking of it, Jer. 31. verse. 32. Which Covenant they
brake, etc. no good could be reaped from that part which was supposed of Grace,
the death threatened in the other part hinders all good; so that, unless Israel
could have kept it without violation (which they could not) it must have been
altogether unprofitable to them, for as Dr. Bolton says, man was not able to
stand to the lowest terms, to perform the meanest condition.

4. There is such an opposition between our Works and Divine Grace in relation
to Eternal Life, that they are inconsistent each with other, therefore the
Sinai Law could not be a mixed Covenant. There is no medium participationis, or
so as to partake of both; there was an impossibility of having life both ways,
this I cleared before from Gal. 3. verse. 18. which is equally strong here.

It is further proved, Romans 11. verse. 4, 5. It is said to be by Grace, verse. 6.
If by Grace, then it is no more of Works, otherwise Grace is no more Grace; but
if it be of Works, then it is no more of Grace, otherwise Work is no more Work.
Which clearly intimates, that the way of Grace and Works are so mutually
destructive one to the other, that if it be by one it cannot be by the other.
If Israel had been to do any thing for Eternal Life, though never so small, it
would have denied it to be of Grace. Gratia nullo modo gratia nisi om^i modo
grafia, Aug. Grace is no way Grace unless it be every way free, and therefore
seeing Israel was justified and saved as we are, Act. 15. 11. and we are
justified freely by his Grace, Romans 3. 24. and saved by Grace, Ephesians. 2. 8. hence
the Sinai Law could not be a mixed Covenant, partly of Works, and partly of
Grace; the one way being so Diametrically opposite to the other.

SECT. III.
Prop. 3. THat the Sinai Law was not only a Covenant for temporal mercies as
the Land of Canaan and such like, but did in some further way belong to the
Covenant of Grace and bad the great concernment thereof, even our Eternal
Salvation as its principal aim and end.

Temporal blessings were dispensed out (and possibly those only) by virtue of
the Sinai Covenant, upon Isreal's performance of it; but yet as it was to be
performed for them by Jesus Christ, so it respected the great matters of the
Covenant of Grace, even Spirituals and Eternals, as may appear. For,

1. There are Typical representations is it, of Spiritual and Eternal
blessings: There was abundance of the Gospel wrapped up in those legal Types and
shaddows of old.

There were Priests and a High Priest an eminent Type of Jesus Christ, who is
therefore called a High Priest also, Heb. 8. 1. and elsewhere.

O what an advantage was it so long before the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, to
have such a lively Emblem of this his glorious Office, which our everlasting
Salvation had such a necessary dependence upon That as the Levitical
High Priest did stand and appear for the People, in many ways and for many
precious ends that none else could; so they might expect that Jesus Christ
would do the like for them. As the Priests did offer Sacrifice for the errors
of the People, so they might look that the Lord Jesus would offer a better
Sacrifice for them. They might easily guess that the Antitype Jesus Christ
would far excel, outstrip, and go beyond the Types, the substance beyond the
shadow, so Jesus Christ would be far more excellent than any of those figures
of him: What a privilege was it to have some lively resemblance of all this so
long beforehand, Heb. 9. verse. 23, 24. Those things under the Sinai first
Testament are intimated to be patterns of things in the Heavens, and figures of
the true. There was a holiest of all which the High Priest alone went into once
every year not without blood, signifying that the holiest of all was not made
manifest whilst the first Tabernacle was standing, verse. 3, 7, 8. this
intimates that Jesus Christ the great High Priest should enter into that which
was truly the holy of holies, to appear in the presence of God for us, verse.
24. and so that their holiest of all was a Type of Heaven.

A like Type thereof was the Land of Canean, and therefore it bears the very
name that Heaven it self is set out to us by; it is called the rest of the
Lord, Psalm. 95. 11. If they shall enter into my rest, i. e. into the Land of
Canaan, Deuteronomy. 12. 9. This was another Type of the rest in Heaven, Heb. 3. verse.
the last, compared with Heb. 4. verse. 8, 9. Many other instances might be given
wherein the Sinai Covenant represented matters of the Covenant of Grace, even
Spirituals and Eternals to Israel.

2. Some of the same Promises of Spiritual and Eternal blessings which are
found in other federal expressures, are under a conditional form in the Sinai
Covenant, and therefore that appertains some way to the Covenant of Grace,
and not only temperals are respected therein.

In the preparation to it the Lord says to Israel, Exodus 19. verse. 5, 6. If ye
will obey my voice and keep my Covenant, ye shall be a peculiar treasure to me
above all people, and ye shall be to me a Kingdom of Priests and an holy Nation
--

Indeed this cluster of Promises has an [if] hanging upon it, or is under a
condition that obedience be yielded to the Sinai Covenant, and then the Wine in
it may flow out, and all temporal enjoyments which the world afford are nothing
to one drop hereof. It is true, conditio nihil ponit in esse, therefore we must
know, that the Sinai Covenant did hold forth the condition upon which not only
Temporals, but Spirituals and Eternals are vouchsafed, which then was
unperformed, but since is fulfilled by Jesus Christ. Besides, the Apostle
applying it to the Saints in Gospel times, this is evidence enough that the
Sinai Covenant (to which it belonged) had a notable relation to the Covenant of
Grace, 1 Pet. 2. verse. 9. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood,
an holy Nation, a peculiar people -- These are reckoned up among Gospel
privileges, and attainable only by Jesus Christ (Rev. 1. verse. 5, 6.) and
indeed they are glorious advantages; [to be a peculiar treasure] implies, not
only his acceptance into favor above others, his claiming a special relation
to and propriety in them, but his highest estimation of them, they shall have
peculiar preservations, peculiar affections, peculiar influences, and peculiar
consolations [a Kingdom of Priests] i. e. they shall have an eminent separation
to the highest services or employments, and be admitted to nearest approaches
unto God, yea shall partake of Spiritual anointings, the holy unction of the
Divine Spirit for that end, and shall enjoy intimate fellowship and communion
with the Lord himself [an holy Nation,] when others are left in their sin and
pollution, under their profaneness, they shall have the Image of God in a
transparent manner found upon them, appearing in a holy profession; O how far
is this beyond temporals! There are other conditional Promises in the Sinai
Covenant of the Lords dwelling among the Children of Israel, and being their
God, Exodus 29. verse. 45, 46. with Levit. 26. verse. 3, 11, 12. and so
elsewhere, which undoubtedly hold forth privileges of the Covenant of Grace;
but the condition was to be performed by Jesus Christ.

3. The nature of many services in the Sinai Covenant was such as argued its
special respect to the great matters of the Covenant of Grace, and its
intending higher things than merely temporals: there were sin offerings in it,
for the ignorances of the Priests, of the Congregation, of the Rulers, of the
People, Levit. 4. and intimations of atonement and forgiveness of sin. Not that
these offerings did make atonement of themselves, but they pointed out Jesus
Christ by whom we have atonement. The like might be urged from the Scapegoat,
etc.

I may add, that some of those Arguments under the Affirmative part, to prove
its containing the legal condition of the Covenant of Grace, will be equally
strong to evidence that this Sinai Covenant had not temporals as its only end.

SECT. IV.
Prop. 4. THat the Sinai Law is not merely a gradually different administration
of the Covenant of Grace to Israel, from that with us in the New and better
Covenant.

Many suppose that this was only a sederal transaction with Israel, so as that
obedience which is the condition of the Sinai Covenant, (on which all the
blessings of it do depend) is nothing else but the same which is to be yielded
by us in Gospel times, only then it was exacted with dreadful terrors,
thundrings and lightnings, now in a sweeter milder way; but certainly a higher
matter, a perfect obedience is aimed at therein. It is true, Christians are
obliged unto all duty, under the better Covenant; there is a Promise in it of
writing the Divine Law in their hearts for that end. All the difficulty then in
the Sinai dispensation arises not merely from its injoyning doing (all runs
upon doing there, not upon believing) but also from its annexing life thereunto
[this do and Live] and a curse to the contrary. If it had contained all the
Laws that are in it, even all the ceremonials, these indeed would have rendered
it more burdensome than other dispensations, yet it would as manifestly have
belonged to the Covenant of Grace still, as that with Abraham and others under
which were some Sacrifices and other Typical ceremonies. If this doing had not
been for Life, there had been no more difficulty in this Sinai Law than in any
other sederal expressure; its running upon [do and Live] this has caused many
to doubt of the nature of it; and therefore the great matter to be cleared is,
upon what account it stands in this form? and this will evidence, that though
there was an administration of the Covenant of Grace in it to Israel; yet there
was a higher intendment therein, viz. a performance of it by Jesus Christ for
impetration or the procurement of sederal blessings for us; and therefore that
it was not only a gradually different administration to Israel, from the other
New Covenant to us. For,

1. The Sinai Covenant obliged unto such doing as makes up a righteousness
unto Life, Romans 10. verse. 5. For Moses describes the righteousness which is of
the Law that the man which does these things shall live by them. He speaks
undeniably of the Sinai Law, for the Text here alleged, is Levit. 18. 5. and
the doing enjoined the Apostle says, is a description of a righteousness unto
Justification and Life. Neither is it taken here abusively, as urged by the
false Prophets, but he says [Moses] describes the righteousness of the Law
thus -- Therefore not only according to the opinion of the false Prophets, but
according to the intention of Moses, the Sinai Law did hold forth a doing as a
righteousness: this was the tenor of it [do and Live]. The same may be urged
from Gal. 3. verse. 12. And therefore a vastly different obedience (in respect
of its end) was required in the Sinai Covenant, from that which could be
yielded by Israel then, or by Christians now under the New Covenant; For, their
doing was not to work out a righteousness unto their own Justification and Life.

2. The Sinai Covenant obliged unto such doing, as stood in a contradistinction
unto Faith. The Apostle, Romans 10. having told us of the Law doing, by way of
Antithesis or opposition, he adds, verse. 6. But the righteousness which is of
Faith speaks on this wise, etc. Where he plainly makes the doing, which
according to Moses was the righteousness of the Law, and that which is the
righteousness of Faith, membra dividentia, and so they stand upon opposite
terms each to other. Thus Gal. 3. verse. 12. And the Law is not of Faith but the
man that does them shall live in them. Where he speaks of the Sinai Law,
verse. 17. and gives the same proof as before, viz. Levit. 18. verse. 5. and
that doing he denies to be of Faith. It is evident then, that the Sinai Law
obliged to such doing, as was not of Faith, and therefore to an obedience
specifically different (in its use or end) from that which was to be performed
by Israel then, or by Christians now, which flows from Faith. And this with
the former particular, shows the invalidity of what is said by some for the
unfolding the meaning of [Do this and Live] as it stands in the Sinai
Covenant, as will appear especially under the sixth particular in the
Affirmative part.

SECT. V.
Answ. 2. AFfirmatively, the Sinai Covenant, was a Covenant of Works as to be
fulfilled by Jesus Christ, represented under an imperfect administration of the
Covenant of Grace to Israel. Or thus,

The Sinai Law is, the Covenant of Grace as to its legal condition (even for
Eternals) to be performed by Jesus Christ, held forth under a servile, Typical,
conditional administration of it for temporals unto Israel.

It promised its blessings, especially Eternal Life, upon the condition of the
perfect obedience of Jesus Christ; thereby was the procurement of all.

It promised temporal mercies to the Children of Israel upon condition of their
due obedience, thereby was the obtainment of them.

There were many Articles between the Father and the Son, which are not found
in this Sinai dispensation, so that it was not the whole Covenant of Grace, but
referred to it, viz. it is a Covenant for the performance of its legal
condition both in respect of duty and penalty.

The Covenant of Works being broken by us in the first Adam, it was of great
concernment to us, that satisfaction should be given to it, for unless its
righteousness were performed for us, the Promised Life was unattainable; and
unless its penaliy were undergone for us, the threatened Death (Genesis 2. 17.) was
unavoidable. All this condition in Moses time was unfulfilled, and so the Lord
puts Israel, (who belonged to the principal party guilty, viz. mankind,)
upon entering into a solemn Covenant at mount Sinai, therein owning their just
debt, and acknowledging their owing perfect obedience to God, and deserving an
Eternal Curse upon the least failure therein, and promising a full payment of
the whole debt: all that the Lord has spoken, we will do, Exodus 19. verse. 8.
and 20. verse. 19. Exodus 24. verse. 3, 7. Not only some of his words, but all
that the Lord has said, will we do: Yet the Lord intended that not Israel (the
principal debtor) but Jesus Christ the surety should perform for them, the
obedience therein required unto Life; his pay should be accepted, for what
Israel had hereby Covenanted to yield, and through inability was never able to
perform: Yea thus much is manifested in the very dispensation it self, in those
many Types and other services contained in it, they all intimate, that the
performance should be by Jesus Christ for them.

In one and the same Sinai Covenant, the All-wise God exacted a double
obedience, for vastly different ends, viz. a perfect obedience to be performed
by Jesus Christ, as the legal condition of the Covenant of Grace, as the
principal end: and also an obedience to be performed by Israel belonging to the
administration of it, in order to their fruition of temporal enjoyments: under
this latter the former is represented. These are so twisted into one and the
same Law, as in the same breath, the Lord demands both of Israel the
principal debtor, who Covenanteth universal performance; but the Lord had this
intention that Jesus Christ should fulfill the former on their behalf.

I shall endeavor the clearing of this matter under two Propositions.

SECT. VI.
Prop. 1. THat the Sinai Covenant did hold forth the Covenant of Grace as to
its legal condition to be performed by Jesus Christ and so was a Covenant of
Works as to be fulfilled by him. Or,

It conditionally promised its blessings, especially Eternal Life, upon the
perfect obedience of Jesus Christ, then (in Moses time) not fulfilled.

The Sinai Covenant did not intend only an obedience to be performed by Israel,
but also a further and higher Obedience to be yielded by Jesus Christ. Indeed
Israel did undertake in a federal way the yielding thereof, and so was obliged
by that visible dispensation to perfect obedience; they being of the principal
debtors, they came under the obligation to it, by their own act, yet the
intendment was that the performance should be by their Surety Jesus Christ for
them; So as [Do and Live] in that Sinai Covenant, primarily had respect unto
the doing which was only by Jesus Christ for us. This appears these

1. The Sinai Covenant exacteth a perfect obedience which makes up a
righteousness unto Life, and therefore was the legal condition of the Covenant
of Grace to be performed by Jesus Christ alone; for it is impossible that
Israel or any of the Sons of men should perform such a perfect obedience for
themselves, Gal. 3, verse. 21. and so they must miss of Eternal Life, if he did
not perform it for them.

That such a perfect obedience is indispensibly required in the Sinai Covenant
as a condition of Life is evident, Levit. 18. verse. 5. compared with Gal. 3.
verse. 10, 12. it is such as stands upon opposite terms to Faith, and is
impossible for any man to perform, as I have proved, and such as is a
righteousness, Deuteronomy. 6. verse. 25. And it shall be our righteousness, if we
observe to do all these Commandments, before the Lord our God, as he has
commanded us.

Also in Romans 10. verse. 5. he evidently determines that the Sinai Law imposes
that doing which amounts to a righteousness unto Life, and must be a perfect
obedience which man is utterly unable to yield for himself: and therefore
admirably to our present purpose it is added, verse. 4. For Christ is the end of
the Law for righteousness to every one that believes.

This intimates, that the Law has an end to be attained, and that is
righteousness; and that Jesus Christ performs it, he becomes that end of it
to believers; not only accidentally and indirectly as the Law discovers duty
impossible for any man to perform, and a necessity of looking to another for
relief; but directly, Jesus Christ has wrought out and fulfilled that
righteousness which the Law exacted, and so is the end of the Law; For, it is
here opposed unto that righteousness which is of a man's own working out, verse.
3.

We must know, that when Adam was in innocence, the Lord required a perfect
fulfilling of the Law, in order to his preservation in life, and now man is in
a fallen estate, the Lord will abate nothing of it; still without a
righteousness specifically the some, no Eternal Life to be had. (Romans 1. urs.
17. Romans 4. verse. 6. and 5. verse. 18, 21. 2 Cor. 3. 9, etc.) That end of the
Law, viz. righteousness, must still be come up to; only under the Covenant of
Works, man was personally to perform it for himself, but now Jesus Christ is
admitted to work out this perfect righteousness of the Law for him, Romans 5.
verse. 18, 19. By the obedience of one (i. e. of Jesus Chist) many are made
righteous. Hence he is said to be made of God to us wisdom and righteousness, 1
Cor. 1. 30. and we are said to be the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.
verse. 21. It is not the righteousness of a mere man, but of one who is also
God, that we must stand in.

Now the Sinai Covenant is a Platform of the legal righteousness, which was
indispensibly necessary unto Life; there it is deciphered, delineated and
described, more clearly than in any other federal expressurn The Sinai Covenant
excels all other in discovering what that righteousness is, upon which we
enjoy Eternal Life.

The Promissory part of the Covenant of Grace is more fully revealed in other
federal expressures, as that with Abraham, David, and the New Covenant, but the
Mandator and Minatory part of it in order to Life; the duty to be performed and
the Curse to be endured, is most fully set forth in that a^ Mount Sinai. Adam
was obliged to a righteousness in obedience to a Position Command of not eating
of the Tree o^ Knowledge, Genesis 2. verse. 17. as well a^ to Moral Commands:
answerably in the Sinai Law there is a righteousness required of the same kind
standing in obedience to many Positive and ceremonial Commands and this was
fulfilled by Jesus Christ; (...) did take it as his Office to fulfill not only
some, but all righteousness, Mat. 3. 15.

And also the righteousness of the Moral Law, Mat. 5. verse. 17, 18. he came not
to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it; he yielded obedience to the Moral
Commands, yea and satisfied, (Heb. 9. 15.) even for transgressions that were
under the first Testament.

2. The Sinai Covenant denounces a dreadful Curse (which can be undergone by
none but Jesus Christ) upon the least failing of perfect obedience, and
therefore expresses the legal condition of the Covenant of Grace to be
performed by Christ, or is a Covenant of Works as to be fulfilled by him; for
that only threatens a Curse upon the least imperfection in point of obedience.

Now the Sinai Law does that, Gal. 3. verse. 10. For as many as are of the Works
of the Law are under the Curse, for it is written, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law to do
them.

The Law then runs upon such terms, as if a man should perform never so many
acts of obedience, yet if he should not come up to [all] that is written in the
Book of the Law, it curses him. If he should come up to all, yet if he did not
continue therein, it curses him: it exacteth perfect obedience upon pain of a
Curse.

Nothing can more fully express the nature of a Covenant of Works than this;
that with Adam in innocence cannot be one, if this be not so; For, there is no
more in that then, [if thou Eatest thou shall Die], and there is as much here
[if thou do not all thou shall be Cursed]: and yet the Apostle is not
speaking here, of the very Covenant with Adam in innocence, but of one in the
matter of it resembling that, made a long time after, even at Mount Sinai; For,
he says, it is written thus; now it is in Moses Law (long after Adam) that
this was written; viz. Deuteronomy. 27. verse. 26. He speaks of it as belonging to
the Sinai Law, as expressing the renour of that: and he does not mention it
only as the opinion of the false Prophets amongst the Galations, but as the
intention of the Divine Law it self [it is written, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all -- ]. Yea further let it be observed, the scope of the
Apostle is to evidence, the impossibility of attaining Justification by the
Works of the Law, for says he, [as many as are of the Works of the Law are
under the Curse] and why? Because it is impossible that any mere man, should
continue in all that is written in the Law, the best of men will have some
sinful infirmities and imperfections, and the least transgression lays under
a Divine Curse, according to that Law, which must be undergone, either by men
themselves (and that would sink and ruin them for ever) or else by Jesus
Christ, and then the legal condition is performed by him for them.

3. Jesus Christ by coming under, and fulfilling the Sinai Covenant, did work
out Redemption for us, and therefore that did hold forth not only an obedience
to be performed by Israel, but also such as was a legal condition of the
Covenant of Grace to be performed by Jesus Christ: For, surely that whereby we
are redeemed, was not any work of Israel (they did not redeem themselves or us)
but a work of Jesus Christ, answering the demand of the Covenant of Grace which
is for Redemption.

Now Gal. 4. verse. 4, 5. God sent his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law,
to Redeem them that were under the Law -- He speaks of that Law by which they
were held in bondage before the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, verse. 3. which was
that at mount Sinai, verse. 24. and a great design or end of his coming is said
to be [to Redeem them that were under the Law]; how this was accomplished or
brought about is declared, viz. by his being [made under the Law] and therefore
thereby he performed the condition of Redemption.

Indeed, I think, one great end of God in bringing Israel under this Sinai
Covenant, was to make way for Christ his being born or made under the Law, in
order to the fulfilling of it for us. I do not see how (by any visible
dispensation) Jesus Christ could have been born actually under the Law, if this
Sinai Covenant had not been made; For, the Covenant of Works with the first
Adam being violated, it was at an end as to the promising part, it promised
nothing after once it was broken; it remained in force only as to its
threatening part, it menaced Death to all the sinful seed of Adam, but admitted
no other into it who were without sin, either to perform the righteousness of
it, or to answer the penalty; it had nothing to do with an innocent person
after broken, for it was never renewed with man again as before: therefore an
admitting an innocent person (as Jesus Christ was) into it, must be by some
kind of repetition or renewing of it, though with other intendments than at
first, viz. that the guilty persons should not fulfill it for themselves, but
that another, a surety should fulfill it for them.

Some medium or means there must be, whereby this innocent person Jesus Christ
might be taken into it, and come under the very same Law that was broken to
fulfill the righteousness, and satisfy or undergo the penalty, which the Lord
still required without substantial abatement.

Now in infinite wisdom, the Lord contrived this way of the Sinai Covenant,
wherein Israel (who were guilty) by voluntary compact and agreement, obliged
themselves and their Seed to the perfect obedience which the Law required, and
that under pain of the Curse; and Jesus Christ being born of their Seed, and
under the Sinai dispensation or Covenant, was born under the same Law, which
the guilty persons were included in: I see not how that could have been, though
he had been born of the Seed of Adam, without this renewing of it at mount
Sinai.

If he had not been born under the very Law as a Covenant of Works, he should
not have satisfied it, by answering the penalty or fulfilling the righteousness
of it, but had only done and suffered something in lieu and stead thereof, it
would not have been the idem for us; and this shows how exceedingly necessary
the Sinai Covenant was.

It is true, there was an agreement between the Father and the Son from
Eternity about it, the Covenant of Grace was then struck and had a being; but
the Sinai Covenant was a necessary medium or means for the execution thereof.

4. Jesus Christ actually underwent the very Curse of the Sinai Law, so as
thereby he has obtained our freedom from it, and therefore that held forth the
legal condition of the Covenant of Grace, to be performed by him on our behalf:
how else should his undergoing the Sinai Curse, give us immunity from it?

Now it is said, Gal. 3. verse. 13. Christ has Redeemed us from the Curse of
the Law, being made a Curse for us, etc. that the blessings of Abraham might
come on the Gentiles, etc. Here is our privilege, we are sharers in the
blessings of Abraham, we are Redeemed from the Curse of the Law; of the Sinai
Law, for of that he speaks, verse. 10, 17. and in order to our fruition of
this privilege, Christ was made a Curse for us, he actually underwent the very
Sinai Curse, that we might be delivered from it. And the scope of the Apostle
here is, to discover how we attain unto Justification and Eternal Life, it is
by Jesus Christ his Redeeming of us from the Curse of the Law; and therefore
his bearing of it is the condition of our Salvation as to penalty, even as his
active obedience is the condition of it as to righteousness.

And let it be observed, these Galatians were Gentiles, and yet before their
conversion they were under the Curse mentioned in the Sinai Covenant, and
needed to be Redeemed from it by Jesus Christ, as well as Jews, though the
Sinai Covenant was made only with the Jews, the Gentiles were never formally
under it; that expired as a Covenant before the conversion of the Galatians,
Gal. 3. verse. 13. and 14. verse. 21. and 5. verse. 1. Jesus Christ did bear the
Curse, not to prevent these Gentiles coming under it, but to Redeem them from
it.

And therefore in the Sinai dispensation was contained the condition of the
Covenant of Grace, which Gentiles were concerned in, as well as Jews.

5. Many ceremonial Services in the Sinai Covenant, did typically point out the
sufferings of Jesus Christ for us, and therefore the design of that Covenant
was to hold forth the legal condition of the Covenant of Grace.

It may stumble some, that in the Sinai Covenant all seems to be between God
and Israel, and the obedience of it to be required at the hands of Israel, not
of Jesus Christ.

But let them know, that Isreal's obedience enjoined therein, was not only about
Morals, but also about ceremonial services, Levit. 18. 5. and 26. verse. 46. his
Statutes or Institutions, which clearly typified Jesus Christ, and that in his
passive obedience, his shedding of his blood, which was the great requisite to
our Redemption and Salvation, these were as much imposed upon Israel as the
other, and yet Jesus Christ must be principally intended therein, so as Israel
could not have any share with him in making the least satisfaction for sin by
all those Sacrifices, Offerings, and sheddings of Blood; therein Christ was
alone and there was none with him.

Now, if the principal condition of the Covenant of Grace for remission of sin,
be undeniably wrapped up in those ceremonial services of the Sinai Covenant, why
should it seem strange to any, that under the obedience to the Moral Commands
imposed upon Israel, should also lie wrapped up the perfect obedience of Jesus
Christ for our righteousness as the principal aim and intendment thereof?

We are not to think that those legal Sacrifices did expiate sin realiter, but
typice, they were patterns and shaddows of better things, Heb. 9. verse. 9. They
offered both Gifts and Sacrifices that could not make him that did the Service
perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience: those services though imposed by God
himself, did not please him ex opere operato from the work wrought, they did
not sanctify the inward Man, the Conscience of the sinner, but directed to
Jesus Christ, in whom alone they might have remission of sin and
sanctification, Heb. 7. verse. 19. The Law made nothing perfect, Heb. 9. verse.
12, 13, 14.

Israelites were obliged Typically, by their Priests to offer Sacrifices for
sin and make atonement, upon pain of the Curse, and to do many such acts that
did bear some relation to the passive obedience of Jesus Christ, but yet Jesus
Christ alone was the real atonement. It is certain the intendment was not,
that Israel by their own works should attain Eternal Life. And seeing both the
ceremonials and morals, are in the same manner urged upon Israel in the Sinai
Covenant, and seeing also, such an obedience to the Moral Law was
unquestionably performed by Jesus Christ as our righteousness; hence all the
inconveniences that lie against the one for expressing the condition of the
Covenant of Grace, do also lie against the other, where yet it must be
acknowledged.

If any will yet urge, that the Sinai Covenant was between God and Israel, not
between him and Jesus Christ. Let them consider, that in Old Testament times,
things were expressed very darkly, and seemed at the first blush to have
relation only to some lower matters, these were most obvious, when other higher
things were principally intended in them.

Thus, many passages to outward appearance seem to relate only to David or
Solomon (who indeed had their share in them) but yet they were Prophetical or
Typical of Jesus Christ, and under them he was principally intended, as the
interpreting and applying of them to him does frequently evidence, as Psalm. 16.
verse. 10. compared with Act. 2. verse. 31. and 13. verse. 35. Psalm. 69. Psalm. 22.
verse. 18. with Joh. 19. verse. 24. Psalm. 89. verse. 36. with Luke 1. verse. 32,
33. So in like manner in the Sinai Covenant (which was a dispensation full of
darkness noted by the vailing of the face of Moses, 2 Cor. 3. Isreal's obedience
is required for its due and proper end, but yet under that, the perfect
obedience of Jesus Christ is principally intended, for a higher end, viz.
Eternal Life, for it is applied unto Christ, and the fulfilling of the Law and
delivering us from it, is ascribed unto him.

6. The great difficulties about this Sinai Covenant vanish, if we understand
it primarily of the legal condition of the Covenant of Grace to be performed by
Jesus Christ, and any other way they will hardly be removed.

The tenor of it, plainly is [Do and Live, and Cursed is he that does not]
here lies the difficult of it.

Hence, on the one hand, some account that at Sinai, a Covenant of Works to
Israel, and deny it to be a Covenant of Grace or to belong to that, it
requiring perfect obedience and not dispensing with one offense, Gal. 3. verse.
10. There being a Curse annexed to the breaking of it, as a blessing to the
keeping of it, even to doing, verse. 10. The Seed of it being outcasts, Gal. 4.
the latter end.

Now all such Objections melt away, if we understand it of the Covenant of
Grace as to its legal condition, to be fulfilled by our Surely: immediately it
was thus Covenanted by Israel, but terminatively it looked at a performance by
Jesus Christ; that he should be the only doer for Life; and thus a perfect
doing was aimed at in the Sinai Covenant, and thus it was perfectly fulfilled
by Jesus Christ, no offense dispensed with, the Curse fully undergone by him,
and they that crowd into the place of Jesus Christ in it, and would fulfill it
for that end he did, even for Eternal Life, they are the Seed which are the
outcasts.

On the other hand, some assert the Sinai dispensation to be an admistration of
the Covenant of Grace only gradually or accidentally, and in some circumstances
differing from other federal expressures, even from the New Covenant.

Whereas, all the blessings of the New, are promised as precious Fruits and
effects of a pre-supposed accomplishment of the Old by Jesus Christ.

It is easy to discover the invalidity of other interpretations of [Do and
Live] in the Sinai Covenant, which confine the Doing to Israel, and do not
extend it primarily to Jesus Christ. As,

Say some, it is not spoken of the Law abstractly and separately considered,
but of the Law and the Promise jointly, or as including the Promise.

But this does not satisfy, for the Apostle says, the Law is not of Faith,
Gal. 3. verse. 12. and adds, but the man that does them, shall live in them.

Therefore the Law speaks of such a doing for Life, as does not include the
Promise, for then it should be of Faith. Nay plainly it is a doing directly
opposite to believing, in the matter of Justification and Life, Levit. 18.
verse. 5. with Romans 10. verse. 5, 6. Gal. 3. verse. 12. viz. if any men undertake
to be the Doers.

Say others, it is not Do and Live [by Doing] but [in Doing]; Christians live
in obedience, though not by obedience.

But this does not satisfy; For, it is such a doing as makes up a
righteousness unto Life, and is contradistinguished from the righteousness of
Faith, Romans 10. verse. 5, 6. and hence it cannot be meant only of sincere or
Evangelical obedience to be performed by Christians at all times, but vastly
differs therefrom.

Say others, This Do and Live has not reference to the Moral Law only, but to
the Ceremonial also.

Neither does this satisfy, for there is no ground to exclude the Moral Law;
it was such a Law as concluded all under sin, Gal. 3. 22. Besides, the
difficulty is the same whether it be by one or the other. If in [Do and Live] a
ceremonial doing were intended for Israel, that would speak as much for its
being a Covenant of Works as if it were a Moral doing; even that with Adam in
innocence did run upon a Positive Precept concerning Eating or not Eating that
Fruit, Genesis 2. verse. 17.

Neither does the Lord here make a repetition of the Covenant of Works to put
them upon their choice, whether they would be saved by Working or Believing;
For, they were already within the Covenant of Grace, and had the Lord for their
God, Exodus 20. 1. And doubtless the Lord would not leave them to a liberty to
go back from that Grace, much less would he enter into such a solemn Covenant
(as that at Sinai was) with them, for that end to open a door for their
crossing his grand design of free Grace.

Say others, If we look upon the Law separately, so it stands upon opposite
terms, but if you look upon it relatively as it has respect to the Promise, so
those opposite terms have their subservient ends to the Promise and Grace,
convincing of our sin and impotency, etc. The Law considered absolutely in it
self, as Gal. 4. verse. 21, to the end, so it is nothing else but a Covenant of
Works; but considered respectively and rerelatively, as Gal. 3. verse. 17. to
Gal. 4. verse. 21. and so it is not a Covenant of Works.

Now, it is true that the Sinai Covenant was designed for the ends of the
Covenant of Grace, or of the Gospel; for the Apostle putting the Question, Is
the Law against the Promise? Gal. 3. verse. 21. He Answers, God forbid; we
must then so understand the Sinai Law, as in respect of its design and end it
may not be against the Promise, verse. 24. The Law was our Schoolmaster until
Christ, yet it was for a Gospel end, not that we might be justified by the Law,
but that we might be justified by Faith.

But still the difficulty remains, in that, separately and absolutely
considered, it is the Sinai Covenant, and runs upon Do and Live. Yea, it
gendreth to bondage, Gal. 4. verse. 24. Even as it is the Sinai Covenant. It
would not conduce to those ends, the convincing of sin, humbling for it,
exciting to believing, etc. But by its own inability for the getting of Life,
and the avoiding of the Curse, as Arguments that way; it is therefore
presupposed as such a Covenant before its usefulness to these ends. Neither can
we imagine that the great God would trifle with men in entering into such a
solemn Covenant with them on those terms [Do and live] if there must not be
this very doing here intended by some or other, or else no life to be attained:
and it is perfect doing that is called for, as I have proved, which could not
be fulfilled by Israel, they were utterly unable for it; Gal. 3. verse. 21. and
therefore it is a doing by Jesus Christ for them that is there intended.

Say others, The Law is taken largely, for the whole Doctr ine and
Administration of the Sinai Covenant, and so it holds forth life upon
believing in Christ, Romans 10. verse. 4. Gal. 3. verse. 23, 24. and is a Covenant
of faith; or it is taken strictly, as it is an abstracted rule of righteousness
consisting in Precepts, Threatenings, and Promises holding forth life upon an
impossible condition to lapsed man, perfect doing; in this sense Moses gave it
not, nor is it a Covenant of faith but of works.

But this does not satisfy, for, I see no ground for that large acceptance of
the Law. Romans 10. verse. 4. speaks of the Law for righteousness, and so is
taken as strictly as verse. 5. only it is said to be performed by Jesus Christ,
and then by believing souls are interessed in his performance, and Gal. 3.
verse. 12, 23, 24. he speaks of the Law as a Schoolmaster to Christ, which we
are not under. Besides, the Law in that strict sense (wherein this Objection
grants it to be a Covenant of Works) is that in which it was given at Sinai.
Romans 10. verse. 5. [Moses] describes the righteousness of the Law -- he that
does them shall live in them. Therefore the Law was given in that restrained
sense by Moses.

Further, in that large acception it cannot be proved to be clothed with the
nature of a Covenant; whatever in that, is of a foederal nature, or can belong
to it as a Covenan, trunneth upon the terms of that perfect Obedience, in that
strict sense [Do and Live] and so apparently it puts on the Nature even of a
Covenant of Works, though not intended to be performed by Israel for life, but
by Jesus Christ for them.

SECT. VII.
Prop. 2. THat the Sinai Covenant under a typical servile administration of the
Covenant of grace promised temporal mercies to Israel upon the condition of
their Obedience.

Its servile and typical nature is clearly holden forth, Gal. 4. verse. 3. 24.
Heb. 8. verse. 9. and will be more fully manifested elsewhere.

Its Conditional form is obvious, it promises nothing but upon the condition
of obedience, and that not only to be performed by Jesus Christ but also by
Israel, Exodus 19. verse. 5, 6. [If ye] Israel, will obey my voice and keep my
Covenant, etc. Deuteronomy. 4. verse. 13. He declared unto [you] his Covenant, which he
commanded [you] to perform, even ten commandments: [you] i. e. Israel (as v.
1.) is required to yield obedience, or commanded to perform it, and he speaks
of the same Covenant made in Horeb or at Sinai when the Lord spoke to them out
of the midst of the fire, verse. 10, 11, 12. yea Israel is blamed for violating
that Covenant, Jer. 31. verse. 32. Which Covenant they brake, etc. therefore it
was their duty to keep it.

That it promised Temporal mercies to Israel, upon the condition of their
obedience is manifest, Levit. 26. verse. 3, 4, etc. [If] ye walk in my statutes
and keep my commandments and do them, what then? [then will I give you rain in
due season, and the Land shall yield her increase, etc.] these are outward
mercies: verse. 6. I will give you peace in the Land, etc. there is another
temporal mercy.

And not only obedience to the judicial commands, (which respects them as a
Commonwealth) but to all moral and ceremonial precepts is required to these
ends. The Ten Commandments are rehearsed, Deuteronomy. 5. and then Statutes and
Judgments mentioned, and observing all is urged to this end, that they may
live and enjoy the land of Canaan, and length of days therein. V. 31, 32, 33.
Deuteronomy. 6. verse. 1, 2 3, 17, 18, 24. and Deuteronomy. 11. verse. 8. Therefore shall you
keep all the commandments which I command you this day: here a universal
obedience is enjoined, they were to keep not only some, but all the Commands;
and what will follow? Verse. 9. I will give you the rain of your land in his due
season, etc. by all which it appears that Isreal's obedience to the whole
Sinai Covenant, was required in order to their fruition of temporal blessings.

Yea, not only external, viz. that of the outward man, but cordial obedience is
required to this end: Deuteronomy. 11. verse. 13. If ye will hearken diligently to my
commandments which I command you this day [to love the Lord your God, and to
serve him with all your heart, and with all your soul.] Then, verse. 14. I will
give you the rain of your land, etc. send grass, etc. outward mercies. So Deuteronomy.
6. 5. Conscience then was concerned even about these things, and disobedience
to moral precepts (which did bind their Conscience) was given as a reason of
their being excluded from their temporal mercies. Jer. 11. verse. 8, 10, etc.
Jer. 44. verse. 21, 22, 23.

It rests then to be proved, that the Sinai Covenant (as to be performed by
Israel) did belong to the administration of the Covenant of grace, or had grace
in it to them.

It is true, it required of them not only sincere but perfect obedience, even
in order to temporal mercies, it must be to all commands with all the heart as
I have proved; their coming short of that was sinful; for, in that very
Covenant, some Sacrifices were appointed, where sincere obedience was
performed, for sins of infirmity as of ignorance, etc. as well as for others.
Lev. 4. verse. 26, 29, 31, 35. and 5. verse. 10, 13, 16, 18. and alsewhere.

This providing a relief, a remedy, does imply, that Israel would fail, would
sin and stand in need of that forgiveness which in many cases was here
promised; yet in pursuance of these directions (which are punctually given by
the Lord) in offering sacrifices exactly according to appointment they should
be forgiven, that is, so far as temporal judgments threatened should be
averted, and temporal mercies promised should be afforded: these sins should
not be any hindrance in the way of them: thus far it was a real forgiveness,
for if there had been no real expiation by those sacrifices and something
forgiven, how could they have been typical of that forgiveness which Believers
have of their sins, by the true sacrifice Jesus Christ? It was not real
spiritual forgiveness as to the Conscience that was promised there, so the Law
could not make him that did the service perfect as pertaining to the
Conscience, Heb. 9. 9.

And let it be observed, when the Apostle speaks not in relation to
temporals, but to eternals, then he mentions the tenor of the same Sinai Law
to be [Do and live, and cursed is he that continues not in all things.] Gal.
3. verse. 10. Romans 10. verf. 5. We are not to think that the righteousness
whereby we are justified is to be performed by our selves, as if the sacrifice
of Jesus Christ were intended only to expiate and obtain the pardon of our sins
in coming short thereof: No, such a righteousness is exacted unto justification
and eternal life, as is absolutely perfect, has no flaws or sinful
imperfections in it, no forgiveness is needed there, it is such as could not be
performed by any but Jesus Christ alone, verse. 4. Romans 5. latter end: hence if
the Romans and Galatians would so much as attempt the seeking it by any works
of their own performance, the Apostle tells them, the least sin would lay
them under the curse; yea they thereby would frustrate and make void to
themselves the whole undertaking of Jesus Christ, so as they should have no
profit or advantage by him. Gal. 5. verse. 2. 4. The Lord exacted perfect
obedience without any abatement in order to Eternals, it was a strict Covenant
of works there.

But as to Temporals it was otherwise; although these were promised in the
Sinai Covenant upon condition of Isreal's perfect obedience, yet when there was
coming short of it, and so a forfeiting them, yet there was provision made for
the forgiveness of many sins, so as the Lord would not take the forfeiture, or
deal with them upon such strict terms as in the Covenant of Works, for in case
they duly offored sacrifices, they should not lose their temporal mercies: and
thus it was an administration with some grace in it unto Israel. This appears
these ways.

1. The Laws and Ordinances for the Public worship of God among the Children
of Israel were contained in the Sinai Covenant as part of its Condition, and
therefore it did belong to the administration of the Covenant of grace: there
is a description of the Tabernacle which was for the worship of God Exodus 26.
and in Levitieus; many sacrifices and services are required of the Children of
Israel, burnt offerings, trespass offerings, peace offerings, etc. and the
Rules and directions left by the Lord, must be exactly pursued by them, in
their several places at their utmost peril that they die not or be not cut off.
Exodus 28. verse. 35. and 30. verse. 20, 21, 33. Levit. 7. verse. 21, 25, 27. and
15. verse. 31. and 16. verse. 2, 13. and 17. verse. 4, 9. and many others.

The Lord would never so punctually have laid out the way of his worship, if he
had not intended that Israel should find acceptance, in keeping close to him
in those his appointments. The free will offering must be brought to the door
of the Tabernacle, Lev. 1. verse. 3, 4. and it shall be accepted for him, i. e.
for him that brings it, he shall have acceptance with the Lord to some end;
and many of those ceremonial services are said to be [for a sweet savor unto
the Lord] Lev. 4. verse. 31. and 6. verse. 15. and 23. verse. 18. which implies
their acceptance with God in those acts of worship, at least to the affording
promised temporals, and so speak their appertaining to the administration of
the Covenant of grace, for sinners cannot be accepted but in that way of grace
in any service; yea the Lord owned them with eminent tokens of his presence
when they duly acted therein, Lev. 9. verse. 23. The glory of the Lord appeared
unto all the people.

2. Isreal's obedience was not to be that righteousness which was the procuring
cause of those temporal blessings promised in the Sinai Covenant, and therefore
that was an administration of grace: the procurement even of those was by the
righteousness of another, by the perfect obedience of Jesus Christ, and
therefore of grace.

In the Covenant of Works, man might have expected blessings for his own
obedience, but it is otherwise in the Sinai dispensation. Deuteronomy 9. verse. 4, 5,
6. Speak not thou in thy heart, saying, for my righteousness the Lord has
brought me in to possess this Land, but for the wickedness of these Nations the
Lord does drive them out from before thee, and again, verse. 5. Not for thy
righteousness or the uprightness of thy heart, etc. and a third time, verse. 6.
The sruition of Canaan was a great mercy promised in the Sinai Covenant, and
with what vehemence does the Lord deny that it was afforded for the
righteousness of Israel; three times over he does inculcate this, and therefore
they must needs have it in a way of grace and favor.

3. There is an intimation in the Sinai Covenant of a provision made against
the sins and transgressions of persons under it, and therefore it was an
administration of grace: for a Covenant of Works reveals no relief or succor
in case of sinning; nothing but death and a divine course is there to be
expected. Genesis 2. 17.

But it was otherwise in the Sinai Covenant, the Children of Israel came
exceedingly short of the obedience required therein, yet behold divine
indulgence even in the bowels of that very Covenant, there is pardoning mercy
represented in the ceremonial Law: thus in case the Priest, the Rulers and the
whole Congregation or any of the common people became guilty of sins through
ignorance, against any of the Commandments of the Lord, there was a sin
offering provided, Levit. 4. throughout, and pursuing the directions therein,
it is said, they shall be forgiven, verse. 20, 26, 31, 35. so in case of sinning
wittingly, there were trespass offerings, Levit. 6. Also there were days of
atonement and many washings; all which intimated that the Lord would not deal
with them in a way of strict justice according to the rigor of a Covenant of
Works, and therefore that was to Israel a ministration of grace.

Indeed Israel had stood under an impossibility of reaping any temporal
blessings by the Sinai Covenant, if they had been held strictly by the Lord to
the condition of perfect obedience, without any way to be freed from their sin;
for, Israel could never have answered the condition of it, and so would have
missed and come short of all the good of it, and consequently this Covenant for
temporal blessings would have been vain and useless; which were an impeachment
to the wisdom of God the maker of it, to assert; there must therefore be grace
in it.

4. Considerations of mercy are made great inducements to the obedience of
Israel in the Sinai Covenant, and therefore it was an administration of grace
to them.

A Covenant of Works runs upon perfect obedience as the condition of it,
urges duty in a way of Justice, as in that with Adam in innocence, the
inforcement to obedience was primarily the danger of failing thereof, viz.
dying thou shall die, Genesis 2. verse. 17.

Or on the other hand the hope of a reward of debt; Adam perfectly obeying, the
Lord in justice would be obliged to afford what he had promised.

Whereas in the Sinai Covenant, a grand motive and provocation to Isreal's
obedience was mercy: in the very preface to the Decalogue, Exodus 20. verse. 2. I
am the Lord thy God; that notes Covenant interest in him, a choice mercy to a
sinful people; [which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house
of bondage] there was mercy in their redemption, and this is mentioned to urge
their observation of the following Commandments, verse. 3, 4, etc. so that
covenant mercy and redeeming mercy are grand arguments unto Isreal's obedience
in this Sinai Covenant; and therefore there was grace in that ministration.
Likewise Deuteronomy. 27. ver. 9, 10. Thou are become the people of the Lord thy God,
here is their mercy, what improvement to be made of it? Ver. 10. Thou shall
therefore obey the voice of the Lord thy God, and do his Commandments and his
Statutes which I command thee this day. Likewise Levit. 19. many Verses, Levit.
20. ver. 7, 8.

5. No violation or breaking of the Covenant on Isreal's part, deprived them of
those temporal mercies promised, unless it were against the substantials of the
Sinai Covenant; and therefore it was an administration of Grace to Israel: for
else every, even the least sin would have cut them short of all the benefit
thereof.

Now where the Lord speaks of breaking the Covenant, it is in some principal
matters thereof, as Levit. 26. verse. 1, 2, etc. You shall make you no Idols,
nor graven Images, etc. despising his Statutes and breakng his Covenant are in
connection, ver. 15. also Jesh. 23. ver. 16. When you have transgressed the
Covenant of the Lord your God, which he commanded you [and have gone and served
other Gods, and bowed your selves to them]. Every sin was some breaking of that
Covenant, but upon the account of the Covenant with Abraham they were only such
transgressions, as serving other Gods and Worshipping them, that provoked the
Lord to anger against them, so as to destroy them, see Jer. 11. ver. 10. Deuteronomy.
8. ver. 19, 20.

If we view the instances or examples of the Lords plucking away those temporal
mercies from them, the Lord did not take advantage to do it upon every sin of
infirmity, but upon grosser failures against the substance of the Covenant,
Deuteronomy. 4. ver. 3. The Lord destroyed them that followed Baal-Peor; there is
judgment upon transgressors, and in opposition to them, ver. 4. But ye that
did cleave unto the Lord your God, are alive every one of you this day, ver. 5,
6. Those that were in the firmest adherence unto God, yet were not sinless; but
the Lord does intimate that he would not take advantage upon leffer sins of
infirmity, to deal in such a way of severity with them, but upon greater
miscarriages; they that walked in a believing, careful, conscientious
obedience, were spared by the Lord as here he tells us: so their going into
the Babylonish Captivity and other scatterings out of the Land of Canaan, and
deprivation of their temporal mercies, were upon their crossing some main ends
of that Covenant, and not otherwise, which argues that there was Grace
attending it unto Israel.

6. After a violation of the Smai Covenant by Israel, yet it admitted of
Repentance, and promised a return of mercy, and therefore was an administration
of Grace to them: Had it been a Covenant of Works to them, then no benefit
could have been expected by it after a violation, whatever Repentance had
succeeded.

But it was otherwise here, Deuteronomy. 30. ver. 1, 2. when under scatterings among
the Nations, then if ver. 2. thou shall return to the Lord thy God, and obey
his voice with all thy heart, etc. Ver. 3. Then the Lord thy God will turn thy
Captivity, and have compassion upon thee. Ver. 5. And will bring thee into the
Land which thy Fathers possessed, and thou shall possoss it, and he will do
thee good, and multiply thee above thy Fathers.

When by their sin they had forfeited their temporal mercies, yet on the
condition of their Repentance, they might repossess and reinjoy them; and
therefore to Israel it was an administration of the Covenant of Grace.

Object. But did not the Lord dispense out Spiritual and Etennal mercies of the
Covenant of Grace, by the Sinai Covenant, as well as temporals? if so, why is
it mentioned as if it were only an administration of it to Israel for temporals?

Answ. 1. Many persons under the Sinai Covenant did obtain Spiritual and
Eternal mercies I freely grant; But whether these were dispensed out by that,
is questioned. Moses and other Israelites were enriched with Faith, Heb. 11.
and were saved through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, even as we, Act. 15.
ver. 11. But they might enjoy those blessings by virtue of the Covenant with
Abraham, and not by that at mount Sinai.

2. Under those temporal things in the Sinai Covenant, many Spiritual
privileges were typically represented: The dealings of the Lord with Israel in
that dispensation, are said to be as with an heir whilst in infancy, Gal. 4.
ver. 1, 3. Now, Children in their minority, are led into apprehensions of and
affections to things by the Pictures of them, and are not so capable of right
conceptions thereof other ways, and therefore a great design of the Lord in
this Sinai Covenant was, to Picture and point out many spiritual blessings unto
Israel under these shaddows (Heb. 8. ver. 5.) for the drawing out that Faith
which they had by the Covenant with Abraham to be exercised about them; so as
their Faith might be raised or helped by that at Sinai, though the blessings
themselves were not dispensed out thereby, but by that with Abraham.

3. The Sinai Covenant must be considered either as holding forth the condition
of the Covenant of Grace, and so it promised nothing but upon a perfect
obedience, and this not to be performed by Israel, but by Jesus Christ; and
thus as it could not give life by any obedience of Israel, Gal. 3. ver. 21.
Romans 8. ver. 2, 3. so neither did Jesus Christ dispense it out thereby, for he
was the Mediator of the New and better Covenant and his ministration did lie
there.

Or, we must consider it as it was an administration of the Covenant of Grace
(though but a servile one) and the obedience thereof to be performed by Israel;
and thus [it was added] Gal. 3. ver. 19. it was Additional or an Appendix to
that with Abraham, containing many Precepts, Rules, and Ordinances of Divine
appointment, as Sacrifices and other ceremonial services relating to the
Tabernacle, Priests, and External Worship of God, not before given forth, and
so the persons who were found in a due performance of these, with an eye upon
and relation to the ancient Promise, had many Spiritual blessings dispensed out
to them; but they might be only externally represented by the Siuai Covenant,
and dispensed out by their looking from thence to that with Abraham, which it
was annexed to, and to be taken in conjunction with.

I cannot think that the Lord would require their exercising themselves about
so many acts of Worship without intending that they should enjoy his Spiritual
presence, and have acceptance in a due observance thereof.

Yea the temporal mercies themselves promised and afforded to them under the
Sinai dispensation, were fruits of the Covenant of Grace; no outward mercies
can be enjoyed by sinful men in a federal way, but there must needs be Grace
therein: And thus the matter comes to the same reckoning, in many respects,
whether those spiritual privileges were derived to them through the one
Covenant or the other. I am far from thinking that the Israelites enjoyed only
temporal mercies; doubtless they had Spiritual also, though possibly by another
Covenant. But for the clearing of that Sinai dispensation, and preventing some
ill effects (even in practice) of misunderstanding the nature thereof, I shall
add,

4. It is probable that Spiritual and Eternal blessings were not dispensed out
to Israel, by the Old Sinai Covenant, but only were typically represented
therein. I take the main purport and design of it to be, under that servile
administration of the Covenant of Grace, to point out the higher and more
Spiritual matters thereof; and to show, that as upon literal Isreal's performing
the obedience which was required of them as a condition thereof, they did enjoy
temporal blessings therein promised to them; so upon the performance of the
main condition thereof by Jesus Christ, even perfect obedience, the true
Spiritual Israel should enjoy the Spiritual blessings promised unto them. So
that, Temporal blessings were afforded by the Sinai Covenant; but Spiritual
blessings were not dispensed out thereby. This (with submission to better
Judgments) seems to me to be so upon these (among other) grounds.

1. No life was attainable by Isreal's performing of the Sinai Covenant, and
therefore other Spiritual blessings were not dispensed out to them thereby,
Gal. 3. ver. 21. For if there had been a Law given which could have given life,
verily righteousness should have been by the Law. The great blessings then of
the Covenant of Grace, viz. life, could not be had by their obedience to the
Sinai Law, of which he there speaks, Ver. 17. And therefore neither could
other blessings be had thereby, which had their dependence upon and issued from
that. As Christians are not now, so Israelites were not then to do for Life.
That Moses and Aaron must not enter into the Promised Canaan, but go up to the
Mount and die, may be to signify, that the Sinai Covenant would not give an
entrance into the heavenly Canaan; Moses obtained that, not through the works
of the Law, but in a way of Faith.

2. Spiritual blessings were not dispensed out upon the condition of Isreal's
obedience to the Sinai Covenant, for they often violated that Covenant, Jer.
31. ver. 32. Which Covenant they brake -- And therefore their Spiritual mercies
had been forseited and lost, if they had been dispensed out then upon the
condition of their keeping that Covenant, seeing they come so much short of it;
whereas there was no falling from special Grace in that day, any more than now.
When they had made a forfeiture of their temporal mercies therein Promised, by
breaking of it, they were forced to make another plea, Exodus 34. ver. 13.
Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel thy Servants, to whom thou swarest by thine
own self, etc. When the anger of the Lord waxed hot against Israel, ver. 11.
for committing Idolatry, by making the Calf; Moses does not plead that made at
Sinai, but flees from that to the Covenant with Abraham for their relief.

Indeed there was an external representation of Spirituals in the Sinai
Covenant: As they making atonement, and offering Sacrifices for diverse sins,
it is said they should be forgiven them, Levit. 4. ver. 26, 27, 28, 29, 31.
Levit. 5. ver. 10, 13, 16, 18. Number. 15. ver. 28. But no real atonement was
made thereby, for the Law made nothing perfect (Heb. 7. ver. 19. Heb. 9. ver.
9.) No real forgiveness was afforded by these acts of obedience, unless so far
as that those sins should not hinder their attaining the temporal mercies
promised in that Covenant, or that the temporal Curses of it should not be
inflicted; these did but typically represent the Spiritual forgiveness, which
they by another Covenant (even that with Abraham) should attain unto.

Thus their entering into Covenant with the Lord, is said to be, that he might
establish them that day for a people to himself, and that he might be unto them
a God, Deuteronomy. 29. ver. 12, 13. They were thereby owned or confirmed in a federal
relation unto God, but so as upon their miscarriages he could say to them
Loammi, Hos. 1. ver. 9. Ye are not my people, and I will not be your God; and
therefore it was externally only, that they were his, and he theirs by that
Covenant.

3. The ceremonials which seemed most to intimate the dispencing out of
Spiritual blessings, were only typical representations thereof: these were but
shaddows of heavenly things, Heb. 8. ver. 5. The forgiveness of sin in the
Sinai Covenant was such as not to have temporal punishments inflicted, and thus
it was but a shadow of the real and true forgiveness, which in opposition
thereunto is restrained unto Jesus Christ, Heb. 9, and 10. Chapters. Their
acceptance was unto some end, viz. so as to be privileged with their temporal
mercies, and it was but a shadow of Spiritual acceptance. Their long Life in
Canaan a shadow of Eternal Life in Heaven: Spiritual blessings seem not to be
dispensed out, but only to be signified by these.

4. Those that look for Spiritual blessings only by the Sinai Covenant, and
their personal performance of it, are excluded from being sharers in them, Gal.
4. ver. 30. Cast out the Bondwoman and her Son, for the Son of the Bondwoman
shall not be Heir with the Son of the Freewoman. The Bondwoman is expressly
said to be the mount Sinai Covenant or Testament, this is Hagar, ver. 24. and
that as a Covenant must be cast out, and also those that are the seed of it,
begotten to a profession only in a legal way, by legal duties or terrors;
those that stand upon an Old Covenant bottom, and put themselves under that,
shall not inherit, shall not be Heirs of the everlasting Inheritance; it is
another, an opposite seed, begotten by a Gospel Promise, which shall enjoy
that; and therefore that Sinai Covenant was not intended, that Souls should
have Spiritual and everlasting blessings dispensed out by yielding obedience
unto that, for then its seed should inherit as well as the other; but that by
the sight of the impossibility of their keeping it, they might be provoked to
become the Children of the Freewoman which are born by Promise, by a distinct
Covenant. Neither does he speak in these things of the Law only taken
abusively, in the sense urged and intended by the false Prophets, but really in
its self, as it was established by God at mount Sinai; For, as an Argument to
draw them off from the errors of the false Prophets, he says, ver. 21, 22.
Tell me, ye that desire to be under the Law, do ye not hear the Law, for it is
written, that Abraham had two Sons, one by the Bondwoman, the other by a
Freewoman, etc. And further, that these were an ancient Allegory, foreshewing
two Covenants or Testaments, the one gendering to bondage, whose seed must be
cast out, as giving no inheritance; and therefore he concludes that the Lord
himself in giving that Covenant at mount Sinai, never intended that it should
be for communicating of the eternal inheritance unto the Sons of men; he
tells them that they did hear the Law, and this was the language thereof,
that those who are born by it, or are the seed of it, are not of the Free
Promise, and must be cast out, they are excluded even by the Law it self from
the eternal inheritance; therefore it was always an abuse of it, to expect the
dispencing out of Spiritual blessings thereby: the Lord ordained another way,
viz. the Free Promise for that end.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Sinai Covenant, whether ceased or continuing?

IT is Questioned by some, Whether the mount Sinai Covenant be still
continuing, so as Christians are laid under the obligation of it in Gospel
times? I may premise, that it is called [the Law] Mal. 4. 4. Romans 7. and [a
Covenant or Testament] Exodus 34. 23. Deuteronomy. 4. 13. Jer. 31. 31, 32. Gal. 4. 24.

Answ. The moral Law which was contained in the Sinai dispensation is still
obliging; but consider it as a Covenant or Testament, and so it is not
continuing.

Cessavit lex, ut norma est operum naturae ex formula foederis operum; manet
vero iis qui in Christo sunt, ut est regula operum gratiae, says Rolloc. de
Vocat. Cap. 2.

1. The moral Law as an external Rule of obedience, is universally and
perpetually obligatory to the Sons of men.

Some circumstances, as the coming out of Egypt, and prolonging the days in
the Land, i. e. in Canaan, Exodus 20. 2, 12. were peculiar to the Children of
Israel: and it is union with Jesus and an internal vital principle, that all
acceptable obedience no weth from, Joh. 15. 5. but the substance of the ten
Commandments is still obliging. For,

1. The moral Law is a perfect rule of righteousness and conformity to the Will
of God, and therefore is perpetual. All good is commanded and all evil
forbidden there, 1 John 3. ver. 4. [Sin] is the transgression of the Law. The
very description of sin is fetched thence; that if we be bound not to sin, then
we are to keep the Law, Mat. 4. 4. Remember the Law of Moses; and this
refers to the times of the Gospel, when the Sun of righteousness arises
with healing in his wings.

Indeed it is a repetition of the Law of Nature, which is engraven upon the
hearts of those which are most barbarous, Romans 2. 14, 15. The work of the Law
is upon their hearts, and therefore so long as the Nature continues, the
obligation to the Law of it must also be continuing, Romans 7. 13. The Law is
holy and the Commandment holy just and good; whatsoever therefore is opposite
to it, must be unholy, unjust, and evil. The same moral Law that was delivered
at mount Sinai was (before and since) as it referred to the Free Promise, a
rule of inward holiness, Sanctification and obedience, and had Spiritual
enjoyments attending of it: as it had relation to the Sinai Covenant and its
end; so it ushered in temporal mercies unto Israel.

2. The Lord has declared his approbation of conformity to the moral Law, and
with great severity witnessed against disconformity to it in all Ages: Long
before the Sinai ministration, Abel is commended for his Faith, owning and
Worshipping the true God, and Cain for the contrary disapproved, Genesis 4. 4.
Heb. 11. There was a reverend use of the Name of God, Genesis 14. 19, 20. The
Sabbath Instituted, Genesis 2. 3. Superiors honored, Genesis 9. 23. and 22. 7.
Murder witnessed against in Cain; Adultery and Unchastity punished in raining
Fire and Brimstone on Sodom and Gomorrah; Abraham reproved for bearing false
witness, saying of Sarah, she is my Sister; Laban accused for defranding and
coveting, Genesis 31. 7, 8, 9. So that though the wording of it in the formality
of ten Commandments was at mount Sinai, yet immoralities were ever sinful. Yea
in the times of the New Testament Jesus Christ declares his observing the
ways, actings, and inclinations of men; and some are blamed, others commended
even in his Churches, Rev. 2. and 3. the least swarvings from the rule are
sinful.

3. The Natural tendency of the moral Law is to promote love; Jesus Christ
himself is giving the Epitome and sum of the Law, and reduces all the ten to
two great Commandments, Mat. 22. ver. 36. to 41. viz. Love to God and the
Neighbor.

Doubtless men are obliged at all times to let the Streams of their Love run
out toward God; to Love him with all their Heart, with all their Soul, with
all their Mind, and to Love their Neighbors as themselves: and upon these two
hang all the Law and Prophets, ver. 40. Yea the fulfilling of these is the
keeping of the Law.

4. The moral Law is explained and obedience to it earnestly pressed in the
times of the Gospel: to free it from the false glosses of the Jewish Rabbis,
Jesus Christ himself gives an explication of it, Mat. 5. declaring that not
only grosser acts are to be avoided, but whatsoever has a tendency that way,
unchaste looks, unclean thoughts are sinful, ver. 28. Christians are under an
obligation, not only to sincere, but to perfect obedience unto the royal Law of
liberty, Jam. 1. 15. so as the least failing of it it sinful, though it does
not bring believers under condemnation. Yielding Worship to God is duty still,
Mat. 4. 10. as the way to withstand Satan in his temptations, and the duties of
the second Table are plainly urged, Ephesians. 6. 3. Romans 13. 8. Love is undeniably a
duty in Gospel times, and the fulfilling of the Law is wrapped up in it, ver. 9.
Thou shall not commit Adultery, thou shall not Steal, thou shall not bear false
Witness, thou shall not Covet. These Commandments then are in force still, and
the Romans (who were Christians of the Gentiles) were under the obligation of
them, and therefore they are perpetual. Yea, Jesus Christ owneth them as his,
Joh. 15. 10. If ye keep [my Commandments] ye shall abide in my Love, etc.
keeping these by believing and loving one another, is the way to the
manifestations of his Love: this of Love he calls a new Commandment, Joh. 13.
34. Indeed this puts sweetness into it, Christians are under the Law, but it
is to Christ, 1 Cor. 9. 21. to their Mediator, who satisfied for their
breaking of it: they take it not from the hand of Moses, in its terror and
rigor, but from the hand of Jesus Christ, who has Redeemed from the curse of
it.

The first Tables which were the work of God were quickly broken, Exodus 32. 16,
19. but the second Tables that were to be hewed by Moses (a typical Mediator)
they were more durable, of longer continuance, and then the Lord proclaims
his pardoning Mercy, Exodus 34. 1, 4, 6. The moral Law in the hand of Jesus
Christ the true Mediator, is abiding, and pardoning Grace and mercy experienced
under it. Of old the Ark of the Covenant had only the moral Law put into it,
not the ceremonial (Deuteronomy. 10. 2.) to note, this was to be abolished, but the
Moral to abide with the Covenant still; on which account it is promised of the
New Covenant, Heb. 8. 10. I will write my Law in their Hearts: all which argue
the perpetuity thereof.

2. The Mount Sinai dispensation as a Covenant, is not continuing.

It is generally granted that it is abrogated in respect of some circumstances,
fruits and effects of it; as servile imbondaging fear and such like: but I
apprehend, that none are under the obligation of it as a Covenant or Testament
in Gospel times.

This may appear these ways,

1. The succession of the New Covenant in the room and stead of the Old, argue
that it is not continuing: for one must be removed when another takes its
place, Deuteronomy. 2. verse. 12, 21, 22. and 25. verse. 6. and 19. verse. 1.

Now, the new Covenant succeeds the old: the Hebrews were apt to be doting
upon that made at Mount Sinai; to take them off from it, he tells them of a
better come in the place and stead of it, Heb. 8. verse. 8, 9. and observe the
contradistinction is, between Covenant and Covenant, not barely between
circumstances and accidents of the same Covenant, and verse. 13. in that he
says, a new Covenant, he has made the first old, now that which decays and
waxes old is ready to vanish away. It is the Covenant that is old, and the
same is said to vanish away; and therefore it must needs be, that the Sinai
Covenant should cease and come to an end, as Calvin says, because the second
is of another quality. It is true that the New Covenant in the substance of it
or as a Covenant, is found in that with Abraham, though not under the notion of
New, for that is given it in opposition to the Old; but it could not be said to
succeed, until the Old expired.

2. The Ceremonial and Judicial Laws are generally granted to be abrogated, and
so the old Covenant as to them (which make a considerable part of it) is not
continuing: indeed the judicials as to their moral equity are deemed binding,
but not as they are a part of that Covenant, for then they must oblige exactly
as they stand in it: these had a peculiar reference to the Jews.

They are called judgments, Exodus 21. verse. 1. determining of rights between
man and man, and of punishments upon transgressions with reference to the
interest of that people in the land of Canaan, says Dr. O. on Hebrews page
275. and hence they cannot formally oblige others who have nothing in that Land.

As to Ceremonials the Apostle to evidence that they are abolished speaks
thus, Heb. 7. verse. 11, 12. If therefore perfection were by the Levitical
Priesthood, etc. where he asserteth perfection, (viz. as to remission of sin,
justification, etc. Heb. 10. verse. 16, 17, 18.) was not obtained by the
Levitical Priesthood, or legal sacrifices and performances, but only by Jesus
Christ who was typified therein; this he proves thus [for under it the people
received the Law] which imports that when they arrive at evangelical
perfection they are free from the Law, do not receive that, viz. as a
testament, as verse. 22. and he speaks of the moral Law as distinguished from
the Ceremonial: and if perfection were by that, says he, verse. 11. what
further need was there that another Priest should arise after the order of
Melchisedeck, and not be called after the order of Aaron? The necessity of a
new order of Priesthood argues, the imperfection of the old, and thence he
infers the abrogation of the Ceremonial Law. Verse. 12. For the Priesthood
being changed there is made of necessity a change of the Law: there is such a
connection between the Priesthood and the Law, as they stand and fall together;
if one be abolished (as the Aaronical Levitical Priesthood is) of necessity the
Ceremonial Law (by which it stood) must be abrogated also, and he calls it a
carnal commandment, verse. 16. and verse. 18. for there is verily (not only an
altering and changing, but) a disanulling of the Commandment going before, for
the weakness and unprofitableness thereof.

The same might also be cleared from Heb. 9. where he speaks of Ceremonial
usages, and they were till the time of reformation, they were the patterns and
figures of heavenly things: the substance being come, the shadow must vanish,
the antitype Jesus Christ being come the type must cease: and O what a glorious
privilege is it, that we have freedom from that load of burdensome ceremonies
required in the Law. There remains only the moral Law, that any can suppose
these promises and threatenings now to be annexed to, and as to that,

3. Jesus Christ has perfectly satisfied and fulfilled the mount Sinai Moral
Law, as it was a Covenant for eternal life, and therefore as such it is not
still continuing: it was impossible for us perfectly to obey the Law, by reason
of the infirmity of our flesh, Romans 8. verse. 3, 4. but whatever is demanded
there,, in any of its Precepts, as the condition of life, Jesus Christ has
performed it for us, Matthew. 3. verse. 15. and 5. verse. 17. and so has brought
in a perfect righteousness to be imputed to us, Romans 10. verse. 4. 2 Corin. 5.
verse. 21. yet we are not exempted from all obedience to the Moral Law, by his
obeying perfectly in our stead, for his righteousness was for one end, viz. to
merit eternal life for us, (Romans 5. verse. 21.) our obedience is for other ends,
as to testify our conformity and subjection unto God and so to glorify him,
etc. as his sufferings were for one end, viz. to make satisfaction for our sin,
our afflictions and sufferings are for other ends, and not for that.

Also he satisfied all the threatenings of the Sinai Covenant, these all did
meet upon him, Gal. 3. verse. 13. He was made a curse for us: so that these
faederal Precepts and Curses expire by satisfaction, as the Judicial and
Ceremonial Laws did by abrogation.

There remain then only the Promises of it; and upon his satisfying the other
he alters these, and turns them from Conditional into absolute, as we see
in the New Covenant. Hence, whereas in the Sinai Covenant, that cluster of
promises, concerning their being a peculiar treasure, a Kingdom of Priests, a
holy Nation, etc. Exodus 19. verse. 5, 6. did run upon the condition of
obedience, [If ye will obey -- ] Jesus Christ having done and suffered all
which that Covenant could exact, now he has given all forth in an absolute
form to believers, and expresses all as already accomplished unto them. 1 Pet.
2. verse. 9. But ye are a chosen generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation,
etc. a peculiar people, etc. it is not now upon an [If] as in the Sinai
Covenant; but the promise is fulfilled to them, and in Christ they are such as
it was conditionally promised of old they should be. Thus, Rev. 1. verse. 5, 6.
has made us Kings and Priests unto Go^ and his Father, but how? he has loved
us and washed us from our sins in his own blood: it is upon his satisfying the
Sinai Covenant by his sufferings unto death, as it was the condition of life:
its not continuing as an administration of the Covenant of grace, will be
cleared in the following particulars.

4. The Lord is not rigorously exacting duty from Believers now, upon the legal
terms of the Sinai Covenant [cursed is he that continues not in all] therefore
the Sinai Covenant is not continuing: for such Coaction would inevitably follow
a being under the obligation of it, in regard that is the very nature and tenor
of it, Gal. 3. verse. 10. Deuteronomy. 27. verse. 26. and all the Promises run upon
those terms. If these curses be not in force against them, then it is ceased as
a Covenant; if they be in force, then they are under the same rigorous exaction
of duty still as Israel was of old, for then the inforcement to it is the same.

For, we must know, that the Sinai Covenant, was not made with Pagans,
Infidels, or professedly unbelievers; the great God would not engage himself by
Covenant unto such; but it was made with the Children of Israel, with those who
were the people of God already, by the Covenant with Abraham, before they came
at Mount Sinai; hence the preface runs thus, Exodus 20. verse. 2. I am the
Lord thy God, etc. not he became their God then, but was their God before:
therefore if it be continuing to any as a Covenant, it must be to the people of
God (for it was made with none else) and they must (if any) be under the terror
of it.

Whereas it is evident, that Christians are to yield obedience upon more
evangelical accounts; the Gospel urges upon them, duties of holiness, the
avoiding apostasy and profaness by sweetness and love; not by legal terror,
but by their freedom from it: Heb. 12. verse. 14, to the end. As if he had said,
ye are not come to a legal Mount Sinai dispensation enforcing duty by terror,
thundrings and lightnings; but to Mount Sion, to a dispensation of Gospel
Grace, verse. 25. See that ye refuse not him that speaks, etc. now the terror
is upon abusing grace.

So Romans 7. verse. 6. Their being delivered from the Law in its compelling and
condemning power, is made the means to raise up unto new and spiritual
obedience. Not so much from the wrath as the mercy of God, Romans 12. verse. 1.
from the constraints of love, 2 Cor. 5. verse. 14. from an eying the promises of
God, 2 Cor. 7 verse. 1. Having these promises, let us cleanse our selves from
all pollution of flesh and spirit.

And here I may hint one considerable difference between the Covenant of Works,
and that Covenant at Mount Sinai; the former extended to all mankind, and was
made with all in Adam their common head: but the later was made only with some,
with Israel and Judah the people of God.

5. If the Sinai Covenant were still continuing, then the people of God within
it, might still be laying claim to the blessings of it, by virtue of the same
promises in the very form as they are found therein; for, if the form be
altered, then the claim is by another Covenant whereby such an alteration is
made.

Whereas temporal mercies are promised in a new dialect, more absoluely, Jer.
32. verse. 36. to the end, and 31. verse. 27, 28, 31, 32. they are not afforded
unto Christians now upon the same conditional terms, that they were to Israel
under the Sinai Covenant. By way of Analogy, those ancient promises may
intimate to Christians now, that walking circumspectly is the way to be
supplied with earthly blessings that are good for them: but there is no such
special Contract or distinct Covenant (as that made at Mount Sinai) whereby
they may claim so large a portion of temporal enjoyments, as Israel could by
that; rather we find, that those which were most obedient in the first times of
the Gospel, were put upon an expectation of little in temporals (in comparison)
and were to look for a plenty of troubles, losses, perseoutions, etc. Mat. 6.
verse. 31, 32, 33. Mat. 10. verse. 22. Act. 20. verse. 23. 2 Timothy 3. verse. 12.
Act. 14. verse. 22. Luke 9. verse. 23.

See Mr. Bisco in his book entitled the glorious Mystery of Gods Mercy; who
endeavors to prove, that temporal blessings were made over and dispensed to
the Jews under the Law in a peculiar manner, and as never to any People or
Nation but they.

6. Various expressions holding forth our freedom from the Law do conclude that
it is not continuing as a Covenant; as,

Romans 6. verse. 14. For sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are [not
under the Law] but under grace: Those then that are under the Law in the sense
here intended, cannot be under grace, and are under the dominion of sin; and
therefore the direction of the Law for duties of holiness is not denied here;
but they are not under the Law as a Sinai Covenant, exacting full and perfect
obedience upon pain of an eternal curse; not under it as a condition of life
unperformed, for that were inconsistent with grace, and would infer that sin is
still exercising Lordship over them.

Romans 7. verse. 4. Ye are become dead to the Law by the body of Christ, that ye
might be married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, etc. He
speaks, verse. 1, 2, 3. of the Law as an imperious Husband (which is by
Covenant) and thus they are dead to the Law, not under the power of it; by the
body of Christ, that is, by his bearing the curse of the Law on his body; and
therefore they are dead to it as a Covenant, for so he had it on his body.

Gal. 4. verse. 21, 24, 30. The bond woman Hagar is expressly said, to be the
Covenant or Testament from Mount Sinai; and she and her Son, all that are of a
legal birth, must be cast out, verse. 30. that Covenant therefore from Mount
Sinai, was but temporary, is cast out in Gospel times, is not continuing.

In some respect that at Mount Sinai may be called (as it is by learned
Cameron) a subservient Covenant, viz. in respect of Israel, as it discovered
sin, and provoked to seek after a Mediator (Exodus 20. verse. 19.) in promising
temporal mercies upon obedience, representing spirituals and eternals; but
subserviency does not fitly express its soederal nature, as it promised life
upon doing or perfect obedience, threatening death and a dreadful curse upon
falling short of it. I do not call it, the Covenant of Grace, nor the Covenant
of Works; but to express the formality and essential nature of it, I call it,
the Covenant of Grace as to its legal condition, or a Covenant concerning the
legal condition of the Covenant of Grace, which is held forth under an
administration of it for temporals unto Israel.

O let Christians yield utmost obedience to the royal Law of liberty, but let
all be done in the strength of Christ, and in the way of the New Covenant, make
use of a promise of grace, in setting about all duty.

And beware of seeking to keep up the Old Covenant, which really is not
continuing; we seek to keep it up

When we live in the spirit of the Old Covenant, acting by its inforcements,
terror, wrath, curse, rather than by the allurements of grace in the free
promise.

Also, when there is a grounding acceptance with God upon our own duties and
performances: the Old Covenant did run upon [do and live] intending a doing for
eternal life which was peculiar to Jesus Christ; but our nature is prone to run
our own doing into the place of his; as if we could gain acceptance unto life
by our own services or do something that way. We are apt to build expectations
of mercy upon our own doing, in stead of building them upon Jesus Christ.
Evangelical obedience may be a secondary evidence, but when we dwell more upon
any thing done by us, yea or upon any inherent grace, any thing within our
selves, than upon the free grace of God in Christ, we then make something of
our own a ground of acceptance and not an evidence only; when something within
raises our hope of acceptance, more than the grace of God in the New Covenant.
The promise and Oath of God (which are both without us) are the two immutable
things of Divine appointment, for the raising strong consolation, Heb. 6. verse.
18. All grace within, should be improved for carrying out our souls to God and
Jesus Christ therein.

Also, when there is not an improvement of our freedom from the Law, toward
making out the more after Jesus, and the free grace of God in him, then we seek
to keep up the Old Covenant still. Romans 6. verse. 14. Being under the Law and
under grace are opposites there; the less grace exercises Lordship over the
soul, the more sin domineereth and gets the upper hand of it, and the more
it is under the Law. The greater freedom from the Law as a Covenant, the more
grace is used toward freedom from the dominion of sin.

Also, when there is a looking for what is promised only in a conditional way;
then there is a keeping up the Old Covenant, which did run upon Conditional
Promises: when souls have acted in duty, and now are ready to count the Lord
engaged to give out or afford mercy upon their performing thereof: when they
look for nothing but as a fruit of some condition performed by themselves (Isa.
58. verse. 3.) and their hopes of mercy rise or fall by that rule of their own
performance, rather than by the free grace and faithfulness of God, then there
is a holding up the Old Covenant.

CHAP. IX.
Of the good that was in the Sinai Covenant.

I Shall now show what excellency there was in the Mount Sinai or worse
Covenant.

The more good there was in this, the greater excellency will appear in the
new, which is a better Covenant.

There was excellency in the matter of it; such Precepts were contained in it,
as had a stamp of righteousness upon them, Deuteronomy. 4. verse. 8. such as did
advance Israel above other Nations: Neh. 9. verse. 13. Psalm. 147. verse. 19, 20.

It was excellent, in the manner of its manifestation; there was a dreadfully
glorious appearance of the Majesty of God in giving of it forth, Exodus 19.
verse. 16, 17, 18. he revealed himself in an unwonted way, in thundering,
lightning, thick darkness, etc. it was a stupendous dispensation to humble that
rebellious people; the mountain was smoking, the thick cloud covering it, the
trumpet sounding, all indications of his Divine Majesty, that they might
discern him from dumb idols, verse. 22. ye have seen that I have talked with you
from heaven: as if the Lord himself had spoken in an immediate way. It was not
altogether immediate, the ministry of Angels was used in it, Act. 7. verse. 38.
but it was by the authority of God himself, with more than ordinary
demonstrations and tokens of his Almighty power, such as struck them into a
mavelous consternation, and admiration that they were alive. Exodus 20. verse.
19. Deuteronomy. 5. verse. 26. Who is there of all flesh that has heard the voice of
the living God speaking out of the midst of the fire (as we have) and yet
lived? O what grace is it, that the Lord is not dealing with us in such a
dismaying terrifying dispensation, but in a milder and more familiar way in the
dispensation of the Gospel!

It was excellent in the special uses and ends it served to: the two principal
I have opened already, which must here be remembered, viz. for eternals upon the
obedience of Christ, for temporals upon the obedience of Israel. I shall now
hint some other uses and ends of the Sinai Covenant.

1. To be a provocation unto Israel to look unto a Mediator, the Lord Jesus, to
fulfill and accomplish it for them: both the terrible publication and the
experienced impossibility of keeping it themselves were excitations this way,
Exodus 20. 19. They said unto Moses, speak thou with us and we will hear, but
let not God speak with us left we die. Here they asked a typical Mediator, and
therein a real one Jesus Christ, for so the Lord expounds their Petition and
promises to grant it, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a
Prophet, etc. that thou desiredst at Horeb, etc. and that Prophet is said to be
Jesus Christ, Acts 3. 20, 22. They were provoked by the terror of the Sinai
Law, to ask a Mediator that he would pass into the burning Mount, to receive
it for them, and give it forth as a Law of Love, and this request they are
highly commended for, Deuteronomy. 5. 27, 28. so that the use of that fiery
dispensation was not, that Life should be attained thereby, but to impell to
look out unto another Covenant for that.

2. To constrain to Duty, and restrain from Sin, Exodus 19. 9. Lo I come to thee
in a thick Cloud, but to what end? That the people may hear when I speak with
thee, and believe thee for ever. It was then to startle them out of their
unbelief, and win credit to his Word. And under their affrightment, Moses for
encouragement, says, Exodus 20. 20. Fear not, for God is come to prove you,
that his fear may be before your faces, that ye sin not. It was then one end of
the Sinai Covenant to deter them from sin.

3. To be a Directory to Israel for the Worship of God: The Church had been
Domestical or in Families, but the Posterity of Abraham swelling into a great
number, the Lord would have them become Congregational; they must coalesce and
become federally united together, the whole to constitute one Ecclesiastical
body, by this Mosaic dispensation, which had Ordinances of Worship suitable to
that new state of the Church now introduced. The Lord gave to Moses a pattern
of the Tabernacle (which was for public Worship) with a strict injunction,
Heb. 8. 5. See that thou make all things according to the pattern showed thee
in the Mount, Heb. 9. 1. Exodus 25. 40. And in that and the following Chapters
of the Book, there are rules about the Ark, Table, Candlestick, and the
institution of Ministers used in the service of the Tabernacle; as Aaron and
his Sons in the Priests Office; here is direction for the consecration of the
Ark and Tabernatle, the Altar of incense and many Ordinances and Institutions,
which hold forth another use of the Sinai dispensation.

4. To be a Platform, model or rule for Government Ecclesiastical and Civil:
Israel received righteous Laws, Statutes, and Judgments from God himself:
therein they were differenced from and excelled the Nations; that they were
more immediately under the Government of God as their only Lawgiver: And not
only an Eternal Curse, but many Ecclesiastical and Civil penalties, and
censures are threatened upon breaking of those Divine Laws, Exodus 22. ver. 1, 4,
20. Levit. 20. Numb. 5. and 19. Deuteronomy. 13. and 25. with many others. This then
was one use of it to be an instrument for the Government of the Children of
Israel.

5 Another end of it was, to give a typical representation of many glorious
mysterious appertaining to the Covenant of Grace: these matters were not empty
insignificant rites, but by Divine appointment served as shaddows, types, and
patterns of heavenly things, Heb. 8. 5, 6. and 9. 23. Even their temporal
mercies were typical representations of Spiritual and heavenly blessings. The
Land of Canaan figured out the heavenly rest. The Levitical or Aaronical
Priests were eminent Types of our great High Priest the Lord Jesus, Heb. 7. The
Tabernacle a Type of his humane Nature; Whence he is said to be a greater and
more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands, Heb. 9. 11. and 8. ver. 2. It
might also figure out the true Church, Rev. 21. 3. The Ark, the furniture for
the most holy place, which none but the High Priest might enter into, (Heb. 9.
ver. 3, 4, 7.) properly refers to Jesus Christ, who is the great repository
in whom the Divine Law is treasured up for Believers; He is their glory and
direction unto eternal rest: many other Types there were of him. I might also
note that Moses was below with the people, for their encouragement against fear
at the promulgation of the Law, and making and confirming the Covenant, but was
called up higher toward the top of the Mount, for receiving the Tables of the
Covenant, and the pattern of the Tabernacle, Exodus 19 ver. 24, 25. and 20. ver.
1, 20. and 24. ver. 12. 18. all which may typifie, that Jesus Christ stands
with us for our encouragement in receiving the fiery Law, and upon more
immediate converses with God, gives forth the frame of his solemn Worship
These were the ends of the Sinai Covenant

CHAP. X.
Of the Differences between the Old and the New Covenant, and the excellency of
the latter above the former.

IT may be inquired, How is the New Covenant (wherein the ministration of Jesus
Christ does lie) a better Covenant than the Old, which was made at Mount Sinai?

I would premise, that in Heb. 8. and also Jer. 31. ver. 31, 32. the opposition
is not between the Covenant of Works as with the first Adam and the New, but
between the Old (made when Israel came out of Egypt at Sinai) and the New
Covenant: These are they which are compared, and therefore the Differences
between these either in their matter or form, must hold forth the excellency
and betterness of the New Covenant above the Old.

1. The New Covenant presupposes obedience unto life to be performed already
by Jesus Christ, and so is better than the Old, which required an after
performance of it: The very tenor of the Sinai Covenant was [Do this and Live]
Levit. 18. 5. Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Romans 10. 5. Here Israel was engaged in a federal
way to perform the righteousness required in the unspotted Law; the very doing
is enjoined which our Eternal Life has dependence upon, even perfect doing,
Gal. 3. 12. Indeed Israel engaged, yet they were to perform this by their
Surety Jesus Christ.

But all was then undone, unfulfilled, unperformed, Jesus Christ not being then
manifested, and hence the Law had then a commanding force, might exact that
obedience at the hand of Israel, who Covenanted there that it should be yielded
in time to come.

But the New Covenant takes it for granted, that all this doing for Life is
over, already past, and not to come, Jesus Christ being actually exhibited;
that as the Old Covenant seemed to be made up of Precepts or Commandments, so
the New is made up of Promises, consists of nothing else, Heb. 8. ver. 8, to
the end, giving a declaration that all is fulfilled, there remains nothing to
be done, either by Principal or Surety for that end, viz. Life: The Lord is so
fully satisfied, as in the New he gives a general acquittance and
acknowledges that he has no more to demand, all is turned into Promise [I
will and ye shall]. Jesus Christ is said to be the Mediator of the New
Testament, ver. 6. that is, actually so; to intimate that in this short term
[Mediatour] we have now in accomplishment the sum of all the doing required in
the Old Covenant, and way is made for our receiving the Promise, Heb. 9. 15.
Within the seventy weeks the Messiah came, Dan. 9. 24. To make reconciliation
and [bring in everlasting righteousness]; before righteousness was commanded,
viz. in the Sinai Covenant, but then it was introduced. By one offering he has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. Nothing remains to
be done for the procurement of these Eternal blessings.

Hence in opposition to that Sinai Law which ran upon those terms [Do and Live]
under the dispensation of the New, we hear so often of [Believe and be saved,
and he which believes has everlasting Life] Mark 16. 16. Joh. 3. 16, 36. Not
that [believing] now, takes the place of [doing] in the Old Covenant; For,
then it must be our righteousness unto Justification, Gal. 3. 12. Romans 10. 5.
whereas that which justifies is called, the righteousness of Faith, ver. 6.
and Phil. 3. 9. and therefore Faith is distinct from that righteousness it
self, is not the least Atome of it: therefore not our believing, but the
obedience of Jesus Christ, is that which comes in the room and stead of that
doing for Life intended in the Law, Romans 5. 19. He is the Lord our
righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. 1 Cor. 1. 30. But to note, that it lies wholly out
of our selves, that it is not by any of our performances, but in another, even
Jesus Christ, it is said to be by Faith, i. e. as a means of application.
Believe that the work is not now to do, Jesus Christ has done all, and says
he, Joh. 8. 24. If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your Sins. Thus
the Apostle, speaking not merely of the false opinion of the Jews concerning
the meritoriousness of their good works, or their external services, being
perfect obedience to the Law unto Life; I say, he not insisting upon these
errors, but having mentioned the very righteousness of the Law, Romans 10. 5. in
opposition to that, he says, ver. 6, 9, 10. If thou shall confess with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus and [shalt believe] in thy heart, that God has raised him
from the dead, thou shall be Saved. It is then a believing in him as already
come, and having all righteousness subjected in him, yea as dead and risen,
that is called for. When they were doting upon works of the Law as performed by
themselves, to take them off from this, he tells them that all this legal
doing for Life must be found in Christ alone: and as it follows [for with the
heart man believes unto righteousness] that is, as a means unto righteousness.
It is not his own working that will be his righteousness, nor his says it
self, only that is a means for the applying that righteousness which is
subjected in Christ alone.

So that the Apostles aim is not, to call them off from a legal doing by
natural power and ability, and instead thereof to put them upon Evangelical
believing and doing as the condition, giving right to Life; but his design is,
to put them upon looking wholly out of themselves and all their own doing,
whether by nature or grace, unto Jesus Christ alone for righteousness unto
Life. If a man should set about any Gospel service, upon a legal ground, he
would be culpable as the Judaizing Professou^s were. It is such a doing as
gives a little unto Life (by performing the condition of it) that is rejected
in the Epistles to the Romans and Galatians as dangerous. Evangelical services
are required on other accounts, and to be performed to testify conformity to
the Will of God, and these may evidence Life in the way to it; but Faith it
self (though necessary, yet) does receive a title from Jesus Christ, does not
give one, Joh. 1. 12. That Axiom [he that believes shall be Saved] is not
expressive of the tenor of the New Covenant; we claim Salvation not in the
right of any act of ours, not upon the Rent of Faith (as men hold Tenements by
the payment of a Penny, a Rose or such like) no such thing here; all is paid to
the utmost Farthing by our Surety, and we hold and claim, upon the obedience of
Jesus Christ alone, Romans 5. 18, 19, 21.

2. The New Covenant represents the Lord as dealing with his people
universally in a way of Promise, and so is better than the Old, which
represents him, as treating them in a way of threatening.

The New consists all of Promises, Heb. 8. ver. 8, etc. as if the heart of
God were so full of Love, and running over therewith, that he could express
nothing else but what he would be to, and do for his people. The Father having
received full satisfaction to all demands in the Old Covenant, by the mediation
of his Son; now he makes it his business to give the fullest assurance by a
constellation of Promises in the New, that he will fulfill to a tittle,
whatsoever on his part rests for performance. Believers are wholly freed from
the Curse, there is no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.
1. Heb. 12. 18. They are under a ministration of righteousness, 2 Cor. 3. ver.
9.

But, the Old Covenant represented God as a consuming fire, denouncing Curses
and threatenings against the Children of Israel, who were his own people (for
with them was the Sinai Covenant made, and not with unbelievers of the
Gentiles:) there were indeed some Promises sparingly scattered up and down in
it, but they run conditionally and Israel failed of coming up to the condition,
that if they had not been privileged with the Covenant with Abraham, to run
unto for relief, what might they think would become of them? By Divine
appointment there were some to stand upon mount Ebal to Curse, as well as
others upon mount Gerazim to bless, Deuteronomy. 27. 13, etc. There are about twelve
curses, which they were enjoined to declare their assent unto [all the people
shall say Amen] yea the last was a general one, ver. 26. If they continued not
in all things they were liable to it, Gal. 3. 10. which shows that although a
temporal Curse was not excluded, yet an Eternal was also some way intended, on
which account it is called a ministration of condemnation, 2 Cor. 3. 7.

It was otherwise with them in reference to that Curse, than it is with
Christians under the New. Israel by that voluntary act, the Old Covenant,
passed Sentence upon themselves: yea, the Curse of the Law was not then
actually undergone by Jesus Christ, it was not then satisfied, and so might be
presented before them as their obligation or bond uncancelled to their great
affrightment. But Jesus Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, Gal.
3. 13. Now all is discharged for us, and so the New is a better Covenant.

3. The New Covenant consists of absolute Promises, and therefore is better
than the Old Sinai Covenant, which did run upon conditional Promises, yea had
works as its condition.

In the times of the Old Testament, the price of our Redemption was not paid by
Jesus Christ, and therefore Life was then held forth upon the condition of
obedience, the Lord said [Do and Live] Lev. 18. 5. Rom 10. 5. Gal. 3. 12. Yea,
as that which under the New, seems to be conditionally mentioned in one
place, is absolutely promised in another; so on the contrary, what seems to
some, to be absolutely propounded in the Old, in one part of it, yet is
conditionally promised in another, Exodus 29. 45, 46. I will dwell among the
Children of Israel, and be their God. Indeed this is not properly absolute, but
(as the foregoing Verses show) upon what Aaron (a Type of Jesus Christ) should
do; however the very same is clogged with a condition, Levit. 26. 3, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15.

The promise of circumcising their heart and the heart of their Seed to love
the Lord, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. runs upon condition [If] thou shall hearken unto the
voice of the Lord thy God and keep his Commandments, etc. ver. 9.

But the New Covenant consists altogether of absolute Promises, Heb. 8. ver.
10, 11, 12, 13. [I will -- and ye shall].

When the condition of any Covenant is performed, it becomes as absolute, as
if there had never been any annexed to it.

Now Jesus Christ is mentioned as our great High Priest and Mediator, and that
as having finished the work of Satisfaction, ver. 1, 2, 6. and the condition
contained in the Old, being exactly and completely fulfilled by him, it
naturally or necessarily must turn into an absolute form as in the New, because
upon his performance, nothing more is to be demanded of him, but all must
certainly be accomplished unto us.

The Apostle in the Text, is purposely putting a difference between these; and
seeing the Old Covenant was unquestionably conditional, and the New here in
opposition to it or distinction from it, is as undoubtedly absolute, must it
not needs be concluded, that herein stands much of the excellency of the New
above the Old?

It was Prophesied of Jesus Christ, Dan. 9. ver. 27. He shall confirm the
Covenant with many for one week. A great end of his coming and death was, the
confirmation of the New Covenant, on the behalf of the many which he stood for,
so as now it is turned into a Testament, as the word (...) (which generally it
is expressed by) does evidence, Gal. 3. 15, 16, 17. Though it be but a man's
Testament, yet if it be confirmed, no man disanulleth or adds thereto. The
Free Promise was confirmed by Oath before, and by way of Testimony since, but
especially confirmed by the death of Jesus Christ, by his performing the
condition of it, and therefore it can admit of no addition or alteration, Heb.
9. 16, 17. For where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be, the death
of the testator, for a Testament is of force after men are dead, etc. It
bears the name of a Testament as in relation to his death, so in such a
proper sense as it has the Laws of a Testament attending it, on which account
he mentions [a necessity] of the testators death, and its being in force
thereupon. Indeed a man may put some conditions into his last Will; I do not
argue thus, it is a Testament and therefore absolute, but therefore
unalterable, and so being delivered in an absolute form [I will, and ye shall]
hence it must abide in it even in its accomplishment: and whereas some argue
for conditions from the nature of a Covenant, against that it is asserted to be
a last Will or Testament, which may bequeath Legacies without any condition.

There is a vast difference between the way of Jesus Christ his acting in the
Work of his mediation before and since his Incarnation, and the latter is much
more glorious than the former. Before, he might plead, Father, thou have
promised me upon my obedience hereafter to be performed, that those Souls which
I have undertaken for, should enjoy such blessings; there was a mutual trust
between them, and so he might plead it in point of faithfulness: but now he
has actually performed the condition of the Covenant, and may plead it in
point of Justice. Christ being actually exhibited as a propitiation, upon that,
God is said, Romans 3. 25, 26. to declare at this time his righteousness, etc. in
opposition to the time of the Old Testament, he says, [at this time] that is,
at the time of the New Testament, wherein the Blood of Jesus Christ is truly
shed, now God declares his righteousness in the justifying him that believes
in Jesus: it is an act of Grace to those who attain the remission of Sin, but
an act of righteousness to Jesus Christ: he may plead, Father, I have made
satisfaction to the full, for the sin of these Souls, now declare thy
righteousness in pardoning of them: it is that which I have purchased for them,
I have finished the Work which thou gave me to do (Joh. 17. 4.) I have paid
the full price of their Redemption, now let them have what I have procured for
them: thus he appears in Heaven in our nature, not as a mere Intercessor but
as an Advocate, 1 John 2. 1. to plead that in Law, in right we are to be
discharged; and this puts a great excellency upon the New Covenant, that it
is in it self, and to Jesus Christ thus absolute.

And note, if some privileges of the Covenant were dispensed out properly in a
conditional way, (as suppose Justification were afforded upon Faith as a
condition, or temporal mercies upon obedience) yet this would be far from
proving any thing to be the condition of the Promise, or of the Covenant it
self. Indeed even Faith is a particular blessing of it, and therefore cannot be
the condition of the whole Covenant, for what shall be the condition of Faith?
And there is no such special Covenant now extant, as the Old was, for temporal
mercies; they are indefinitely promised, and Sovereign Grace is the determining
rule of dispencing out these to the Saints when they are wanted, for time and
measure as it is most for the glory of God and their good, Matthew. 6. 32, 33.
Nothing performed by us then is conditio foederis, the condition of the
Covenant it self, Jesus Christ has performed all required that way.

But whether any thing be conditio foederatorum comes now to be considered.

Object. Is the New Covenant absolute to us or conditional? Are there not
conditional promises therein to us, as there were in the Old unto Israel? Can
we expect any mercy but upon our performing some condition that it is promised
to?

Answ. 1. If condition be taken improperly, for that which is only a connex
action, or, medium fruitionis, a necessary duty, way or means in order to the
enjoyment of promised mercies; in this sense I acknowledge there are some
promises belonging to the New Covenant which are conditional, and thus are many
Scriptures to be taken which are urged this way. That this might not be a mere
strife of words, I could wish men would state the Question thus, Whether some
Evangelical duties be required of, and graces wrought by Jesus Christ in, all
the persons that are actually interested in the New Covenant? I should Answer
yea; For, in the very Covenant it self, it is promised that he will write his
Laws in their hearts, Heb. 8. 10. and that implies Faith, Repentance, and
every gracious frame; and those that have the Lord for their God are his
people. If the accusation be, that there is a want of interest in Jesus Christ,
they need not plead that they have fulfilled the condition of the Covenant, but
that the Covenant it self in some promise of it (which uses to be distinct from
its condition) has its accomplishment upon them therein.

And those that are altogether without those precious Graces, are strangers to
the Covenant, Ephesians. 2. 12. they cannot lay claim to the blessings of it. It is
our duty earnestly to be seeking after what is promised, and one blessing may
be sought as a means to another; as, the Spirit as a means to Faith, and Faith
as a means to obedience, Gal. 5. 6. Believing is a great Duty in connection with
and a means of Salvation, he that believes shall be saved, Mark. 16. 16. Joh.
3. 36. Ephesians. 2. 8. 1 Pet. 1. 5, 9. There is an order in giving sorth these
blessings to us, and that by Divine appointment, so as the neglecting to seek
them therein, is highly displeasing unto God. This is our privilege that
Divine promises are so conjoined and twisted together, for the encouragement of
Souls in seeking after them; that if one be taken, many more go along with it;
like many links in a Chain that are closed into each other. The means and the
end must not be severed.

Where there is such a connection of Duties, Graces, and Blessings, the matters
may be sometimes expressed in a conditinal form, with an [If] as Romans 10. 9.
[If] thou shall confess with thy mouth be Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy
heart -- thou shall be saved. Such ^fs, note the verity of such propositions in
their connection; they affirm this or that to be a certain truth, as that he
which believes shall undoubtedly be saved, yet that Grace is not properly the
condition of Salvation; For, even believing is absolutely promised, so as
nothing shall intervene to hinder it, Isa. 53. 10, 11. Heb. 8. 10. In that
improper sense, some Scriptures seem to speak of conditions, viz. they intimate
a connection between Covenant blessings; some are conjoined as means and end,
yet the promises are really absolute for their performance.

There is a vast difference between the way of the Lord in the dispensation of
Covenant blessings, and the tenor of the Covenant.

Or, between the New Covenant it self, and the means which the Lord uses for
its execution and accomplishment.

The Covenant it self is an absolute grant, not only to Jesus Christ, but in
him to the house of Israel and Judah, Heb. 8. Yet what the Lord has absolutely
promised, and is determined and resolved upon to vouchsafe to them, may be
conditionally propounded as a quickening means unto Souls seeking a
participation of it.

As, it was absolutely determined, yea and declared by the Lord, that those
very persons which were in the Ship should be preserved, Act. 27. 22. There
shall not be a loss of any man's Life, and ver. 25. I believe God, that it shall
be even as it was told me.

Yet as a means to their preservation he speaks to them conditionally, ver.
31. Except these abide in the Ship ye cannot be saved: So although the
Salvation of all the Elect, and also the causing them to believe is absolutely
intended; yet as a means that he may urge the duty upon Souls with greater
vehemence and earnestness, the Lord may speak in a conditional way [if ye
believe ye shall be saved] when it is certain they shall believe.

Answ. 2. There is no such condition of the New Covenant to us, as there was in
the Old to Israel: for the Apostle is comparing them together, and in
opposition to the Old he gives the New altogether in absolute promises and
that to Israel, Heb. 8. and showing that the New is not according to the Old,
he discovers wherein the difference lay, ver. 9. Because they continued not
in my Covenant, and I regarded them not, says the Lord, and Jer. 31. 32. which
Covenant they brake, etc.

This argues that the condition of the Old was such as the performance of it
did give them assurance of the temporal mercies promised and a right to them,
and such as failed in, left them at uncertainties whether they should enjoy
them or not, so as it was not only in it self and its own nature uncertain, but
even as to the event, I regarded them not, says the Lord.

If their performing the condition had been as absolutely promised, as the
blessings of the New Covenant are, then Israel would have continued in it
(which they did not) and could not have forfeited what was promised thereupon,
as diverse times they did and were excluded out of Canaan upon that account.
Jurists say [a condition] is, a rate, manner or Law annexed to men's acts,
staying or suspending the same and making them uncertain, whether they shall
take effect or no. Cowell out of West. part 1. Symb. 2. sect. 156. And thus
condition is opposed to absolute.

That there is no such condition in the New Covenant to be performed by us:
giving right and title to the blessings of it, and leaving at uncertainties and
liability to missing of them, as there was in the Old to be fulfilled by
Israel, may appear,

1. If there be any, it must either be an antecedent or a subsequent condition;
but neither: L. Coke upon Littleton says of one precedent, Conditio adimpleri
debet priusquam sequatur effectus. There can be no such antecedent condition by
the performance of which we get and gain entrance or admittance into Covenant,
for till we be in it, no act put forth by us, can find any acceptance with
God, Heb. 11. 6. Without Faith it is impossible to please God. And our being in
Covenant is in order of nature (though not of time) before Faith, because it is
a privilege or benefit of the Covenant, a part of the New heart, a fruit of
the Spirit, and so the Spirit (which is the worker of it and another blessing
of the Covenant) is given first in order before it. Jesus Christ is the first
saving gift, Romans 8. 32. and with him he freely gives all things. Men ought to
be in the use of means, but it is the act of God that gives admission into the
Covenant, Ezekiel. 16. 8. I entered into Covenant with thee, says the Lord God,
and thou becamest mine. Immediately before they were polluted in their blood,
Ver. 6. In an utter incapacity for acting in any pleasing way, so as to get
into Covenant.

Neither is there any subsequent condition to be fulfilled by us; the use of
that is, for the continuation of a right, and upon failing thereof all is
forfeited, as in the case of Adam.

Whereas there is no act of ours whereby our right unto Covenant blessings is
continued to us, upon failing whereof they may be forfeited. Our right and the
ground of our claim is upon a higher account than any act of our own; it is
even the purchase of Jesus Christ; and they are the sure mercies of David, Isa.
55. 3. Sure to all the Seed, Romans 4. 16. And when they are become believers,
Eternal Life is absolutely promised, Joh. 3. 16, 36. 1 John 5. 10, 11, 12. and
it is a contradiction to say, that it is absolutely, and yet but conditionally
promised to them.

2. The Lord has given assurance that there shall never be an utter violation
of the New Covenant, and therefore it has no such condition as was annexed to
the Old; For, the Lord declares that they had broken his Covenant, Jer. 11.
ver. 3, 4, 10. Jer. 31. ver. 32. Littleton speaking of an Estate upon condition
in deed by Feoffment, says, it is called Estate upon condition, for that the
Estate of the Feoffee is defeasible if the condition be not performed. Ten.
lib. 3. Cap. 4.

But the New Covenant is secured from such a violation, it cannot be disanulled
so as the persons interested in it should be deprived of the great blessings
promised therein, Jer. 32. 40. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them;
but may there not be such a condition of it as they may come short of all its
blessings? No, [I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put
my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me]. If there were any
danger of forfeiting and losing these; it must be either on Gods part, by his
leaving of them, or on their part, by their departing from him; and here the
Lord has undertaken to secure against both these, and so the matter is out of
Question; it was not thus in the Old Covenant.

Indeed what the Lord has absolutely promised, yet he has appointed means in
order to the attaining of it, internal as Faith, and external as Ordinances;
and commands utmost attendance upon him ordinarily in the use thereof; this is
necessary as a duty, and sin arises upon the neglect of it. Thus the Lord is
unalterably determined to vouchsafe a frame of obedience, Ezekiel. 36. 25, to 30.
Yet obedience is to be performed by us, we are to be the Agents and we may sin
about the means in the way to the enjoyment of such mercy, as is laid up in
absolute promises. Faith is to be exercised in these (else what use are they
of?) and we may be faulty in not attending to it.

3. If there be any such condition of the New Covenant, it were most like to be
precious Faith: but that is not.

A condition properly taken, is influential into right; if performed it gives
right to the benefit promised; if not performed there is no right, and
therefore is a cause; it gives jus ad rem, which a man may have, and yet be
forced after to Sue for possession. If it be only in a Mode or accident, it is
thus; as if a great Estate be granted upon paying a white Lilly, if a person
brings a yellow Lilly and not a white, he has no right, all is null and
void: upon such a tickle point are they, who stand upon such conditions for
Eternal mercies.

Now Faith gives no right, Joh. 1. 12. To as many as received him, gave he
power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name. Jesus
Christ is offered in the free Promise of the Gospel; Faith that consents or
receives him, and a right and title in him, to the blessings of the Covenant,
it does not give one.

The Father offers righteousness in a way of gift, Romans 5. 17. Faith
accepts the offer, receives Jesus Christ for righteousness, and so conduces
to Justification Romans 4. 3. Abraham believed God and it was counted to him for
righteousness, i. e. it was reckoned a means unto righteousness, so ver. 5. Not
that Faith it self was reckoned the least of that righteousness whereby we are
justified, but a means for the applying of. Jesus Christ who is our
righteousness. The Covenant as to that privilege of it, Justification, is not
so absolute as to be without all means, yet may be absolute without any
condition properly so called. As condemnation (without any new act of
receiving) is the resultancy from the Law upon disobedience, to all under the
Covenant of Works; so Justification is the resultancy of a Divine Promise, upon
the obedience of Jesus Christ, to all those that are under the New Covenant.
That unbelievers are not justified by it, is because they are not actually
under it. Not because they have not fulfilled the condition of it; but because
they are not interested in the obediential righteousness of Jesus Christ which
is the condition of it, Romans 10. 10. The act of God in justifying is to be
answered by the act of Faith, consenting to the offer of the Gospel. As the
death and satisfaction of Jesus Christ is enough to answer, if the accusation
be that we are sinners and deserve Eternal wrath; so, if the accusation be,
that we have no interest or portion in this satisfaction, any thing that can
evidence our interest in Christ, is a sufficient plea to answer that; be it
Faith or other Graces; they may be pleaded as evidences, but not as titles: as
fruits and effects of a right given, but not as causes, and conditions
fulfilled by us giving us that right. It is a great mistake to think, that
there is no plea in this case, but from the performance of a condition; For, an
evidence may be from the effects as well as from causes: even in civils, a mere
witness may carry it in such a charge, when he can testify, I saw the person
put into peaceable possession of such an Estate. Besides, if this charge he
drawn up against those out of Christ, many things may make it good; if against
those that are in Christ, then who draws this up? Not God; for he it is that
justifies, and therefore he will not condemn, Romans 8. 33, 34. if Satan or
their own hearts, then as gracious effects are enough to answer, so by direct
acts of Faith, there ought to be a steadfast resisting and withstanding of
Satan, and he will flee from them, 1 Pet. 5. 9. Jam. 4. 7. No necessity of
pleading the performance of a condition to help against this.

4. Our obedience though evangelical is no such condition of the New Covenant,
as there was of the Old unto Israel: For, the Lord has undertaken that his
people shall obey, Ezekiel. 36. 25, to 30. I will put my spirit within you, and
cause you to walk in my ways: Heb. 8. 10. obedience is as absolutely promised
as any other blessings in the New, and therefore it cannot be the condition
thereof. The Apostle having asserted and largely proved, Romans 3. that
justification is by faith, not by the works of the Law, he further clears it
from the instances of Abraham and David Romans 4. 3. Abraham believed, etc. and
verse. 4. Now to him that works the reward is not reckoned of grace but of
debt. This strongly implies, that the reward must be reckoned of grace but of
debt. This strongly implies, that the reward must be reckoned of grace and not
of debt; the emphasis is upon this, so as if it were otherwise, the whole force
of his argument were taken away; and the stress is not upon the word [reckoned]
yet if it were, the same word (...) (being applied to both) must signify a
true judgment and just estimation (as Romans 8. 18. and 9. 8. 1 Cor. 4. 1.) for,
really and in true account the reward is of grace, and it is as firmly asserted
that if it were of works it were (in the same account) of debt. Say some, only
meritorious works would make it so: but let it be considered, that works can be
meritorious only one of these two ways; either,

1. By being of such value and worth, as that in justice such a recompense is
deserved by them, yea though there were no contract that way: and dare any say,
that any works of men, even in innocence, could thus merit at the hands of God?
is not all obedience due to God, so as when we have done all we are
unprofitable servants? Luke 17. 10. Job 22. 3. and 35. 7. If thou be righteous
what give thou him? Romans 11. 35. Who has first given to him and it shall be
recompensed to him again? Credendum est firmiter dari nihil ab hominibus per
modum indebiti, vel accipi a Deo per modum lucri. Tract. Sacr. Or else,

2. They merit ex pacto, by some contract or Covenant: that though the works be
inconsiderable in value, to the reward, yet the Lord has promised such a
reward to them: thus only and no otherwise, could the obedience of Adam in a
state of innocence be meritorious, for he did owe all as duty to God, even by
right of creation; he might have required all, without engaging himself to give
any reward; and finite services could not merit in worth and value an infinite
reward; but the Lord promised it to his perfect unsinning works. No otherwise
did any among the Romans or Galatians expect justification or eternal life in a
way of works, but only falsely imagining, that the Lord had made a promise of
salvation unto these.

Thus a reward may be of merit and of debt, and yet of grace in some sense
(though not of special Gospel grace) for all good promised or given by the Lord
to his creature is of grace, seeing God owes nothing to any. Thus the making
of a promise to Adam in a state of innocence for the rewarding of his works was
of grace; yet the promise being made, if he had continued in that state, the
reward would have been of debt: and therefore upon the same ground, if the
reward were now promised to us upon evangelical obedience, then that were as
truly meritorious (though the condition were more favorable) and life as
really of debt, as it would have been to Adam upon his sinless obedience; for,
only the promise must have made it so there, and the same is found here. The
Text in hand, must refer either to the works of the Law, which cannot properly
merit, because due even by the Law of Nature, or. else to those performed by
Abraham after believing, and then he concludes that if the reward were of
these, it were reckoned of debt: neither of these could render it so, but only
by a Divine promise assuring such a reward upon the performing such works as
the condition thereof; and therefore seeing he concludes it not of debt, hence
no obedience of our own can be such a condition of the New Covenant. It is
difficult to understand how the reward can be a debt legally and in justice
due, and yet not God a debtor, when it is only his compact or Covenant that it
becomes debt; if that may be our due which another possesses though he be not
bound to us, yet where it becomes due only by promise (as in the case in hand)
and that upon an act of ours as the (supposed) condition, it seems that the
promiser is a debtor, though considered antecedently to his promise he was
free; and in Romans 4. 4. not only is God denied to be a debtor but the reward is
denied to be a debt; therefore, there is no promise of it upon such a condition
as our works, which would make it of debt: in opposition to that, it is said to
be of grace, that is, of Gospel Grace.

It Is true there are Divine Promises of the reward upon Christ's works; but they
are not made immediately to us either upon our believing or obeying; but
mediately and at the second hand, so as the ground of our claim is not our
performing any Gospel condition upon which it is promised (for then it were as
really of debt as Adams) but all the Promises are immediately made to Jesus
Christ upon his righteousness and meritorious obedience, on which account all
become debt to him; and thus God is not a debtor to us, but to himself, to his
own goodness and faithfulness and to his Son, and not our works; but faith is
the means unto our being counted righteous in his righteousness, which only
merited our eternal reward, 2 Cor. 1. 20. All the promises [in him] are yea and
[in him] Amen, etc. We cannot claim any one promise in our own name, upon
performing any Gospel condition our selves, though by the help of grace (for
then though it were never so small it were of debt to us) but our only claim is
[in him] in the right of our elder brother Jesus Christ, and thus it is of debt
to him, but only of grace to us. Says Augustine, in Psalm. 83. Debitorem Dominus
ipse fecit se, non accipiendo sed promittendo; we can plead for nothing
promised but upon the account of Divine faithfulness; whereas if any act of
ours (though never so small) were the condition of any promise, then being
performed, we might plead for what is promised in a way of Justice, whose
formal reason Aquinas teaches, is, ut sit ad alterum: justice consists in
giving to another what is his due, viz. by contract, promise or otherwise. If
Divine Promises pass into a debt, it is to none but himself, says Dr.
Arrowsmith in his Tract. Sacr. Ipsi etiam Deo competit duplex debitum,
condecentiae unum, fidelitatis alterum. And a little after out of August. Deus
sibi debtor est, ut agat condecenter and prout congruit bonitati suae, u^i
seipsum negare non potest, ita non debet aliquid se indignum facere. And a
little after out of Davenant, Cum Deus dat vitam aeternam Petro aut Paulo,
Divina voluntas non solvit debitum creaturae, sed sibi ipsi: See more, ibid.
page 335.

It either says or obedience were a condition, then there were a suspending
acts of God upon some acting of the Creature, which (says Dr. O. of Persev. P.
53.) cannot be without subjecting eternity to time, the first cause to the
second, the Creator to the Creature; yea then by our performing of it the Lord
were laid under an obligation to afford mercy promised, even life and salvation
to us, and we might claim these upon our own act.

In short therefore, we may have the recompense of reward in our eye as an
encouragement unto duty, 1 Cor. 15 last. Heb. 11. 26. and 12. 2. Yea, we may
exercise faith as a means to the fruition of life and salvation, and yield
evangelical obedience that we may show forth the praises, or may honor him
that has called us, by such choice fruits and effects thereof, and as
evidences of interest therein; Thus we may (in the strength of Christ) strive
to enter in at the strait gate, conflict with and overcome spiritual enemies
and work out salvation. 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25. Rev. 2. 7, 11, 17, 26. Phil. 2. 12.
We may pray, read, hear, believe, repent, as ways or means to the obtainnent
thereof, seeking the right thereunto only in Jesus Christ.

But we may not believe or obey as a condition, for then, upon the performance
thereof, we have right and title to the promised blessings even to eternal
salvation; some act of ours then should give the ^i^le to life, and we might
claim it upon our own act; but such doing for life is disclaimed and condemned
in the Gospel, whatever the act be Romans 4. 4. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. Tim. 1. 9.

Faith it self does but receive a right, does not give one. It is not upon any
act of ours, that the Lord is engaged to make good his promise, and that we lay
claim to it. If a Malefactor had not petitioned to the Prince he had died,
though no promise of life was made to him upon it, and so his petitioning was
only a way or means to his being spared: had it been a condition thereof, then
the Prince had been unfaithful, yea unjust if he had not granted it.

In the most absolute grants, or where there is no condition making an estate
liable to forfeiture by the nonperformance, yet there may be parties and
stipulation.

It is the excellency and glory of the New Covenant, that it runs upon
absolute promises, it does not leave at uncertainties, no liability to a
forfeiture of its special privileges, and this with the admirable treeness of
it, afford matter of great encouragement and everlasting consolation to all
under it. See more for this, in the last question, concernig the use of those
called conditional Promises.

The New Covenant brings in a real plenary and perfect remission of sins, and
so is better than the Old, which left short o^ it: Some sins had no sacrifice
provided for them in the Old, and were not forgiven so as they might enjoy
temporal blessings promised. Some must be cut off, as they that did ought
presumptuously were to be cut off from among the people, Numb. 15. 28, 30. yet
believers in that day might be forgiven those very sins and enjoy eternal
salvation through the free promise in Jesus Christ, and Act. 13. 38, 39. By him
(i. e. by Jesus Christ) those that believe are justified from all things from
which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses. The typical remission
did not reach to all sins, as Christ's does, except to that against the holy
Spirit, Matthew. 12. 31. 1 John 1. 7.

The great design of the Epistle to the Hebrews is, to show the excellency of
Jesus Christ and his sacrifice above the Levitical; and how much better the New
Covenant is than the Old, in the point of the remission of sin. There was
imperfection in the legal sacrifices; the forgiveness there was only so far as
temporal judgments were averted and temporal mercies afforded; they could not
really take away sin, did not purge the Conscience, or make the comers
thereunto perfect. Heb. 9. 9. Heb. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. but in opposition hereunto,
it is the glory of Jesus Christ, verse. 12, 14. by one offering he has
perfected for ever those that are sanctified, i. e. the people of God, those in
Covenant.

This he clears, from the New Covenant, verse. 15, to 19. which says, their
sins and iniquities will I remember no more. Says Calvin, from this we gather
that sins are now pardoned in another manner than they were in old time, but
this diversity consiseth neither in the word nor in faith but in the ransom of
the remission; thus he.

In the old there was a repetition and iteration of their sacrifices; the
typical pardon of new sins was stayed and suspended till they had offered new
sacrifices, and there was a yearly remembrance of their old sins, verse. 3. but
in opposition to that, it is the perfection of the New Covenant, that as there
will be no more offering for sin, so there will be a remembrance of the sins of
believers no more, that is, they will not any more come one moment under the
curse or obligation of the Law to eternal punishment for them: the declared
discharge from this (which is that wherein ^he pardon of sin does properly
consist as it is Gods act) is not suspended, till the putting forth new acts of
says or repentance (although these ought to follow) but is afforded to the
believer, the very moment of his sinning, whether he then takes notice of it
or not.

I confess there is difficulty here on either hand, for if believers be under
the Laws curse and obligation by new sins, then they are unjustified as often
as they sin (which may not be admitted;) and if they be not under it, then it
seems they are not daily pardoned, seeing pardon consists in a declared
discharge from that obligation: this will be answered in a following objection.

It is actual pardon that is here inquired after, for, it will be granted, that
at our first justification all sins past, present and to come are virtually
pardoned.

That the actual remission, pardon or forgiveness of their sins who are in
Covenant and already justified, is the very instant wherein the sins are
committed, so as believers remain not one moment under the obligation of the
Law to eternal punishment, or the immediateness of pardon may appear thus:

1. Believers have always an actual interest in Jesus Christ his righteousness
and the satisfaction made by him, and therefore are not one moment so
unpardoned after the commission of new sins. Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins. It is a glorious
mystery of the Gospel, that sin is removed upon a full satisfaction, and yet
in a way of forgiveness. It was in a way of redemption to Jesus Christ, and yet
in a way of pardon and free grace to us; it cost Christ dear, even his precious
blood, it cost us nothing. The Elect whilst unconverted are not interested in
that redemption, in their own persons, and so are unpardoned; but [we]
believers, not only shall have it hereafter, but have it already, and therein
the remission of sins; they cannot one minute be without that, for there is an
inseparable connection between these, they that have the one have the other
also, Christ is theirs, in whom they have redemption: there will never be an
interruption of believers union with him; and Christ being theirs, his
satisfaction is theirs, which answers and discharges the obligation of the
Law, and so they are always in a state of freedom from that. Jesus Christ being
theirs, they are always interested in his righteousness; and the Law cannot
actually oblige or curse any, that are interested it its righteousness, but
only those that want it: righteousness and pardon are in such connection, that
the Apostle argues from one to the other, Romans 4. 6, 7, 8. He proves the
blessedness of men in imputed righteousness from David's saying, verse. 7.
Blessed are they, whose iniquities are forgiven; therefore unless believers
could be disrobed of that righteousness, and for some space lose that
blessedness, they cannot be the smallest season unpardoned.

If souls were actually under the Law guilt of any sin one moment, they were
then not perfectly righteous: for, these are inconsistent to be completely
righteous, and yet to be under the Law guilt of any sin at the same time. See 2
Cor. 5. 21. ^om. 3. 23, 25.

Yea further Jesus Christ suffered not the tantundem; something in lieu or
stead of what we should have suffered, but the idem, the very same punishment
of the Law that was due to us, and therefore continual interest in that must
needs render at all times disoblig^d or pardoned, Genesis 2. 17. In the day thou
eatest [dying thou shall die.] Death then was the utmost penalty that was
exacted; nothing more was required of us by the Law of works, and nothing less
was suffered by Jesus Christ in our stead. Heb. 2. 9. That he by the grace of
God should taste [death] for every man.

The very thing that was threatened, was undergone by him for us. As to the
eternity of the death and such circumstances that we are liable to, these arise
from the incapacity of our persons, that cannot bear infinite sufferings in a
short time, as Jesus Christ did for us; or as Mr. B. observes; that despair
and death in sin proceed not from the threatening in it self considered, but
from the condition and disposition of the persons, upon whom the execution of
the curse falls: punishment properly is satisfaction for injury done, but sin
is a continuing of the injury. See Christ in Travel, page 71.

Gal. 3. 13. Made a curse for us; the very thing, yea all that the Law
threatened was the curse, and Jesus Christ did not undergo something in the room
of it, but the very curse of the same Law, that we were under, and therefore
the idem.

Jesus Christ having undertaken the office of a great high Priest, Isai. 53. 6.
The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all; I cannot understand how
iniquity it self could be transacted upon the Lord Jesus; it is a non ens, a
privation of good, if it could pass from one subject to another, yet it could
not fall upon any without the pollution of the subject where it rests; for it
is altogether evil; any thing short of this is not sin; deny pollution and you
deny sin it self to be upon any subject. Jesus Christ was so infinitely pure as
he could not suffer the least tincture of defilement; therefore by [iniquity]
must be understood the guilt of sin, or its obligation to punishment; not a
tantundem, that had not indeed been our iniquity; but it was our very guilt,
whatsoever the Lord threatened against us, and might exact from us on the
account of our sin, it is expressed by his being wounded for our transgression,
verse. 5. by his being made an offering for sin, verse. 10. by his hearing
iniquity, verse. 11. whatsoever burden therefore was to be undergone, or man
was liable to bear for his iniquity, this was laid upon Jesus Christ, and that
by the Fathers hand [the Lord] laid it there; O what grace was here to us! it
was the Lord that was offended, provoked, dishonored, by sin, and yet how
desirous was he that we should be discharged from it, in that he would with his
own hand lay it upon his beloved Son Jesus Christ: And it is the iniquity [of
us] all; it was not at an uncertainty, the persons were determined, by tale, by
number, by name, in whose stead he underwent all this. He was wounded for [our]
transgressions, and bruised for [our] sin, and the chastisement of [our] peace
was upon him, verse. 5. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 21.

Now, seeing Jesus Christ underwent the idem, the very same penalty that was
threatened by the Law, and for the very persons, and believers are always
interested therein; hence they cannot one minute of time be unpardoned.

2. Believers are at all times actually interested in the general acquittance
obtained by Jesus Christ, and therefore are not without the actual pardon of
particular sins one moment after the commission of them; for that acquittance
is our general pardon.

As he was charged with our sin, so he was discharged by the father from it.
Isai. 50. 8. He is near that justifies me, etc. It is spoken of Jesus Christ
as appears, verse. 6. He had justification not for himself (he needed none)
but for us, our sin or guilt being laid upon him, and all demands of Divine
justice being fully answered, he was justified, obtained a general acquittance
for the whole body of his seed, hence it is not only said he was delivered for
our offenses, Romans 4. 25. i. e. suffered death, the wages due to us for sin,
but also [was raised again for our justification.] If he had not made full
satisfaction for us, death would have held him still; in that it could not hold
him any longer, this argues that it had no Dominion over him, but he had a
complete victory over that last enemy, and his resurrection was his general
acquittance for all the Elect, and thus it was for their justification.

Believers have a ground to say as Romans 8. 34. It is Christ that died, yea
rather that is risen again. They have then not only a continual interest in his
death, but also in his resurrection, and they are put upon triumphing in faith
on this account, verse. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect?
it is God that justifies, etc. It is the standing privilege of all that are
in a justified state, that nothing can be justly laid to their charge, and
therefore none of their sins are one moment actually unpardoned as to Law
guilt, for then they might be laid to their charge, Colos. 2. 12, 13. Quickened
together with him; He stood as a common person and virtually his seed might be
said to die and rise at the death and resurrection of Christ himself in their
room and stead; but some actual sharing with him is here intended, for he says
[you are risen with him, through the faith of the operation of God] this
privilege is not enjoyed till they attain a work of faith with power, and then
the whole advantage of his resurrection becomes theirs, in Jesus Christ they
have a general acquittance and discharge. Believers are risen with him, it is
reckoned unto them as if they had died and risen again in their own persons:
neither is this suspended until daily acts of Faith (although these are not to
be neglected) but it is at their first conversion, at their first Faith and
recovery, out of a spiritually dead condition [you being dead in your sins,
both be quickened together with him]. That general Justification at his rising,
becomes theirs at first believing, which will secure from all Law guilt, that
it will seize upon them no more, as it follows [having forgiven you] not only
[some] but [all] trespasses: they have then in their rising with Jesus Christ,
a general discharge in hand, not only for sins past and present actually, but
for [all] even those to come virtually; this general pardon will be ever ready;
that as soon as there is an actual commission of particular sins, by that they
will be immediately disobliged from them. The actual pardon will be as early as
the actuality of the sin, and hence he speaks, as if all were actually
forgiven already.

3. Believers are always under Justification unto life, and therefore cannot
at any time be actually under the obligation of the Law unto Eternal death: It
is nothing less than a sentence of death and condemnation, a dreadful Curse
that the Law denounces against sinners, Genesis 2. 17. Gal. 3. 10. Cursed is
every one that continues not in all, etc. So that if Believers were one day or
moment laid under the obligation of the Law by new acts of sin, then so long
they must be unjustified again, there must be an intermission of their
Justification; For, condemnation is opposed to, and utterly inconsistent with
present Justification, Romans 5. 16, 18. Romans 8. 33, 34.

Whereas it is expressly said, Romans 8. 1. There is no condemnation to them which
are in Christ Jesus. There is not a bare suspension of the Curse, but they are
differenced in respect of their state from others which are out of Christ;
after union with him, yea after the fullest pardon, yet every sin deserves
condemnation; pardon does not remove the desert of sin, but the legal
obligation (which is to condemnation) that is taken off, verse. 33, 34. Joh. 5.
24. He that believes has everlasting Life, [and shall not come into
condemnation]. By daily pardons there is a continuation of a persons
Justification, and some Faith he has, but although the new acts of Faith may
not always be put forth the same moment that he sins, yet he is secured
from condemnation, even at first believing or passing from Death to Life.

The same might be evinced from the declared freedom from the Law and in Curse,
Romans 6. 14. Gal. 3. 10, 13. At many as are of the works of the Law are under
the Curse; this strongly implies that others, viz. Believers are not under the
Curse, so ver. 13.

And though materially the affl^ctions of the Elect before conversion be the
same with others under the Curse, yet the least Atome of that does not formally
light upon them; For, Jesus Christ underwent the whole of it on their behalf.
They were sententially by the Law under the Curse before believing, but not
executively then, much less after, being united to Jesus Christ.

4. Believers are continually under the New Covenant, and therefore the very
instant wherein their sins are committed they are remitted; or the persons are
disobliged from the Law Curse, and so actually pardoned; For, unto this, there
is requisite, only interest in the satisfaction of Jesus Christ (which they
have in union with him and the Lords declaring their discharge thereupon, and
this is by the New Testament, which was established by his blood for the
remission of sins, Matthew. 26. 28. All pardoning mercy is treasured up there;
this is the very act of Pardon.

Believers are always within the New Covenant, and therefore have an actual
right to the pardon of all sins not only past and present, but also to come;
they have it beforehand in the Promise, though not actually in possession; they
have a ground of claiming after pardons, may urge the faithfulness of God in
his promise for the affording of them; also the instant wherein their sin is
committed, the New Testament declares it remitted, for that is a standing
pardon, ever speaking on this wise to all under it [your sins and iniquities
will I remember no more] Jer. 31. 31, 34. Heb 8. 12. so as they cannot be under
the Laws obligation to punishment any more. Believers are under the Promise of
a New Heart, and writing the Law there, which assures that they shall further
repent, believe, etc. Yet such spiritual frames may not immediately be
afforded, seeing these are gradually attained by a real change: but remission
of sin is a relative change, made in an instant by the Promise upon all under
it when they want it.

And here let it be observed, that pardon or forgiveness of sin, is a Divine
grant by the Law of Grace the New Covenant, that is his act of Oblivion, Heb.
8. 12. Heb. 10. 16, 17. Romans 11. 27. On which account we read of [the Law] of
Works, and [the Law] of Faith, Romans 3. 27. and this latter in reference to
Justification and remission of sin. As, present condemnation is by a Law, even
by the Divine Law of Works, that passes Sentence upon sinners; the seed of the
first Adam who are under it, the very instant of their sining, whether they be
aware of it or not: So answerably, present Justification and remission of sin,
is by the Law of Grace the New Covenant, that passes a Sentence upon all the
seed of Jesus Christ the second Adam who are under it, the very instant of
their sinning, when often at the very time they do not discern it. And as among
men, o^^ may have his offenses pardoned by an Act of Oblivion which he is
under, though no accusation be drawn up against him to put his case upon trial
before a Judge, that may come afterward: thus it is not by a judicial Act, by
an Act of God as a Judge, but as a Lawgiver that he gives present
Justification and Pardons, they are the Sentence of his Law the New Testament,
which Believers are always under; accusations from Satan or their own
Consciences may come afterward, and a trial before the Judge in the great day.

The not understanding this, has run into many mistakes; some asserting
Justification to be from Eternity; whereas they might easily understand that
the Elect may, yea must be under a Sentence of the Law of Works (without the
least execution of the Curse upon them by the Lord as a Judge) till by coming
under the Sentence of another Law, even the New Testament they be discharged
from it.

Others talk of pleading to a charge, and upon a plea being discharged as their
Justification; whereas that is only the Sentence of one Law, declaring a
discharge from the Sentence or Curse of another Law, upon their interest in the
righteousness of Jesus Christ by union with him. The Lord is not dealing as a
Judge there; often the Lord is mentioning Judgment as a future thing; Paul
reasoned [of Judgment to come] Act. 24. 25. Matthew. 11. 22, 24. and 12. 36. 2
Pet. 2. 9. Joh. 12. 47, 48. The Word will judge you at the last day.

The present work of Jesus Christ, is not to judge the World, but to save it.
Now he comes in a dispensation full of Grace, with entreaties and beseechings
that he may win over Souls to a subjection unto the Law of Faith, which is a
ministration of righteousness and Life exceedingly glorious, 2 Cor. 3.

But he will deal in another way, when he comes forth as a Judge, then he will
come clothed with terror, and we must all appear before his judgment Seat, 2
Cor. 5. 10. When the times of refreshing shall come, then will their sins be
blotted out, Act. 3. 19. Not as if they wanted a complete pardon till the day
of Judgment. They are now as fully and perfectly justified and pardoned, as
they were condemned. It was by a Law against them that they were under
condemnation, and so it is by a Law grant, viz. the New Covenant, that they are
justified and have the remission of sin. Some call it a sentential
Justification; there will be a repetition of its Sentence, so as they will be
judicially acquitted before all the World in the great day. In what Court or by
what Judge are any so pardoned here? If the Bar or Tribunal of this Judgment
be a man's own Conscience, that can hardly pass Sentence without discerning and
knowing it self within the New Covenant, and pleading that against the
accusation of Satan; whereas a Soul may have the righteousness of Jesus Christ,
and justifying Faith before he knows it, or be able to discern it, and
therefore Justification and Pardon may be before any judicial act of Conscience.

Object. If Believers be not actually under the obligation to punishment (which
is guilt) then asking the removal of it, or praying for daily pardon of sin is
unnecessary. Yea, if they be not obliged, they cannot be disobliged, and so not
pardoned; therefore it seems that the Curse of the Law must be in force
against them for some space before the new Pardon comes.

Answ. I. Believers in their daily pardons are declared to be discharged from
the very obligation and Curse of the Law it self, but not from a personal
obligation to it. There is an obligation to punishment residing in the Law, but
it does not actually pass upon the persons of Believers one moment.

It must be remembered that present pardon is not a judicial act, but it is a
Sentence of a Law of Grace, which declares all under it to be discharged from
the penalty of another Law.

Observe, when a violated Law has already passed Sentence upon an offender, an
act of pardon coming afterward in force to him, there it dissolveth or takes
off an obligation to punishment which is already passed upon the person, and
this is the case of the Elect at first conversion.

But where an Act or Law of Pardon is in force to any persons and reaches to
offenses yet to come, or not yet committed, there the obligation to the penalty
never passes one moment upon the persons, and yet they have as much forgiven
(even the whole penalty of the Law) as the other, and more Grace in it; For, it
preventeth the passing of the Sentence upon them.

Now, this is the case, Believers are always under the New Covenant, which is
a Divine Act of Pardon; this Law is in force to them before their Commission of
new acts of sin, and declares their discharge from the penalty of the Law of
Works, that the instant wherein the sins are committed, they are remitted
thereby.

The commanding Law is not repealed (for then they were no offenses) but yet
the Curse of it rests not upon their persons one moment, 1 John 2. 2, 3. If
any one sin, we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous,
and he is a propitiation for our sins.

1. Pardons afforded to sinners are from Jesus Christ as an offering Priest,
making satisfaction for sin; but if one of those who have fellowship with God,
if Believers sin, their succor and relief is also by the standing Advocateship
of Jesus Christ. Now, an Advocate, or Attorney pleads a Law in force, whereby
his Client is discharged; so Jesus Christ pleads, Believers being already
under the New Testament, whereby they have a right unto indemnity; that though
the Cursing Law remains in force still to unbelievers, yet this new Act of
Grace grants a pardon to the Saints for all transgressions committed against
it.

2. It is yet unquestionably the duty of Believers to be daily praying for
pardoning mercy: Those who are taught to cry unto God [Our Father] Luke 11. 2.
yet are to say, ver. 4. Forgive us our sins. Those then which have the Spirit
of Adoption, yet are to be praying daily for the pardon of Sin. There is reatus
simplex as well as reatus redundans in personam; though Believers are not to
confess themselves to be personally (i. e. in their persons,) to be under the
obligation or Curse of the Law (there is cause for highest thankful
acknowledgement of Grace in their freedom from that) yet there is room for the
deepest acknowledgement of their own sin and guiltiness in deserving of it, and
here is enough for their humiliation: though the person by Grace is acquitted
or pardoned, yet there is a dueness of such a penalty to such an offense
according to the Divine Law: and this may be owned even under the clearest
evidences of pardon; for that does not remove the desert of sin, but freeth
from what is deserved thereby.

Yea, there is a great deal of work for Faith in Prayer, upon this account.

Believers are to pray for the continuation of the Pardon, which they do
already enjoy, and for the remission of those sins which shall hereafter be
committed by them. The New Covenant contains in it a Promise of future
pardons, and therefore Faith may act upon the Lord in it, and that although
they know they shall be forgiven. The Promise-assurance of a mercy does not
exempt us from praying for it. Jesus Christ had assurance that he should be
glorified and yet he prays, Joh. 17. 5. Father glorify thou me: he knew that
he should be kept and yet he prays for it, ver. 11. David had an absolute
Promise of establishing his House and Kingdom for ever, 2 Samuel 7. 14, 15. 16.
and yet he the rather prays for it; and upon that ground, even the Promise of
it.

So we may ask future Pardons, though we certainly know we shall have them.

Also we are to ask clearer manifestations of our interest in pardoning mercy.

But further, Believers in praying for pardon of Sin, are

1. To ask a fresh application of the blood of Jesus Christ in the promise of
pardon: he is said to be to that very end a propitiation through Faith in his
blood, Romans 3. 25. not only is a manifestation of pardon to be sought after,
but Faith is to be exercised in an application of the blood of Jesus Christ, as
that which has purchased and procured the pardon; that is to be eyed as the
price of Redemption, as that which ratifieth the New Testament for the
remission of sins, Mat. 26. 28. it is that blood which cleanses those that
have fellowship with God from all Sin, 1 John 1. 3, 7, 9. He is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins.

It must be by a Word or Promise that the faithfulness of God is engaged this
way, and it is the work of Faith to own that, and the Grace of God that shines
forth therein, Act. 10. 43. whosoever believes on him shall receive the
remission of sins. The Lords giving it is in order of nature first, but to be
followed with men's receiving it through Faith. Gods act of pardon disobliging
Believers, the instant of their sinning, is to be answered with a renewed act
of Faith applying this to themselves, setting their Seal to what God has done,
yea renewed acts of Repentance also are to follow. Under the Old Covenant it
was not possible, that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sins, Heb.
10. 4. but the New Testament is better, for therein through the blessed
Mediator believers obtain real remission, Heb. 9. 15.

2. To ask impunity, or immunity and freedom from the execution of the Curse,
and from other tokens of Divine displeasure: if they know they shall have it,
yet they are to ask it, as I before evidenced. Though Believers know that God
is a Father, and that the Eternal Curse will never seize upon them, yet they
are to pray for a freedom from it, and the rather be encouraged and provoked to
it, because the Lord has promised it.

Although by the New Covenant Justification is continued, yet by gross acts of
sin the Lord may be provoked so as many sweet effects of their being justified
may be suspended. David who was in a state of Grace, when he had notoriously
sinned, before renewed acts of Faith and Repentance, before confessing his sin,
his bones waxed old through his roaring all the day long, Psalm. 32. 3, 4. Day
and Night the band of God was heavy upon him. By this it is evident, that
although, at the instant of sinning, Believers are declared really disobliged
from the Eternal Curse of the Law, yet they may not be sensibly freed from
that, nor from temporal evils till afterward. They are exempted from vindictive
Justice, in order to the making satisfaction for sin, but not from paternal
corrective dispensations to the humbling for and deterring from sin, Psalm. 51.
2, 7. Wash me thoroughly from my sin, etc. Purge me with Hyssop, etc. He was
deeply sensible of his pollution, defilement and uncleanness by reason of
iniquity, makes confession, and seeks the removal of it, Ver. 4. That he
might justify God, whom he had greatly dishonored, and give glory to him by
acknowledging his righteousness in all his judgments; he cries out, Ver. 9.
Hide thy face from my sins, they were not only ever before him, but seemed to
be so before the Lord also; as if he were always looking on them: though he
had not lost his Salvation, yet he wanted much of the joy of it, ver. 11, 12.
Nathan told him God had pardoned him his sin, (2 Samuel 12. 13, 14.) only some
tokens of Divine displeasure must be expected; and I think he Penned this
Penitentlal Psalm after, for the title shows that this confession was
directed to the chief Musician; it was for the use of the Temple; he had
confessed privately before to Nathan, now he does it more publicly, after he
had told him of pardon and also of judgments, ver. 4.

So that after Souls are really disobliged and have pardon it self, yet they
may want the sense of it, till there be a fresh application of the blood of
Jesus Christ, by the Spirit to them, so as they may cry out for it, as he, ver.
9. Blot out all my iniquities. There may be inward cloudings and darkness, sin
and guilt may lie heavy upon the Conscience, there may be throbbing there, and
a dreadful sense of it, which may be enough to deterr from sin. He will visit
transgressions with a Rod, though his loving kindness he will not utterly take
from them, Psalm. 89. 32, 33. And who is willing to see the frowning face of God
a tender Father, and to have such smart rebukes not only by outward corporal
afflictions, but by the withdrawing the light of his countenance, which is
better than Life?

The Old Covenant did not purge the Conscience, but the New is a better
Testament; for having mentioned the remission of sins afforded thereby, Heb.
10. 16, 17. he adds, let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of
Faith [having our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience] so Heb. 9. 15. In
the way of a fresh exercise of Faith they may have freedom not only from other
fatherly corrections, but from those accusations of an evil Conscience which
are the usual fruits of heinous sins, till renewed acts of Faith and Repentance.

5. The New Covenant raises a choice Spirit of filial Love, and so is better
than the Old, which leaves under a Spirit of servile fear: the New being made
up all of Promises, must needs have a tendency to raise into the sweetest
Spirit, Romans 8. 15. For, ye have not received the Spirit of bondage again to
fear, but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption whereby we cry Abba Father.
There is an excellency in the Evangelical Spirit then above the other. I
understand that Text of different states of the Church, or People of God;
seeing in the former and following Chapters, he evidently speaks of Believers
freedom from the Law by the Lord Jesus, and the particle [again] does intimate,
that once they were under that fearing Spirit, viz. under the Old Mosaic
dispensation, but now in the times of the New Testament, were freed from it.
Some by the Spirit of bondage understand operations of the Spirit, in fear and
terror in order to conversion. I cannot find, that he is treating of that, and
it is more suitable to understand it of the state under the Old Testament, and
the rather because it is brought in as a proof of their Sonship, as the
particle [for] does intimate; it was therefore no desirable frame to be sought
after, but a misery to be under it, and a mercy to be freed from it. The Old
Covenant carried with it more of the [Spirit of a Servant] as the word
signifies, and although serving the Lord chiefly or only for reward savoureth
of a legal Spirit, and is one difference between the Spirit of a Servant, and
the Spirit of a Son, yet here another difference is aimed at, for it is said,
ye have not received it [again to fear]. The Sinai Covenant put them on to duty
by dreadful threatenings, presented Curses before them (and that not actually
undergone for them by Jesus Christ) as Arguments or inforcements thereunto,
which terrifieth and fills with such fear as is found in Servants by the
severe threatening of their Masters; Israel was filled with fear and
astonishment at the first promulgation of the Law. And whewhether this was the
proper effect of the Sinai Law, to work into servile fear and bondage, so as to
make that duty then, which now is not so, and whether it were the approved
effect of it in that day or not, yet it intimates, that through the frailty of
sinful man, this would certainly be the issue of it, and was even unavoidable;
hearing the Law from the mouth of an all-powerful God as a consuming fire; and
there was not enough in those conditional promises to free from this servile
fear, and so it left them under it; and comparatively with the New Covenant,
which has more Evangelical inforcements unto duty by Grace, and the free
Promise. The Sinai Law has a tendency to work into the fear of a Servant,
toward his Master, and so (as the Apostle says) gendreth to bondage, rather
than to the fear or love of a Son, which is the issue of Gospel Revelations.

Christians now are to act upon more Evangelical accounts, from more Love, yea
and more Faith, having received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba
Father; it is by this believing Spirit that Souls have liberty of access to God
with that freedom that Children use to have in going to a tender Father. The
fearing Spirit kept them at a distance from the Lord like a Servant, that durst
not come near an austere Master, but by this they may with a holy boldness and
firm assurance repair to him, and cry Abba Father.

This will appear more clearly, if we compare it with that parallel place, Gal.
4. 1, 2, etc. The Heir so long as he is a Child differs nothing from a
Servant, etc. Even so we when we were Children were in bondage, under the
Elements of the World, etc.

Here, the state under the Old Sinai Covenant plainly is expressed by bondage,
not absolutely that of bondslaves, they were not in pure slavery, nor so in the
condition of Servants; but as under Tutors and Governors, and in a state of
subjection, that they differed little in outward appearance to themselves or
others from Servants, they seemed to have more of that Spirit (being acted by
fear) than of the Spirit of Sons: but since the dispensation of the New
Covenant, they are freed from the servile state, redeemed by Jesus Christ, from
the rigor of the Law, and have much of the Spirit of Adoption, ver. 5, 6.
there is such an alteration for the better, as if their Sonship now began, ver.
7. that is comparatively with the other; therefore Christians now are to act in
a different way from what they did of Old; more in a free Spirit of Adoption:
thus bondage and freedom are opposed, ver. 24, 25, 26, 31. not as taken for
simple slavery, but for a state of less freedom, though in the same Family and
House, as Hagar and Sarah were, the one expressly intending the state under the
mount Sinai Covenant, the other under the Free Promise, so Gal. 3. 24. The Law
was our Schoolmaster until Christ, so it is in the Original, we have not there
those words [to bring us]. This Text does not speak of a work of the Law still
continuing in order to conversion, before closing with Jesus Christ, for the
bringing Souls unto him; but tells us of the rigorous discipline of the Law
of Old to Israel the people of God, like a Schoolmaster with a Rod compelling
to duty, until Christ, i. e. until his Incarnation, until his satisfaction, it
speaks of such a use thereof which is now at an end in Gospel times, as
appears by the Antithesis, ver. 25. but after faith is come we are no longer
under a Schoolmaster, etc. that is, after Christ the object of Faith is come in
the flesh, and has satisfied the Law, has purchased Redemption for us, now we
are no longer under the menaces and severities of the Law as a Schoolmaster; as
Christ is said to be our hope, so he is our faith, that is, the object of it,
the thing believed. That which is held forth here by the coming of faith, is
expressed by the coming of the seed, verse. 19. which is Jesus Christ, and our
present freedom from the Law as a severe Schoolmaster speaks the betterness
of our state, and so of the New Covenant.

6. The New Covenant is established upon spiritual Promises, and so is better
than the old Sinai Covenant which did run upon temporal promises to Israel; now
I speak of it as an administration to them: all the promises of the New are of
a spiritual nature, that promises to give the Law into the heart, that God
will be their God, their sins shall be pardoned, Heb. 8. these spirituals are
firstly promised, and temporal things are comprised in these; godliness has
the promise of this life, but spirituals are mentioned here, that we might be
taken up mostly with spiritual enjoyments, grace, peace, communion with God,
etc. I have wondered why the New should be made up of such promises, as if only
real Christians could be interested therein, but I consider he speaks of it
not to exclude all from visible interest, which elsewhere is witnessed to (Act.
8. 12.) even when the ^^al was wanted; but in opposition to the old to discover
how these promises are better than those of the Old Covenant, which run upon
temporal things to Israel, is long Life, the Land of Canaan, etc. Deuteronomy. 5. and
11. Levit. 26. these were most obvious there, and better things represented by
these; whereas the New puts on to duty rather by spiritual promises and
blessings than by temporal, and so is a better Covenant.

7. The New Covenant it self ushereth in spiritual blessings and in a more
immediate way than under the Sinai Covenant, and so is established on better
promises: the more immediate mercies of God the better; the more new pure, and
fresh from the fountain of Divine Love. Immediate visions of God in Heaven,
will render them surpassingly excellent; and in this world, those that are not
without all means, but comparatively immediate, are the best mercies, as the
more immediate judgments are the worst of these.

The Old Covenant did not it self dispense out spiritual and eternal blessings,
but provoked to have recourse unto the Abrahamatical Covenant for these, they
must setch a greater compass in traveling to those enjoyments than under the
New; they must look from the Old for remission of sin (which was typified
there) and so for such other mercies, unto the free promise. In the New
Covenant mercies are absolutely promised, Heb. 8. and therefore the application
of them is more immediate than under the Old; they may forth. with by an eye of
faith look to Jesus Christ for a fruition-of them; there is not such a vail of
typical institutions to intervene, that is a better way to the obtainment of
those blessings, Joh. 1. 17.

Yea the dispensation is also better, the Apostle says, Heb. 1. 1, 2. That God
in the last days has spoken to us by his Son* This is the excellency of Gospel
discoveries above visions, dreams, and such like afforded in old restament
times, that now Jusus Christ himself speaks to us with his own mouth, we have
more immediate manifestations, and on that account there is infinite danger in
non-attendance to what is spoken. Heb. 12. 25. As the Gospel is more extensive,
it reaches not to Jews only, but to Gentiles also, as equal sharers in the
blessings by faith, the partition wall being broken down. Ephesians. 1. 12, 14. Romans
3. 22.

So there is a more open door of access to God, Heb. 9. 8. under the old, the
way was not yet opened into the holiest; which implies, that since, the way is
open, there is a greater freedom (Ephesians. 2. 18. Heb. 10. 19, 22.) and better
encouragements, the price is already paid, and now Christians ask mercy as
already pruchased. Of old the people must not come near unto the Holiest, but
only the Priests, now believers are become Priests unto God (Rev. 1.) and may
have more immediate converses with him than before; all which argues this to
be a better Covenant.

8. The New Covenant is full of efficacy, and so is better than the Old: in the
New all is undertaken by an omnipotent God, Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12. and therefore
whatever difficulty or opposition lies in the way, yet this word of power is
enough sowards the accomplishment of it: whereas in the Old Covenant much is
required of Israel, but no such absolute promises assuring effectually of their
accomplishment, there is such a difference between the Old and the New as
between the letter and the spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 6. The Ministers of the New
Testament are not of the letter but of the spirit [for the letter kills, the
spirit gives life.] The Lord not only uttered the Law by lively voice, but did
write it with his own fingers in those lasting monuments, tables of stone; and
the Jews grossly mistaking did too much take up in the letter, in external
literal obedience, the chief efficacy and impression they felt thereby was in
the threatening part [the letter killeth] the Divine curse was a killing thing,
struck into the fear of death: but the New has more efficacious vivifying
operations, verse. 6. 8. the spirit gives life, and so that is a ministration
transcendantly glorious, that is a powerful means for recovering the heart out
of the greatest spiritual deadness, indisposition, disconsolation, it is full
of quickening, life-giving influences; abundance of the spirit in the gifts and
graces of it may be found there, and so it is a better Covenant.

Lastly, The New Covenant is more durable and lasting, not liable to such
violations as the Old, and so is a better Covenant: the Lord in promising to
make a New Covenant adds, Jer. 31. 32. Not according to the Covenant made
with their Fathers, etc. which Covenant they brake, etc. So Jer 11. 4, 6, 10.
Heb. 8. 9. yea the Old Covenant it self is said to be vanishing, verse. 13.
which imports, that this is a grand difference between them; that the Ne^
should not be subject to be broken as the Old was. If those that are only
externally and by visible profession within the New may totally, and others who
are internally and really in it, may parsially break it, yet not totally so as
to cast themselves altogether out of it, nor comparatively with those within
the Old. The vital principles and impressions of divine love in Gospel times
shall be so strong, and the Divine Law imprinted and engraven in such lively
characters upon the hearts of men as shall wonderfully secure those that are
really in the New, from the violation of it, far bove the other, and
unsteadiness of spirit or want of establishment is an argument that souls have
but a slender participation of its blessings; and the New shall never be
antiquated, there is none to succeed that, both the Mediator and the
privileges of it are eternal, the blood of Christ is the blood of the
everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13. 20, 21. and therefore it is better Covenant than
the Old.

CHAP. XI.
Of the time of first coming into Covenant.

IT may be asked, When is it that any are actually and personally interested in
the Spiritual benefits, or blessings of the New and better Covenant?

It is not a virtual but an actual interest that is here inquired after; and,
not when they were representatively in Covenant in their common person, but
when personally by an application of its blessings to their own persons?

And indeed the New Covenant is for application, and is the sum of all that is
to be applied, though it be not the whole Covenant of Grace, which takes in
all Articles between God the Father, and Jesus Christ the Son, in order to our
restoration.

And it is to be noted, That some are visibly, others are really under the
Covenant.

Some who are branches in Jesus Christ, yet may be broken off, Joh. 15. 2, 6.
Romans 11. and therefore were but visibly in him. Some are sanctified with the
blood of the Covenant, and yet afterward may count it an unholy thing, Heb. 10.
23. and so are but visibly under it, by an outward separation to, or profession
of the name and Faith of Jesus Christ, to as to partake of common privileges
belonging to its external dispensation: persons thus in Covenant and under the
sign of it, may be in a perishing condition still, Act. 8. 13, 23. Outward
profession of Faith is not that which entituleth to the external
administrations of it, but only is a character or mark of persons fit for them,
as showing a visible interest in the Promise by a possession [of the things
promised]; and their Seed have as sure a mark of their being visibly under [the
Promise], by the Lords declaring them interested therein with their Parents,
Genesis 17. 7, 9. Act. 2. 38. and this not by the Old Covenant (as some would have
it) which is disanulled, but by that with Abraham, which is yet in force, Gal.
3. 17.

And besides, the same that are the subjects of the New Covenant, were the
subjects of the Old, even the house of Israel and Judah, Jer. 31. 31, 32. Heb.
8.

As the Faith of Abraham was to be exercised in the Promise (which was made to
him) for his Seed; so many other Parents Faith be acting for theirs. It Is true
all of them may not be saved, the same is to be said of adult Professors, and
therefore the Promise unto either (as to rea interest) is to be understood
indefinitely not universally; even as promises attending Family instruction,
yea and the public Preaching of the Word: Christ is with his Ministers to the
end of the World, though all that hear be not converted; they are the means
usually blessed to such ends.

But there is a real interest in the New Covenant, such as is certainly
attended with Salvation, when the special blessings of it be theirs, Heb. 8.
10. 1 Pet. 3. 9. 1 Pet. 1. 23. this is it that I would chiefly inquire after
here, when it is afforded?

Real actual and personal interest in the New and better Covenant, is afforded
unto Souls when they attain unto union with Jesus Christ, and the gift of
Faith, not one moment of time before.

Abstractedly from Christ or till in him, not one Promise is thine; For, all
the Promises of God [in him] are yea, and [in him] Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. Ephesians.
3. 6. all made, treasured up, and fulfilled or accomplished in him; if
Christless, then Promiseless^, Ephesians. 2. 12. Romans 8. 32. Jesus Christ is the
first saving gift of God; Christ and the Promises go together.

There are special marks of distinction whereby persons in Covenant are
differenced from the World, which agree to none that are out of Christ, Heb. 9.
15. they are called ones that receive the Promise. Abraham that famous
Covenanter was not actually so, till the time of his effectual calling; from
thence the four hundred and thirty years do commence, which give the first date
to the Covenant or Promise, as made with him, Genesis 12. Gal. 3. 17. not from the
day of his Nativity, much less from Eternity, although then he was an Elect
Vessel: by becoming Christ's, men become Abraham's Seed and Heirs of Promise,
ver. 9. 14, 26, 29.

So the New Covenant runs to the House of Israel and Judah, Heb. 8 13. and
none are the spiritual Israel for Life and Salvation till in him, Romans 2. 28,
29. Till then they are so far from a Covenant state, which is of Life, Peace,
Mercy, Salvation, Mal. 25. Isa. 54. 10. and 55. 3. Luke 1. 71, 72. Romans 11. 26,
27. That they are declared to be in an opposite state, they are at enmity, dead
in trespasses and sins, and children of wrath as well as others, Ephesians. 2. 1,
2, 3, 5, 8, 15, 16. Col. 1 21.

This may appear further, by an enumeration of the principal blessings of the
New Covenant: it is promised there, that he will write his Law in their hearts,
and be to them a God, Heb. 8. 10. but till in Christ, they are without God in
the World, Ephesians. 2. 12.

The greatest difficulty is, as to the great privilege of Pardon or Remission
of sin, under which the whole of Justification is signified, Heb. 8. 10, 12.
Romans 11. 27.

Some think that we are justified from Eternity, others at the death of Christ:
but actual personal Justification of a sinner before God, is at his union with
Jesus Christ and the gift of Faith, not before. For,

1. None are actually interested in the righteousness of Jesus Christ, before
union with him and the gift of Faith: it is he that is made unto us
righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30. 2 Cor. 5. 21. if without Christ, then without his
righteousness, Romans 5. 18. By the righteousness of one upon all unto
Justification of Life; none therefore ever attain Justification without a
righteousness; For, it consists in a Divine declaration of a persons being
righteous; and if he were not so, it were a false Sentence, which is
incompatible to the true God.

Neither will a righteousness of his own working out (though by the help of
Grace) serve for this end of Justification, but of that one Jesus Christ: hence
ver. 19. By the obedience of one, many are made righteous? As, his suffering
and death did make satisfaction for sin, so his obedience is a righteousness
meriting blessings, even Eternal Life, ver. 21. and it is called the
righteousness of Faith, Phil. 3. 9. that being a means for our application of
that righteousness which is given, Romans 3. 22, 25, 26. Not that Faith is the
meritorious, procuring cause of our Justification; it has not the same
causality therein, that Jesus Christ has. No more is required to the release
of our obligation it self, than what the Law (by which we are obliged) does
exact, which is satisfaction as to Duty and Penalty; the solution thereof was
by Jesus Christ alone: but more is required partly to make way for this, viz. a
compact or new Covenant concerning it, without which all sufferings by another,
had been of no advantage to us; partly as a means of application, viz. Faith,
Romans 10. 10. with the heart man believes unto (i. e. as a means unto)
righteousness; and hence Justification is often said to be by Faith, Romans 3.
28. Romans 5. 1. And the Question then, was not how are men manifested and
declared in their own Consciences to be justified, but how are they justified
before God and in his fight? and that is, not before, but by Faith, Gal. 3. 11.

The scope of the Apostle, Romans 4. is, to prove that we are justified by Faith
and the righteousness thereof, and not by works of the Law without cause of
glorying, ver. 2. from the instances of Abraham and David, ver. 3. for what
says the Scripture, Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for
righteousness, and ver. 6. David deseribeth the blessedness of the man unto
whom God imputes righteousness without Works. And here note, [Pardon of sin]
is not the whole of Justification, there is also necessary unto that end, a
righteousness; if it were of our own working out, then we were justified and
saved by our own works (which the Scripture generally denies) this were to
confound Justification and Sanctification; as if Jesus Christ only satisfied
for the sins and defects of a righteousness which we perform, so as that is
accepted unto Life; whereas it is by a righteousness of Faith, which is not of
our own working out, but wrought out for us by Jesus Christ. The false Prophets
themselves from among the Jews, that urged these works of the Law upon the
Romans and Galatians, insisted much upon the ceremonials, which plainly
implies an acknowledgement of sin, and argues that they did not expect
Justification without pardon, but carnally looked for pardon in the way of
their own works; and the Apostle in opposition to them excludes out of
Justification, not only works wrought by their own natural power, but even
those which were by sanctifying Grace; for the works of Abraham and David (who
were believers) are here excluded.

Some think the righteousness of Jesus Christ, or his active obedience in our
stead needless; unless as a part of his satisfaction for sin, because (say
they) the Law requires not of us both suffering and obedience.

I Answer, The Law as a Covenant of Works, required suffering in satisfaction
for sin, and as it belongs to the Covenant of Grace, so it requires perfect
obedience (to be fulfilled by Jesus Christ) as the condition of the
Justification and Life of sinners, and new obedience, (which refers to
sanctification) is to be performed by Christians as the fruit and effect of
their spiritual Life. Rather it was needless that Jesus Christ should fulfill
righteousness or yield active obedience to the Law as part of a satisfaction
for sin, when by his passive obedience he underwent death, which was the very
same and all that the Law threatened against the sinner.

If man had never violated or broken the Covenant of Works, or had never
sinned, then the Law would have required only righteousness of him for Life;
the tenor of it being Do and Live.

When man had sinned, then the Law (at a Covenant of Works) required only
suffering, and threatened death, Genesis 2. 17. but ceased in its promise of Life;
that immediately became null and void. It is true, the Law as a natural rule of
righteousness required still perfect obedience, that was due to God by right of
Creation, and his sinning could not free him from the obligation of it. It
promised nothing to a sinner; it would imply a contradiction that it should
promise Life to him still upon perfect unsinning obedience, when he was already
a sinner under the threatening of Death. Yea, if immediately after Adams
sinning, satisfaction had been made, and he pardoned, yet he had been but in
statu quo prius, in his former state; If the Covenant of Works had been in
force again is at the first, he must afterward have yielded perfect obedience,
else no promise of Life; and therefore there is no incongruity, in saying, that
man sinning, the Law required satisfaction for sin, and yet also required
righteousness unto Life; much more in our case; for there is another Covenant,
viz. of Grace made with Jesus Christ the second Adam, wherein he has
undertaken by suffering to make satisfaction for our sin, without which we
could never have been freed from the threatened death, there was no other way to
it; the Lord might have refused a substitute, and therefore might (without any
show of injustice) put in what terms he pleased for our restoration unto Life.

If freedom from threatened death were obtained, still the Lord might have
annihilated us, we had no promise of Eternal Life; that in the Covenant of
Works being null and void, upon the transgression of the first Adam.

Behold therefore, the Lord agrees to stand to the first terms; the second
Adam undertaking to do what the first should have done, to fulfill the same
righteousness, the Lord does thereupon promise Life again. Thus the Law is
drawn into the Covenant of Grace, and requires the same perfect righteousness
as before, to be fulfilled not by our selves for Life, but by Jesus Christ the
second Adam, as the aforementioned Scriptures do witness; which assert not only
suffering, but also the righteousness of that one Jesus Christ to be necessary
unto Justification and Life, as Romans 5. 18, 19, etc. and hence the Sinai
Covenant (which he fulfilled) did run in the first form of Do and Live.

The ground of this mistake is a false supposition, viz. that no more is
needful unto Life, but satisfaction for our sin and disobedience; as if Life
would naturally follow upon that, which is to say, either that we have Life
without any righteousness (whereas there is no Promise of it to Adam, or to any
since, that run that way) or else that we have it by a righteousness of our own
working out, Christ satisfying for our sins and defects therein, and this is to
affirm that we have life still by the Covenant of Works and in the way thereof,
which to affirm is very anti-evangelical and unscriptural; For, there are many
Testimonies, that unto the pardon of sin there is needful a New Covenant, Heb.
8. 12. and that Life is by that, and the righteousness required to it, wrought
out not by our selves, but by another for us, even Jesus Christ.

And thus the death of Jesus Christ was needful to our freedom from death,
although we obeyed in him, or he obeyed in our stead, to merit for us Eternal
Life, which is promised thereupon, not now by the Old Covenant of Works, but by
the New Covenant of Grace.

And thus although Christ fulfilled the Law for us, so as it is imputed to us,
and we made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Yet it does not
follow that we should be freed altogether from the obligation of the Law unto
obedience; For, the righteousness of Jesus Christ, his obeying and fulfilling
of the Law for us, was as the condition of Life, or that upon which the Lord
has promised Justification unto Life; but we may be (and are) obliged to
obedience, not for that, but for other ends; not in the least for our
Justification and title to Life; but as a part of our Sanctification; and we
sin in not obeying, that we may glorify God by those fruits of our being
Spiritually alive. Christ's obedience was for one end, ours is for another; as
his sufferings were for one end, our afflictions for another, and neither of
them unnecessary.

2. No actual interest in the promises of the New and better Covenant before
union with Jesus Christ and Faith: Even the Elect of God so long as unconverted
and without Christ are without promises, as I have manifested, Ephesians. 2. 12. 2
Cor. 1. 20. Gal. 3. 22. they were not from Eternity the Seed of Abraham, ver.
29. he had no Seed so early.

If the sinner himself had satisfied, then it had been no pardon; for he is
not-pardoned that pays his whole debt himself; but Jesus Christ interposed,
he underwent the Curse, and the New Covenant or Free Promise, is Gods grant or
act of Pardon, Heb. 8. 11. and 10. ver. 16, 17. This is my Covenant -- Their
sins and iniquities will I remember no more. Remission of sin then, is a
glorious fruit and benefit of the New Covenant, not only manifested but
conferred thereby. God justifies, Romans 8. 33. and this is his pardoning act.
Not Faith it self or any Grace within us, is that which gives the pardon:
Faith only receives the Remission of sins, Act. 10. 43. and the Divine gift of
it is by an immutable thing, even by the Promise of the New Covenant.

And hence, if any Object, That Jesus Christ as a Surety, had the obligation of
the Elect transferred upon him, and made full satisfaction to the Law for them,
and so disabled it for holding them obliged, because they cannot eventually be
damned.

It is Answered, As our obligation and condemnation was by the Covenant of
Works, so our declared freedom from its obligation, and our Justification, must
be by the New Covenant; that is the way laid out for the giving of it forth.
And though our sin was transferred upon him, and an Act passed which rendered it
certain, that we should be justified (yea and sanctified too) in due season,
yet not so, as that we were immediately disobliged, but in the way laid out by
Divine appointment for that end.

The Covenant of Works being violated, though satisfaction must be given to
that, yet that contained no Promise of Life to a sinner upon another
undergoing the very penalty threatened therein, and therefore was so far from
giving ipso facto deliverance, that it would have availed nothing toward it,
without a New Covenant, because payment by a Surety was a refusable
satisfaction; the Lord (without any appearance of injustice) might have said,
the Soul that has sinned it shall die. Therefore the Sentence of the Law lies
against us, till by the Covenant of Grace we be discharged from it, in the way
and time therein appointed, which is at union with the Lord Jesus.

3. None are actually and personally the Seed of Jesus Christ as the second
Adam, before union with him and Faith; therefore none are actually and
personally justified till then.

They are only his Seed, such as he redeemed that he does justify, Isa. 53.
10, 11. Romans 3. 24, 25. The two Adams are paralleled, Romans 5. 6. to the end.
The day that the first Adam sinned, the Law passed a Sentence of Death upon all
his Seed, ver. 12. virtually they all sinned and died there, but not actually,
till they exist or have a being: and as none are the Seed of the first Adam,
actually under his sin and condemnation till they be naturally born of him into
the world of sinners; so none are the Seed of Jesus Christ the second Adam,
actually under his righteousness to Justification of Life, till they be
spiritually born of him into the World of Saints, ver. 16, 18, 19. Joh. 1. 12.
Gal. 3. 16. the one Seed Christ, to whom the Promise is made, is not exclusive
of infant Seed as to Ordinances; but of an adult Seed, which fought
Justification and Eternal Life, by the Works of the Law, thus the one seed is
that of Faith, ver. 26. For ye are the Children of God by Faith in Jesus Christ.

Indeed Representatively, we were not only justified, but also sanctified and
glorified at the Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2.
5, 6. He has quickened us together with Christ, and has raised us up
together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Not that
we were the principal actors by him, and he merely our delegate; For, then we
were Self Redeemers, Self-saviors, it were more properly our act than his;
Jesus Christ so represented us; as he was the principal actor, and owner of all
still, the Redeeming act was his, not ours, Gal. 3. 13. Revel. 5. 9. Gal. 4. 5.
Rom 3. 24, 25. the righteousness his, Romans 5. 18, 19 21. It is his
subjectively, he is the S^bject of it, objectively ours, we the Objects; yea,
he so represented us, as all was federally ours in him, it was agreed that
afterward we should have it; all was for us in the Covenant, but we are not
actually his Seed one moment of time before Faith, Romans 5. 1.

To say, therefore, that we are justified, not in our persons, but to our
persons in Christ; is to grant what is desired: For, men cannot be actually
justified but in their own Persons, and that cannot be till they actually exist
and have personality: and seeing, after their Nativity, their persons are
unjustified, they cannot at the same time be said to be justified.

Indeed the persons were determined, Jesus Christ had full assurance that he
should not die at uncertainties, Isa. 53. 11. But that does not argue, the
immediateness of their Justification, that is in the appointed season.

We must therefore carefully distinguish, between Justification it self in the
abstract, (consisting in remission of sins and righteousness prepared) and our
being justified, as Mr. Norton says, Orthod. Evang. p. 314.

Or distinguish between Justification actually procured, and it actually
applied; the former is before Faith, the latter not so. As to the former, see
Romans 5. 8, 9, 10. Our being reconciled was at the death of his Son, not at the
time of our Conversion. Justification in this sense is the Object of Faith, and
may be before the act; thus Heb. 1. 3. When he had by himself purged our sins,
sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high, so Heb. 2. 17. Remission of
sin then, purging and reconciliation it self, were complete at the death of
Jesus Christ, then prepared for us, but not conferred upon us, till union with
Jesus Christ and Faith.

4. All are in a state of condemnation till union with Jesus Christ by Faith,
and so have no actual Justification till then; for these are opposite, Romans 8.
33, 34. It is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? The same persons
then cannot at the same time be both justified and condemned; for he proves
immunity from condemnation by their being justified; and they are persons [in
Christ Jesus] that only have this immunity, ver. 1. None out of Christ actually
enjoy it, and no union with him one moment of time before regeneration and
Faith; for if any man be in Christ be in a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. All
unbelievers are condemned already, Joh. 3. 18. The wrath of God abides on
them, ver. 36. Are Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2 3. Even Elect vessels before
Faith, are here said to be in that state; under a Sentence of wrath and
condemnation, not only naturally de jure and quoad meritum, as to desent, for
so are all; the sinful actings of Saints deserve wrath; whereas here such wrath
is intended as differenced their state in time past, from what it was since
they believed; it was inconsistent with present Justification unto Life. Though
Jesus Christ alone made satisfaction to justice for their sin, and was made a
Curse for them, so as not the least Atome of the Curse formally, that is, of
vindictive wrath shall fall upon them in execution; yet not only materially
they are under it, but the Laws Sentence of condemnation is against them: and
they are obnoxious to many tokens of wrath, not only in their bodies in many
sicknesses, infirmities, and painful diseases, but in their Souls, by
ignorance, darkness, with many other sinful dispositions, and inclinations, and
in their whole man by subjection and thraldom to Satan (Col. 1. 13. Act. 26.
18. 2 Timothy 2. 26.) and deprivation of fellowship and communion with God, and
liability to the terror of such a state; and all these not in the least to
make satisfaction, but for other ends, as that Grace may be the more admired in
Salvation out of such a miserable state, Ephesians. 2. 11, 12. to humble them, etc.

If it be Objected, That our obligation being transferred upon Jesus Christ,
and he having born our sin and Curse, justice and equity requires that the
Elect should upon his death be ipso facto actually discharged; their debt being
paid, it cannot afterward be charged upon principal or Surety.

It may be Answered, More is to be considered in this case than a mere debt,
for here, the person was firstly and principally under the obligation, as Dr.
O. observes, satisfaction by a Surety being accepted, the father might put in
what terms he pleased, without any show of injustice, and so there is no
necessity that the discharge be ipso facto upon his death.

Also a debt may be charged upon the principal debtor, till he obtains an
actual interest in the satisfaction of the Surety; till then, though no further
satisfaction will ever be exacted from Jesus Christ or the Elect, yet the Laws
obligation unto wrath may lie against them for other ends; as to quicken them
to seek deliverance out of that deplorable condition they are in. The want of
an immediate freedom, is not from the defectiveness of the satisfaction made by
Jesus Christ, but from a present incapacity in those who are to be the subjects
of the freedom: as a full ransom may be paid for Slaves, yet by reason of the
distance, an after-day may be set for their release; So, the Elect whilst
unborn are incapable of being actually disobliged; for the subjects must exist
before even a relative change can pass upon them; also, after they are born,
they are at a great distance from God, without making up of that, they are
incapable of an actual possession of Redemption. As a common person Jesus
Christ represented many that lived in several Ages of the World, and therefore
of necessity the actual discharge of particular persons must be at different
times, not all at once, but when they become his Seed.

Further, A debt may be charged upon the principal debtor by an Old Law, till a
New Law or Covenant declares his discharge from the obligation: Thus the
Sentence of the violated Covenant of Works may stand against men, till they be
declared to be discharged by the New Covenant, Heb. 10. 16, 17. Yea observe,
Jesus Christ in suffering death for our Redemption, stood as Mediator of the
New Testament, Heb. 9. 15. Though therein he satisfied for our breaking of the
Covenant with the first Adam, as this was drawn into the Covenant of Grace, as
the condition thereof.

Once more, A debt may be charged upon the principal debtor, after a Sureties
satisfying the obligation, in case the Sureties name was not at first in the
same obligation, but is admitted afterward by voluntary contract, Covenant, and
consent; For, there the Covenant is the only determining rule of all matters
concerning the discharge. Why are they not sanctified and glorified immediately
after their coming into the World (these being effects of the death of Christ)
but because the Covenant provideth otherwise?

If the Name of Jesus Christ (as as Surety) had been Originally or at first in
Adams obligation, then more might have been said for an immediate discharge
upon his payment of our debt, and suffering death; but this was not the case,
for if it had, then his suffering death had been necessary and unavoidable,
though no New Testament had ever been made, yea the making of it had been
unnecessary, vain, and useless.

Whereas it was extremely necessary, there could have been no transferring of
our guilt to him, without it, and his submitting to death was by a voluntary
contract, Joh. 10. 17, 18. And his name not being at first in our bond, hence
his payment was a refusable satisfaction.

It was by an act of Free Grace that he was admitted to undertake for us, and
his payment accepted in our stead, and so, though he paid the idem, the same
that we did owe, yet there was nothing contrary to justice or equity, if the
Father added other terms than before, and so no need that we should be ipso
facto discharged. And the Law passes Sentence not only upon sinful actions,
but upon the persons for them, Genesis 2. 17. Gal. 3. 22. And therefore no
Justification, till delivered out of this state, which is at union with Jesus
Christ and Faith.

5. I might argue from the many absurdities that attend the asserting
Justification from Eternity: It would sound harsh to deny that Adam was an
Elect vessel; and being Elected, if Eternal Justification be admitted, then he
must be actually both under the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace at
once; and so was bound at the same time to seek Life in two ways utterly
inconsistent each with other, Gal. 3. 12. viz. by Works, and by Jesus Christ
through Faith. Yea, then Adam was actually justified from sin, before he had
any sin to be justified from, before sin entered into the World by his F^ll,
Romans 5. 12. and did not become guilty by ^his falling, being disobliged from
Eternity.

Neither will this be evaded by saying, Our sin was imputed to Jesus Christ
before committed, and an actual existence of sin is no more requisite unto our
disobligation, than unto our obligation unto the punishment thereof.

I Answer, The sins of the Elect were not actually upon Jesus Christ, till he
came actually under the Law, which was their very obligation, Gal. 4. 4, 5. And
thus all their sin by that Law did meet upon him before committed; answerably,
when persons do actually come under the New Covenant; I grant they are
justified, yea even virtually from sins not yet committed: but the Old Law of
Works must needs be in force against them till a New discharges from it, and
this is not till union with Jesus Christ and the gift of Faith.

And O how miserable then, are all they who are out of Christ! they are in an
unjustified estate, seeing they have no Word or Promise to assure them that the
Lord has laid down his Suit against them; but great is the happiness of all in
Christ, of all believers, in that they stand justified before the Lord, Romans 4.
verse. 7. Blessed are, they whose iniquities are forgiven, etc. it is sin alone
that renders miserable; and now the Apostle challenges even Earth and Hell
for all such, Romans 8, 33, 34. It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? It
was God that was injured by sin, and who has power to discharge from it, none
can reverse or disanul Gods act; who shall lay any thing to their charge? Sin,
Satan, their own hearts may draw up many charges, but will be able to make none
good against them, why? it is God that justifies. It is very extensive, it
reaches to all sins, Col. 2. 13. Jesus Christ is a propitiation for the sins
that are past, Romans 3. 25. that is, for sins committed before his Incarnation;
for it is spoken in opposition to those that sought to be justified by the
Works of the Law, verse. 20, 21. To draw off from this, he tells them (as Heb.
9. 15.) that the Redemption of transgressions that were under the first
Testament, or their remission, was not by legal sacrifices and observances, but
by the blood of Jesus Christ. It does not deny his being a propitiation for
sins to come, his faithfulness is engaged to afford the remission of these, 1 John 1. verse. 8, 9. 1 John 2. verse. 1, 2. even Believers are daily sinning, and
the Lord will be extending pardoning mercy unto them, yea he will all their
life long be magnifying this Title, or part of his Name, The Lord God pardoning
iniquity, transgression, and sin, Exodus 34. 7. yea, it is his glory that he is
a sin pardoning God, Mica. 7 ver. 18. Who is a God like unto thee pardoning
iniquity? etc.

CHAP. XII.
Of the evidences of interest in the New Covenant.

IT may be Questioned, How or by what means may a Soul know its actual Interest
in, and Title to the New and better Covenant, and the better promises thereof?

For the clearing of this, I shall not insist upon the testimony of the Divine
Spirit, which is the primary evidence, Romans 8. 16. 1 John 5. 8. nor upon
Sanctification, as it stands in spiritual dispositions and inclinations for
compliance with the Divine Will, either in causing an answerableness of heart,
to what is commanded from us, (comprised under a writing the Law there), or
working into Evangelical obedience in the Life, or bringing up a
self-resignation to the Lord, as Isa. 44. 5. in tho Covenant it is expressly
promised, [they shall be my people]. These things are insisted upon elsewhere;
yea, frequently by others, therefore I shall pass them over at present, and
mention only one evidence.

Answ. By the operations and actings of precious Faith, a Soul may have a clear
knowledge of its actual interest in the New and better Covenant: That noble
Grace of Faith has such a special relation to the Covenant, (which is made up
of promises), that the Gospel is called the Word of Faith, Romans 10. 8. It is so
expressive of the great matters of it, that Faith often and the Law or Old
Covenant are the opposite terms of a distinction, Gal. 3. ver. 2, 5, 12, 23.
Yea, ver. 9. they that are [of Faith] are blessed with faithful Abraham: they
are sharers with him in the same Covenant, and blessed therein: the very
blessings of Abraham come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, ver. 14. That
we might receive the Promise of the Spirit through Faith. Much is to be drawn
out of the free Promise for our relief and succor in any condition, yea for
the influenceing of any other Graces, by Faith. By that, our entercouse with
God here is kept up: Not that the Promise is made to beliving as a Grace in us,
or as a gracious Act put forth by us, but to the Believer as in Christ. Faith
is not magnified as a quality, but as in the Office of receiving the Promise,
and of excellent use therein. Verse. 22. That the Promise through the Faith of
Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. Faith is not then properly
the condition of the Covenant, upon the performance of which, they have a right
and title to it; but a choice effect of it, and a singular means for the
application of the promises, and fetching in of Covenant blessings to the Soul:
by that, the Promise or what is in the Promise, is given to it, and Faith
having thus to do with the Promises, it must needs have an aptitude above other
Graces, above Sanctification and Evangelical obedience to witness a Souls
interest in the everlasting Covenant, Heb. 11. 1. It is an evidence of things
not seen; and therefore it self is not as inevident as those other things.

There are various acts of Faith, that by the concurrence of the Divine Spirit
may evidence interest in the Covenant.

1. By Faith in the Free Promise such glorious discoveries of the Grace and
Lov^ of God in Jesus Christ unto sinners ar^ afforded, as their hearts consent
to the offer thereof: it is by the shining of Gospel light through the Free
Promise into the hearts of men, that they are turned from darkness to light,
Act. 26. 18. The highest natural light will leave them short of a discovery of
sin, in its exceeding sinfulness, and of the riches of Grace in Jesus Christ
for the recovery of lost sinners; they cannot see these aright till they be
revealed by the Divine Spirit, Matthew. 16. 17. 1 Cor. 2. 10, 14. Tit. 2. 11, 12.
Unbelievers may have a notion of these things, but when they are seen by an eye
of Faith, they appear in another manner, Romans 1 16, 17. The Gospel is the power
of God to Salvation, to every one that believes. The heart stood immediately
before at an infinite distance from the Lord Jesus, and was full of opposition
against him, but when there is a work of Faith upon it, then Di^ine power is
exerted by the Word or Promise of the Gospel, for the drawing it off from all
other objects to ^itch upon Jesus Christ alone for Salvation in a way of Free
Grace; then it ^ccepteth of the blessed offer, when all ^rguments in the World
before would not prevail with it. The heart that stood off from him, is then
brought over to him by the Gospel, and why? [For therein is the righteousness
of God revealed from Faith to Faith]. It is in a Gospel-Glass that a Soul
gains a right discovery of the excellency of Jesus Christ, and that
righteousness of his without which no Salvation. It is by Faith that there is a
learning of the Father, so as effectually to be drawn unto the Son. This
cordial consenting to the offer of the Gospel, in submitting to the obediential
righteousness of Jesus Christ alone for acceptance unto Life, this is Faith
unto Justification, Romans 10. ver. 3, 4, 6, 10. as the like consent to have him
for our Lord to rule over us by his Spirit dwelling in us, is Faith unto
Sanctification, Act. 15. 9. Romans 8. ver. 9, to 16. Thus the Soul makes out to
the blood of Jesus Christ for cleansing from all sin; and the first act of
closing with Jesus Christ is by Faith in a Free Promise that is the first Grace
that lives in it the first breathings of Spiritual Life are thereby: such
powerful and admirable alterations are found at first acquaintance with Jesus
Christ, by discoveries above sense, fetching in the heart unto him beyond all
other means, that they must needs be evidencing of interest in the Promise or
Covenant from whence all these come. Such first things have a mark upon them,
and often are most discernable, the state thereupon being so vastly different
from what it was, how refined so ever the nature was before.

Thus some have had their interest cleared up in such a word as that, 1 Timothy 1.
15. This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ
came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief.

By the eye of Faith a Soul gains such a prospect of matchless Love and Free
Grace, as it is won over to Jesus Christ thereby, through a powerful
application of the Promise to it self, 1 John 5. 10, 11. He that believes on
the Son has the witness in himself; he being enabled by Grace to entertain and
cordially subscribe to the blessed record upon a Divine Testimony, viz. that
God has given to us Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son; thereby he
sets to his Seal that God is true in the Word of his Grace, that has a
witnessing power, and the person has the witness within himself, even when he
sometimes does not discern it.

2. By Faith the Soul makes out to Jesus Christ in the Free Promise, as he
alone that gives it subsistence in spiritual Life: Oneness with Jesus Christ
cannot be without interest in the Covenant, 2 Pet. 1. 4. [In whom] are given to
us exceeding great and precious Promises, etc. Ephesians. 3. 6. Partakers of the
Promise in Christ. Ver. 17. That Christ may dwell in your heart by Faith. It is
a promise-hold that we have of Jesus Christ here, his in-being and indwelling
is by Faith; so he even animateth the Souls of Saints, Gal. 2. 20. I live, yet
not I, but Christ lives in me, how? I live by the Faith of the Son of God.
Others live by sense, they seed upon earthly comforts, but Christians live by
Faith; by what is laid up in Divine Promises, by these things they live; they
know not how to subsist in any state or condition without a Promise: they would
count themselves dead creatures without that, whatever earthly enjoyments they
had in possession. Neither will a Promise alone satisfy without Jesus Christ
in it, [Christ lives in me], he is the very Life of their lives: without him
nothing but spiritual swoonings, faintings, dyings, and all from the want, and
failings, of Faith. That fetches in all influences from Jesus Christ for the
supporting, and has the great hand and stroke in all the actings, of spiritual
Life; all spiritual motions are managed thereby, Heb. 11. 6. Without Faith it
is impossible to please God. And therefore Sanctification is but a secondary or
after evidence. That is not discernable till first there be a discerning Faith,
which speaks Justification. If Faith be inevident, all other Graces will be
so also.

Faith may be showed unto others by Works, Jam. 2. 18. A man may be
Declaratively justified by Works, but if a man doubts of his Faith, he will
as well doubt of his Works, whether they be from a Gospel root or not? For, no
Love of the right stamp (and so no due obedience) but what is the fruit and
issue of Faith in the Lord Jesus; For, that works by Love, Gal. 5. 6.

As first acts of Faith, do not consist in believing that our sins are
pardoned, but in a receiving Jesus Christ and his righteousness as the way to
pardon, Joh. 1. 12. So, if Christians kept up in acts of Faith by outgoings of
heart to him in the way of the Promise for all that is wanted, there would be
not only sweet flowings of Love and Evangelical obedience issuing thence; but
also they would be filled with all joy and peace in believing, Romans 15. 13.

I have often thought, if Christians did give more attendance to such direct
acts of Faith, and spent less time in questioning their conditions, or giving
way to doubtings about them, they would find their interest in the Covenant
cleared up, yea and consolation also coming in as by the by.

3. By Faith Souls are venturing upon the Free Grace and faithfulness of God,
in his Covenant in the greatest distresses with good success: The New Covenant
is made up all of Promises, and the Gospel is called the Word of Faith, because
it is the Work of Faith to draw out what is vesseled up there, Heb. 10. 38. Now
the Just shall live by Faith. Not only as to Justification, but as to
expectation of mercy promised. Many would be acting Faith in the concluding
interest in Christ and Eternal Life, but they should be acting it by a cordial
owning of Evangelical principles; Yea, Christians should lead their whole Life
in looking to the Love and Faithfulness of God in his Promise for all their
relief and succor in any condition they come into here, yea even for Eternal
Mercy, Heb. 6. 18. They are pursued by spiritual enemies, corruptions, and
Temptations, and are in great danger, but by hope (which flows from Faith,
and can act no higher than Faith does) they go, yea run for refuge, to the
hope, to the heavenly glory that is set before them, so as they lie as at
Anchour in such stormy days; and here are two immutable things, the Promise
and the Oath of God, that by these they might have strong consolation. By Faith
they realize the very things contained in the Promise or Covenant, and so their
interest in it is experimentally witnessed to them. They can say, at such a
time when we were in Soul distress, so as all the means in the World could
contribute nothing toward inward ease, quietment and consolation; then we
being enabled by Grace to bear the weight of our Souls, and our conditions upon
the Faithfulness of God in his Covenant or Free Promise, we found relief and
refreshment. It was not merely our own fancy and imagination, but we were
delivered out of our distresses; by Faith we were enabled to draw out of the
Promise, the Milk of consolation, which it was beyond the power of all
creatures to afford us, and thus they find that the Covenant or Promise is
their own.

4. By Faith in the Free Promise, there is a standing Conquerours in Jesus
Christ over all spiritual enemies: it is a great matter of the Covenant, that
the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpents bead, Genesis 3. 15. And therefore
there is (through Grace) a vanquishing all the enemies of Salvation, Sin, and
Satan, through the blessed Seed the Lord Jesus. The Promises are accomplished
within the Soul, but the way is Ephesians. 6. 16. Above all take the Shield of
Faith.

That not only is best for descrying Satan in all his Stratagems, but for the
withstanding of him also, Joh. 5. 4. This is the Victory that overcomes the
World, even our Faith. When the Soul has Combats, or Spiritual Conflicts, and
reason is foiled, cannot bear up, then Faith appears as Victorious, not in
its own strength, but in the strength of Christ and his conquest, which it
makes use of in these encounters. And thus conquering acts of Faith, as before
venturing, relieving, and discovering acts, are useful for witnessing interest
in the Covenant.

I might show that Faith has other acts, as, acts of assurance, drawing up
conclusions, he has loved me, and given himself for me, Gal. 2. 20. But I have
said enough to show that it gives a knowledge of being within the New Covenant.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Use of Absolute Promises.

THe Question will now be, What Use is there of absolute, better Promises? When
or in what cases are they to be made use of?

Answ. 1. They are of Use for the manifestation of the riches of Divine Grace
and Love to sinners: if there may be some Grace in promising great blessings
upon a very small condition, certainly there must be more Grace and Love in
promising the same absolutely, without any condition. This makes to the
magnifying of the Lord in his owning Israel above all people; that he loved
because he would love, Deuteronomy. 7. 6, 7, 8. not because they were greater, or more
lovely than others, or had any beauty or comeliness in them, but for his own
sake, as is often intimated. Absolute Promises are high expressions of Divine
Love, as Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12. They proclaim rich mercy and great Love, Ephesians. 2.
4, 5. That the Lord should break through all unworthiness and undeservings,
this may work into the greatest self-emptiness and self-abasement. The Lord
peremptorily promised the establishing of David's throne for ever, 2 Samuel 7. 13,
16. and this Grace melts his heart into a deep sense of his own nothingness,
ver. 18, 19. Who am I, O Lord God; what is my house, etc. Thou have spoken also
of thy Servants house for a great while to come, and is this the manner of man,
O Lord God?

So that absolute Promises of Divine Grace are of great efficacy to render
deeply humbled and abased; and he breaks forth into admiration of God on this
account, ver. 22. Wherefore thou art great, O Lord, for there is none like thee
--

And as the absoluteness of the Promises, sets forth the excellency of the
New Covenant above the Old; and the gloriousness of this dispensation above any
that was preceding: so it may help against that temptation to live in the
Spirit of the Old Covenant, and it is mentioned in the Epistle to the Hebrews
for this purpose.

2. They are of use in the impartation or communication of first Grace unto the
Souls of men: their first interest therein, is by the efficacious operations of
the Spirit in absolute Promises. These are called by some, Promises of Grace,
which presuppose a being without it, thus Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12. Immediately
before writing the Law in the heart, another Law of sin was found in its power
there. The moment before the Lords becoming their God, they were without God in
the world (Ephesians. 2. 12.) The instant before the remission of sin, the guilt of
it was found there. All first Grace is comprised under these Promises, so that
the bringing Souls over to a first close with Jesus Christ, ^s by an absolute
Promise: though they may have their eyes upon those called conditional Promises
in conversion, yet if ever they arrive at any Drachme of especial Grace, it is
in an absolute way; it is the fruit, the result and issue of an absolute
Promise: for as all first Grace is contained therein, so till that be
accomplished upon them, no qualifications or conditions are wrought in their
Souls altering their state, or which are acceptable and pleasing unto God. The
instant before quickening, Souls were dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 4.
Immediately before reconciliation, they stood at enmity against the Lord, Col.
1. 21. The moment before Sanctification they were under sin and pollution. It
is groundlesly therefore, that any Souls stand off from Jesus Christ and the
Free Promise, upon the account of a want of any qualifications; they should
rather immediately close with him therein, as the way to gracious
qualifications which are derived to them through the absolute Promise. The Lord
is a free Agent, may work how he pleases, but has not warranted any Souls to
stay one moment before closing with Jesus Christ, upon the want of any
qualification, or upon any account whatsoever: indeed if he had, then he must
testify his allowance of their persisting so long in unbelief; whereas that
hateful and abominable to him.

3. They are of Use as a provocation to seek, and a direction where to find,
all supplies of Grace wanted: Other Promises may referr to some particular
state or condition, but there are absolute Promises that are of generaluse,
whatever the condition or compliant be, Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12. As first Grace is
promised there, so all after degrees of it, in that of writing the Law in the
heart. As first interest in God is promised, in that of his being their God, so
all after communion with him is included in it. As first Justification is
promised, in his remembering sin no more, so all after remission of sin that is
afforded to those in Covenant with him.

So that absolute Promises are useful at all times; when Souls are ready to
say, What have we to do with other Promises, there is enough in these to help
and succor in all cases, when Souls are at the greatest loss, and cannot find
other Promises mentioning their particular conditions; to be sure, they must
either want some Grace, or fellowship with God or pardon of sin; and the
absolute Promises extend and reach to all these; that they are a standing
relief, bread that never fail, waters that are for ever sure; all is laid up
here that souls can groundedly desire at the hands of God.

And being Absolute, they are Free Promises, no discouragement laid in the way
of souls for closing with them. Often men do ungroundedly take discouragement
for meddling with other Promises, because they cannot see that they have the
qualifications which they are annexed to; but to be sure those that are
absolute, do not presuppose any such qualifications as necessarily
antecedaneous to the closing with them, but they promise all gracious
qualifications that souls have the deepest sense of the want of. Whatever Grace
or degree of it they want, it is here; they are directed to turn in hither.

No ground to stand off from these one moment upon the account of a want of
humiliation, etc. but the rather should they repair hither for it, and for
first Grace when they seem to be without it, for Evangelical sorrow, and all
spiritual frames of heart desirable; when there is nothing discerned as the
qualification but sinfulness, then they had the more need look to, and fasten
upon the Lord in absolute Promises, that all desirable qualifications may be
wrought within them. How should they obtain these, but by looking to the Free
Promise? The absolute Promises are theirs, so far as to make use of them, and
venture upon the Lord in them, for the obtainment of Grace wanted; though they
cannot claim an interest so as to conclude a good estate thence, or that Grace
is enjoyed, before a powerful application of them.

4. They are useful for the strengthening against, and supporting under all
temptations that gracious Souls can be attended with: If it be suggested, that
the Promise is none of theirs, they have nothing to do to meddle with it. Here
is enough to answer, possibly other Promises may be theirs, though at present
they cannot discern it; there are such cloudings, as all experiences, all
qualifications may be out of sight; they may thus sit in darkness and see no
light, and yet may be Children of light, Isa. 50. 10. But however though they
cannot claim any Promise so as to conclude interest in Salvation and Eternal
Life thence, yet they may, so far as to seek an interest therein. The absolute
Promise is theirs in the offer of it, if they should yet be without the special
Grace offered therein. All, where the Gospel comes, have so far a right and
Title to the absolute Promise, as it is their duty to fasten upon it, for the
begetting all gracious qualifications that they seem to be or are without, else
they could not be blamed, condemned, and punished for unbelief, as many are,
Mark 16. 16. Joh. 3. 18. To. 11. 20.

If the temptation be, that it would be presumption to meddle with the Promise
which is none of thine:

It is answered, thou art to look to the Lord in the absolute Promise, that it
may be thine, that Grace may be thine, that God may be thy God, that pardon of
sin may be thine, though thou can not discern at present, that these are
thine.

Such a looking to the Promise, as thence to take encouragement to indulge
itself, or persist in sin, this indeed is presumption; but a cordial looking to
the Lord in, and venturing to take hold of the absolute Promises for the
gaining a freedom from sin, and every gracious frame, this is duty, and the
neglecting of it is presumption, as being a standing out against a Divine Call.

There is a ground for putting forth direct acts of Faith upon the Lord in the
absolute Promise for all Grace wanted. When there is not a present discerning
by a reflexive act, that gracious qualifications are enjoyed, yet there may be
an outgoing of heart in the Promise to God in Jesus Christ for them, or that
they may be afforded. It is a great mistake, to think that we are to exercise
Faith upon the Lord in the Promise, only upon a sight of a condition in our
selves; this were to ground our Faith rather upon something of our own, than
upon the Lord in his Free Promise; it were to subject the absolute Promises and
make them depend upon those that are called conditional as to their efficacy
and usefulness, whereas the truth lies the contrary way; for the New Covenant
is as it were the Fountain of all the Promises to us, and that runs
altogether upon absolute Promises, and therefore those which are called
conditional Promises, being streams flowing thence, and branches of that Tree,
they must be reducible to, and partake of the Nature of the New Covenant, and
so are really absolute in themselves, only as a quickening means to our seeking
after the blessings of them, they are represented sometimes as if they were
dispensed out in a conditional way: but the Lord does not confine himself to
that way, for when Israel was destitute of commendable qualifications, had
failed in the worship of God, and wearied him with their sins, yet he turned
their eye upon an absolute Promise, Isa. 43. 25. I am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions for my Names sake.

5. They are of Use for the evidencing interest in Jesus Christ, and clearing
up how the case stand thas to their Eternal conditions: The Lord can make a
saving change (i. e. such as has Salvation and Eternal Life, infallibly in
connection with it) in the opening of any Promise, but it is from absolute
Grace. The begetting of Faith, or first Grace in the Souls of any, is by an
absolute Promise; For, what condition can there be, in any Soul before first
Grace, to have a Promise annexed to it? It were to frustrate and make void the
undertaking of Jesus Christ, to assert, that the Lord has promised Eternal
Life to a work of nature, or that Souls are in a state of Salvation before
union with Jesus Christ, which they must be, if they had any qualification
which had Salvation certainly promised to it. The Lord says, Ezekiel. 36. 26. A
new heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I
will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart
of flesh. What precedent qualification was here, but stonyness and hardness of
heart, and so uncleanness before the sprinkling, ver. 25. Here then is a
Promise of first Grace, and it is absolute, and the operations of the Spirit
herein are so supernatural and transcendently glorious as they are evidencing.
The Word of the Gospel comes in such power, for the accomplishing the very end
which the Promise is appointed to, and there are such sparklings of Divine
excellency in the impressions that are made upon the Spirits of men hereby,
that without having recourse to any other promises (which are called
conditional) they may read or see their personal interest in an absolute
Promise. By its efficacious application or the fulfilling of it, by their
actual enjoyment of what is promised, they may discern their sharing in it. And
seeing all gracious qualifications are begotten or first wrought by an absolute
Promise, why should not that give evidence, as well as the after sanctified
frames?

Besides, the absolute Promises are made to some persons, even to the house of
Israel and Judah, Ezekiel. 36. 21, to the end, Jer. 31. 31. and being expressions
of the determinate Will of God, hence they must needs be evidencing; For, the
chief intendment of Promises, is, to give assurance how the heart of God
stands toward persons under them; the Lord is ever speaking to them therein
after this manner, I will be your God, and your sins and iniquities will I
remember no more, Ezekiel. 36. 28. Heb. 8. 12. This is the natural Language of the
Covenant to them. And, though unbelievers (who are out of Covenant) may fancy
the same things, and delude themselves, yet this hinders not, but that the
Lord may really speak thus to Believers, who are undoubtedly under it. So
sometimes, the state or condition of a Soul is evidenced, by such Words or
Promises as these, Isa. 41. 10. Be not dismayed, for [I am thy God] Ezekiel. 34.
31. I am your God says the Lord God. Isai. 44. 22. I have blotted out as a
thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins, etc.

The Divine Spirit oftentimes makes such a powerful application of such
promises, and makes such glorious discoveries, of the loving kindness and free
grace of God to the soul, as he gives it clearly to understand that God is
speaking to it therein, and it is the voice of God and not of man or of Satan,
and thus it is evidencing.

The Lord is so shining upon his own graces, as then a soul usually can discern
these; yet it is not merely a reflection upon faith or other graces, that now
give the evidence; but faith receives it as it were upon a Divine testimony.

6. They are of use for the filling souls with consolation in the saddest
conditions, and under the most trying dispensations: Jeremiah was sent to
prophecy of the Jewish captivity, procured by their sin, for the space of
seventy years, yet to keep them from despair and utter despondency, and to
comfort them against all their trials, he not only assures them of a return,
but prophesies of the New Covenant, and its being put into an absolute form,
Jer. 31. 31. Therefore the absolute promises are of comforting use against the
saddest trials that sin it self may bring us under. The Apostle turns their
eye upon those two immutable things, the Promise and the Oath of God, Heb. 6.
18. as those which the Lord appointed on purpose to usher in strong consolation.

Thus we see, that when the Condition of sinners seems most despicable, and
when the graces of Saints are most out of sight, yet then they may have
recourse to the Absolute Promises, and look unto the Lord therein, for all
grace and supply that is wanted.

CHAP. XIV.
Of those that are called Conditional Promises.

SOme may inquire what use is there, of those called Conditional Promises? Or,
when and in what cases are they to be made use of?

Answ. 1. Some of them are of discovering use what an extensiveness there is in
Divine grace, suitable to all the worst conditions that souls can come into: the
conversion of a soul of God, ordinarily is not without a special discovery of
sin, and a lost undone condition by nature, in a Gospel glass, yea a work of
evangelical repentance is experienced there.

Also there may be sometimes a common work, a legal conviction of sin, before
and without a saving change; but that in the ordinary way of Gods dispensation
there is a necessity hereof, on our part, so as if we do not find it, we must
stay for it, till we have it, may not be looking to Jesus Christ, or meddle
with the promise, yea as if it were presumption to attempt believing, that we
may be (as many are) shy of Jesus Christ and the free promise, and stand off
from them, this I see no rule yet for. I think the worst of sinners (even
unsensible ones) are immediately under the invitations and calls of the Gospel,
for they may be condemned for unbelief, as standing out against them. Mark 16.
15, 16. Matthew. 22. 3, 4, 9, 10. Rev. 3. 17, 20.

Many Scriptures alleged for the necessity of such preparations before
conversion, are mentioned as conditional promises; Whereas those are not
restrictive, do not restrain the promises to those that are so qualified, but
rather declare, that large and suitable supplies are to be had in Jesus Christ,
even in such conditions when it seems most unlikely.

And of such use are these words, Isai. 55. 1, 2, 3. Ho every one that thirst
come, etc. There thirsting, was no desirable qualification; it was for that
which did not satisfy, they labored for that which was not bread, verse. 2.
and yet are invited immediately to come to him, as to one that has a variety
of supplies, water and wine to refresh, milk to nourish, and all offered
freely, without money, and without price.

Thus Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I
give you rest. Many are ready to think, that they should seek to be thus weary,
and heavy laden, and till then they may not attempt to come unto Jesus Christ.
Whereas it does not appear, that these were any desirable or commendable
qualifications to be sought after; but rather are expressions of their sad
conditions, and yet here is revealed suitable relief in Jesus Christ; if they be
weary and heavy laden (not only by sin, but) with the yoke of the Law (though
unduly imposed upon them by the Pharisees) yet coming to Jesus Christ they
might have rest; and so whatever other burden, they had sinfully pulled upon
themselves. And besides, the promise is not in this or the other text, annexed
to thirsting or weariness, but to coming unto Jesus Christ.

Thus Jesus Christ is said to be anointed to preach glad tidings for the meek
or the poor, Isai. 61. 1. Luke 4. 18. and to heal the broken hearted, not only
by a sense of sin; but broken by affliction, and distress, temprations, any
way. His scope is not, to restrain the promise, as if it did belong only to
those that are thus qualified; but to show, that the grace of Jesus Christ
reaches and is suitable to those in such deplorable conditions. These are not
frames to be sought after, any more than those that follow, of being Captives,
blind, bruised, but consider men under whatever notion of misery you can, and
here is declared, that there are those very supplies to be had in Jesus Christ
that are suitable and relative thereunto; as rest for the weary, so sight for
the blind, deliverance for the captives, and these take in the worst, even
unsensible sinners; he by discoveries of his grace, brings them into a due
sense of sin.

Thus Matthew. 5. 3, 4, 6. Blessed are the poor in spirit, and those that mourn,
etc. Not that these note Conditions properly, upon coming up to which, they
have right to promised blessedness, else not; for, among others, persecution
has the blessedness twice annexed to it, verse. 10, 11. and outward poverty is
partly intended; Luke 6. 20, 21. as is evident by the antithesis or opposition,
verse. 24, 25. Woe to you rich, etc. and you that are full. Yet, who will say,
that poverty or persecution are desirable, and to be sought that we might
enjoy the blessedness, by coming under the condition of it? Nor can one say, I
am poor, therefore blessed, more than persecuted therefore blessed. These are
not qualifications giving right and title to the promise, and without which
they have it not; but these things are spoken to the disciples, verse. 20. the
promises are annexed to discipleship, or to the person in Christ, rather than
to his qualification of mourning, etc. and whereas they (who before had a right
in Christ to all the promises) might be tempted to think themselves unhappy by
these things, here is a discovery that the seeming sadness of these conditions,
as poverty, persecution, etc. did not exclude from the promised blessedness;
there is suitable relief for them in the promise still. Hence in opposition to
these, there are woes denounced against others in the opposite conditions,
which to outward appearance seemed better, as against the rich, those that are
full, etc.

And thus, these seeming conditions, in stead of being limitations of the
promise, they are discoveries of the extensiveness thereof; holding forth
supplied and succors for souls in Christ, under their saddest trials and
temptations, and in all the various, and worst conditions they can come into,
though not upon the condition of their coming into them.

The following particulars are to be understood when something of special grace
is mentioned, as if it were a condition.

2. Some called Conditional Promises are of declarative use what a high
approbation the Lord has of the persons or things concerned in them: thus,
speaking promiscuously to professors, some of which are sincere, others not,
sometimes it is with an [if] as Heb. 3. 6. [If] we hold fast our confidence
unto the end. To note, that perseverance, in holding fast, is a character of
sound believers, in opposition to others who do apostatize and fall away. Thus
some Scriptures contain a description of the persons who shall obtain those
blessings of the Covenant, they are such as are found believing, repenting,
obeying, in opposition to those which are infidels, disobedient, etc. as Heb.
5. 9. He became the author of eternal salvation to them that obey him. Those
that are in a state of salvation, are characterized by such effects as
obedience, such words conclude Negatively, they that have not these in some
degree, are not saved ones, but the promises are made rather to their persons
in Christ, than to their qualifications (as believing, obeying,) though these
are necessary for the persons: as it behoved the great High Priest even Jesus
Christ, (who had the promises made to him) to be holy, harm less, undefiled,
yet they are not made to him upon the condition of his holiness, or
undefiledness.

Yet I would add, that such promises do testify how acceptable these acts are
to the Lord, as being duties commanded by him, though they be not properly
conditions upon which Covenant mercy is promised to us. Will any say, that
nothing is acceptable unless it be performed under the notion of a condition
upon which the Lord has obliged himself to give our mercy?

Thus many Scriptures that seem to run in a Conditional form, are to be
understood: as Coloss. 1. 21, 22, 23. Romans 2. 7. they declare his approbation
of faith, hope, obedience, etc.

3. They are of exciting and encouraging use to the duty of seeking in an
absolute promise those gracious qualifications which the other promises are
annexed to: the seemingly conditional expressions are not intended as
discouragements, but as powerful provoqations and encouragements to that duty,
or seeking that grace conjoined with the promise. Whatsoever mercy is mentioned
any where either with or as a condition, is absolutely promised, in the New
Covenant, Heb. 8. particularly the remission of sin is promised there, yet it
is said, Matthew. 6. 14, 15. If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly
father will also forgive you, etc.

Not as if divine pardons were suspended till we have forgiven others, that so
long any were unpardoned, and so condemned who before were justified. This were
to make divine acts have dependence on our actings, and so to subject (as one
says) the Creator to the creature. Our forgiving others is not properly a
condition, as if a performance of ours did engage the Lord or lay him under an
obligation to forgive us; or as if we had right and might lay claim to Divine
remission upon such an act of ours: but, it is expressed in a Conditional form
as a pressing argument and a quickening spurr to so necessary a duty as the
forgiving others, although the Lord has absolute intentions to pardon us, and
to cause us to forgive others.

Thus many other Scriptures are to be understood, as Matthew. 18. 31. Mark 11.
26. Luke 6. 37. thus repenting and blotting out of sins are conjoined, Act. 3.
19.

As a Father, who is absolutely determined and resolved to afford some great
favor to his son, yet may speak of it to him with an [if,] that he may lay an
aw upon him toward some duty, which yet is not in the least the condition of
his affording it.

4. They are of directive use unto the right way and means of seeking the
mercies promised: the eternal decrees of God are not conditional but absolute
and unalterable, yet are not exclusive of all means in order to their execution
in time. So, Divine promises which are absolute, without any condition properly
so called, yet are not fulfilled without any means. It is a gross mistake to
think, that if there be no condition to be performed by us, then we need not
take any care, or trouble our selves about the matters. For, we must know,
there are Divine commands putting upon the use of means in order to the
execution of absolute promises; and, those that are called conditional promises
are of this use to declare, in what way and by what means those great favors
shall be derived to us: and men neglecting to seek mercy in the way of Divine
appointment, may miss of it, not because they have failed of performing a
condition, but have neglected a duty, and by sinning provoked God to ^^t short,
Jam. 1. 6, 7. Psalm. 78. 21, 22.

The promises of first grace, are generally granted to be absolute; for, if
they did run upon any condition, that must be performed before union with Jesus
Christ, yea that must be seen in the soul before it had a ground to meddle with
the promise; and so it should be ascertained of salvation whilst it is in a
state of nature. If faith were supposed the condition, that then must be prae
existent in the soul and discerned also, before it had a ground to believe in
the promise that it were the condition of; whereas faith is a grace and is the
fruit of a promise as well as any other graces. Indeed, the promises of first
grace (though absolute, yet) seem to be as conditionally propounded as any.
Prove. 2. 3, 4, 5. Mark 16. 16. Joh. 3. 16. herein, is holden forth the way and
means to the obtainment of salvation; for it is propounded and offered
indefinitely, to all, elect and not elect; not particularly promised to any,
but as it turns into an absolute form to those persons described as the
subjects of it.

Thus the Lord gives forth a cluster of absolute promises, Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26,
27, etc. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be clean -- a
new heart also will I give you, etc. and yet verse. 37. Thus says the Lord God,
I will yet for this be inquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them.
This inquiring, is not mentioned properly as a condition, for all was before
unalterably determined, but as the way and means to the fruition of what was
absolutely promised, and thus, as a means to promised mercies, we may not only
believe, but exercise our selves in other duties, ordinances, and appointments
of the Lord Jesus, as pray that we may be pardoned, justisied, saved, that the
Lord would give us a new heart, and put his spirit within us, etc. though not
as conditions giving right to salvation, for no act of ours lays the Lord
under an obligation by promise to afford these to us. All is from mere grace
and good pleasure. But yet, as a man may have purchased physic that would cure
a disease which he labors under, he may have paid for it, and so performed
the condition and has right to it, yet if he does not make use of it, he may
be uncared: so believers have a right to all even to those that are called
conditional promises, they being in Covenant all are theirs, (2 Pet. 1. 4. 2
Cor. 1. 20.) yet if they do not make use of these, they may come short of
mercies promised, not because they fail of a condition, but because they use
not the means to the fruition thereof: like men that have a civil and absolute
right to great estates, and yet are without the comfort thereof, because they
make not use of them.

5. They are of some evidencing use, who the persons are, that are interested
in the promises: though other promises are primary, yet these are secondary
evidences: when those gracious qualifications can be discerned, they are useful
for the confirmation of our interest in eternal mercies. They give a
description of the persons, and are so far distinguishing, as when they are
seen we may measure our estates and conditions by them.

Thus, many scriptures speak of those qualifications, not as conditions, giving
right, but as declarative evidences of a title to Covenant blessings, even to
salvation. So Rev. 22. 14. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they
may have right to the tree of life. Not that their keeping of them did give a
right and title unto life, for none can duly keep them before believing, and
then they have it; but that their right to it may be evidenced by such good
effects. For, these were already in a state of grace, and were before
interested in Jesus Christ unto eternal life, on which account, they are
opposed to those that are without, verse. 15. without are dogs, etc. The use of
the tree of life, was the confirming in life, Genesis 3. 22, 23. So, this keeping
his Commandments (of which believing is chief) is the way to a confirmation in
a living state, or to give a further testimony of their right to life.

So Jam. 2. 24. By works a man is justified and not by faith only. Not that
love or evangelical works come in the least into justification it self, as a
cause or condition thereof; the Epistles to the Romans and Galatians are full
against this; but are the fruits and effects of it. They as evidences, testify
to a man's self, or to others that he is justified; as, verse. 18. I [will shew]
thee my faith by my works. We are then, not properly, but only declaratively
justified by works; they as precious effects do argue a lively says which is a
means unto imputed righteousness and justification, not a syllable that it is a
condition thereof.

So, 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Not that our confession
is properly a condition, engaging the faithfulness and justice of God to
forgive, (I proved before, that is not suspended till our confessing) but a way
and means to our gaining a sense, a fresh application; an evidence and
manifestation of our interest in forgiving grace.

And as evidences, so they may promote comfort; only we are to take heed, that
we do not ground and bottom our consolation, on the qualifications within, but
on the promise it self (or the Lord therein) without. Many are drawing and
fetching their comfort from their faith and other graces, and lay the stress of
it there, and accordingly are up and down, ebbing and flowing therein, in stead
of fetching it from the Lord in the promise, an immutable thing, Heb. 6. 18. by
the means of faith, and taking that and other graces only as evidences of
interest in it. Some, because they are weary and heavy laden, thence take their
rest and refreshment, whereas they are called out of themselves, to come for it
to Jesus Christ, Matthew. 11. 28. When qualifications lie most dark, or are most
clearly discerned, yet we should not look so much to these, as to Jesus Christ
in the promise for Consolation.

Thus I have endeavored to open the nature of the Old and New Covenant.

As to the Mediatorial Office of Jesus Christ, it is largely handled by others,
and so shall not be insisted upon by me at present. Only I would say thus much,
when Jesus Christ was upon Earth, he performed the Office of a Mediator as to
satisfaction; and now he is in Heaven, he does it still as to intercession,
Heb. 7. 25. He presents his obedience continually to the Father for our
obtainment of what he has purchased. Would we have any soederal blessings, the
Law written in our heart in more lively characters, the Lord witnessed more
fully to be our God, or sin to be pardoned? let our faith be acting upon him as
one that mediateth for our obtainment of all; for he is the Mediator, not of
the Old, but of the New and Better Testament, which is established upon better
Promises.

FINIS.
Books Printed, and are to be sold by Elizabeth Calvert, at the Black-spread
Eagle, at the West end of St. Paul's.
Folio.
THe Scripture Directory for Church Offices and People: Or, a Practical
Commentary upon the whole Third Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul to the
Corinthians. To which is annexed, The Godly and the Natural Man's Choice upon
Psalm. 4. verse. 6, 7, 8. By Anthony Burgess, Pastor of the Church of Sutton
Coldfield in Warwickshire.

IEPON (...),

The Temple of Solomon Pourtrayed by Scripture Light: wherein all its famous
Buildings, the Pompous Worship of the Jews, with its Attending Rites and
Ceremonies, the several Officers employed in that Work, with their Ample
Revenues: And the Spiritual Mysteries of the Gospel veiled under all, are
treated of at large by Samuel Lec.

The History of Diodorus Siculus, containing all that which is most memorable
and of greatest Antiquity in the first Ages of the World, until the War of Troy.

Renodaeus his Dispensatory, containing the whole body of Physic; discovering
the Natures and Properties, and Virtues of Vegetals, Minerals and Animals.

Burgess on the Corinthians.

Wrighton the Pentateuch.

Quarto.
Christopher Goad his Sermons Entitled, Refreshing Drops, and Scorching Vials.

Samuel Gorton his Exposition on the fifth Chapter of James.

Samuel Hartlib of Bees and Silkworms.

Large Octavo.
Owen of In-dwelling Sin. Steels Anditote. -- His Husbandmans Calling. Gales
Idea of Jansenism. Conversion Exemplified. Heaven Realiz'd.
FINIS.

