THE Petitioning-COMET: Or, a Brief CHRONOLOGY Of all the Famous COMETS, And
their EVENTS, That have happened from the Birth of CHRIST, to this very day.
Together with a Modest Enquiry into this present COMET.

Cum Deus puniturus est Gentem vel Urbem, prodigiis id prius solet significare.

Herodot. lib. 6. astronomical device

LONDON: Printed by NOT. THOMPSON, next door to the Cross-Keys in Fetter-lane,
1681.

A LETTER out of the Country, FROM THE AUTHOR to the PRINTER.
SIR,
SInce my last recess from London, I have wholly devoted my self to
Contemplation; which is as natural to a Country life, as Flattery to the Court,
Debauchery to the Town, Cozening to the City, and Fawning to the Clergy. Now of
this Contemplation I have spent some part in the Evenings, about observing the
Motion and Progress of this so-much-talkt-of COMET, and in this enclosed have
sent you the Result of my Thoughts concerning it, together with a
Meteorological Compendium of all the most remarkable BLAZING-STARS, that have
been at any time conspicuous from the Nativity of Christ, to this very day: as
also the Events and Misfortunes both to Kings and Kingdoms, that have attended
each of those Meteors. This present Comet (it is true) is of a menacing Aspect,
but if the New Parliament (for whose Convention so many good men pray) continue
long to sit, I fear not but the STAR will lose its virulence and malignancy, or
at least its portent be averted from this our Nation; which being the humble
request to God of all good men, makes me thus entitle it, A Petitioning-Comet.
Now as for you, my old Friend, I must confess the late Noise abroad of your
being a Papist, or at least Popishly affected, made me at first hesitate
whether I might with safety entrust any more Papers with you, or proceed in our
old Acquaintance as formerly; but when upon mature deliberation I recollected
all your former Letters and Discourses, as well as examined what several
eminent Pieces against Popery you have published, even such as would be a
damning Sin in the very Pope himself to dispense with, after this I soon
satisfied my Reason with the absurdity of the Report; and from that time,
examined every one of your Adversaries Intelligences, with as great expectation
to find that the Emperor of Turkey was turned a Christian, and the Pop a
Protestant.

As force and virtue of the Sun, into the highest Region of the Air, is there
inflamed, partly by the Element of Fire on which it bordereth, and partly by
the motion of the Heavens which hurleth it about; so as there is the same
matter of an Earthquake, Wind, Lightning, and a Comet: if it be imprisoned in
the bowels of the Earth, it causes an Earthquake; if it ascend to the middle
Region of the Air, and from thence repelled, it produces Wind; if it enters
that Region, and be there environed with a thick Cloud, it sends forth
Lightning; but if it passes that Region, it then becomes a Comet, or some other
fiery Meteor, in case the matter be not sufficiently capable thereof.

Now of these Ignita mixta, some continue a longer, and some a shorter time;
seven days is the least, but some have been visible six months together; all
which happens according to the scarcity or plenty of the matter whereof it
consists. In a Comet there are two things remarkable; the color, and the
fashion.

As for their colors, they are usually but of three sorts: 1. If the matter be
thin, then the color is white: 2. If reasonably thick, then the color is
ruddy, resembling Fire: and 3. If very thick, then their color is like the
burning of Brimstone, or of a blue appearance. Yet nevertheless they are not
always so exactly of these three colors, without any different tincture, but
as near them as the disposing of their matter will admit; so that instead of
white, we sometimes have them of a yellowish color; and instead of a blue, of
a watchet or greenish color, and the like.

In the next place, as for their shapes or forms, (if we stand upon a curious
examination of them) they may be manifold, however Aristotle resolves them into
two, all their other shapes being dependant on these two: For first, either
they seem round, with Beams about them, which comes to pass when the Matter is
thin on the edges, and thick every where else; or secondly, they seem as it
were with a Beard or Tail, which happens when it is but meanly thick toward
some one side or other, and rather long than round. But some would have these
two fashions, to be three, because the Tail hangs downward sometimes, as well
as side-long; and so there is by this means Stella crinita, Stella caudata, and
Stella barbata: concerning which, I am not solicitous.

Now concerning the Prognostications of such Meteors, many and various are the
opinions of all Meteorologists; whether Comets or Blazing-Stars be generally of
such terrible effects, Browns Vulg Err. l. 6. c 14
as elder times have conceived them, is (says Dr. Brown) very uncertain: for
since it is found that many from whence these predictions are drawn, have been
above the Moon, why may they not be qualified from their Positions and Aspects
which they hold with Stars of favorable natures? or why, since they may be
conceived to arise from the Effluviums of other Stars, may they not retain the
benignity of their Originals? or since the natures of the fixed Stars are
Astrologically differenced by the Planets, and are esteemed Martial or Jovial,
according to the color, whereby they answer these Planets; why although the
red Comets do carry the portensions of Mars, should not the brightly white be
of the influence of Jupiter or Venus, answerably unto Cor Scorpii and Arcturus,
is not absurd to doubt. Therefore some are of opinion, that this superstitious
dread of Comets may possibly proceed from some terror struck into men's
thoughts by reason of their rare and unexpected appearance, rather than from
any certain ground of knowledge of the reason of the thing it self; as if all
but the history of them, were only uncertain conjectures. For (say they)
although it may be true, that after such Comets have appeared, strange things
have happened, yet is there no more connection of causality between the Comet,
and the deaths of Great men, or Alterations of Government and Religion, than
(as the ingenious Sir Thomas More instances) that the building of Tenterden
Steeple was (as the old Sage would have it) the cause of Goodwin Sands; because
the one appeared presently upon the building of the other. And that the
Almighty (they say) has given these Signs in the Celestial or Aerial Regions,
not only to affrighten such mortals as pretend not but to be ignorant what they
are; nor only to exercise the curiosity of others, who affect an enquiry into
such things; but also to puzzle (it may be) and discover the vanity of those,
who would be thought ignorant of nothing, be it never so much above them; and
who choose rather to adventure the after-censure of Folly, then quit the
Ambition and vainglory of being thought Prophets, if the event chance to
answer their prediction, by interpreting the portent of those things which
fore-signifie (it may be) nothing, or at best they know not what: For (say
they) no certain knowledge, or scarce a satisfactory probability, appearing of
what a thing is, who shall pretend to know what it signifies; when no one would
think, but that should (in reason) be known before, if not more easily than
this.

Accordingly (says Dr. Hakewell) the late Lord Privy Seal, Apolog. l. 2. sect.
6.
and Earl of Northampton, in his Defensative against the poison of supposed
Prophecies, shows: that as Comets do not always fore-run such Events, so
neither do such Events always follow upon the appearing of Comets: some
instances he produces of Comets, which brought with them such abundance of all
things, as stories have recorded it for Monuments and Miracles to posterity:
And the like, says he, could I say of others, An. Dom. 1555, 1556, 1557, 1558.
after all which years nothing happened that should drive a man to seek out any
cause above the common reach: and therefore I allow the diligence of Gemma
Frisius, taking notice of as many good, as bad effects, which have succeeded
after Comets. Moreover he tells us, that Pecuer a great Mathematician of
Germany, prognosticated upon the last Comet before the writing of his
Defensative, that men's Bodies should be burnt up with heat; But how fell it
out? we had not (says he) a more unkind Summer for many years, in respect of
extraordinary Cold; nor was there any inclination to War, or any Prince
deceased at that time; but on the contrary, the Plague which had raged before
in Lombardy, as God would have it, ceased at the rising of that Comet. Queen
Elizabeth (1558.) being then at Richmond, and being dissuaded from looking on a
Comet which did then appear, made answer, Jacta est alea, the Dice are thrown;
thereby intimating, that the preorder'd providence of God, was above the
influence of any Star or Comet. Neither (says he) do I remember that any Comet
appeared before her death, as at her entrance there did; nor before the decease
of Prince Henry, nor of Henry the Great of France, all three famous Princes.
Charlemagne professed, that he feared not the sign of a Blazing-Star, but the
great and potent Creator thereof; and so much fear consists both with
Christianity, and prudence:

(...). Also Manilius:

Nunquam futilibus excanduit ignibus ether. That Comets of themselves are
mischievous, I disown; yet how knows any man but that they may be set there as
menaces of the Almighty's Anger? The common opinion has been, that New Stars,
Comets, and the like, either as signs or causes, or both, have always
prognosticated some dreadful misfortune to the World, as outrageous Winds,
extraordinary Drought, Dearth, Pestilence, Wars, death of Princes, etc.
Accordingly we find the wise men of the East prophesying, that our Savior (at
whose Birth a new Star appeared) should bring destruction upon the Kingdom of
the Jews, his Native Country. But that which above all others does most
influence me, is the experience of former Ages, wherein 'twas rarely observed
that any terrible Comet appeared, without an effect altogether as terrible.
There is no general Rule without an Exception; and as we must not define Luxury
to be a Virtue in a Prince, because some few extravagant Princes have lived and
died happily beyond expectation; so neither must we esteem a Comet the less
ominous, because one in a hundred has proved a Blessing to the people, although
fatal to Nero.

There are many Authors who have wrote concerning Comets, some in particular
Treatises upon that subject, and some only by the by: as Josephus, Manilius,
Xiphiline, Pliny, Seneca, Suetonius, Eusebius, Nicephorus, Pontanus,
Amerbachius, Niphus, Apiarius, Funccius, Mylichius, Carrion, Cufrinianus,
Suessanus, Peucerus, Camerarius, Aretius, Garcaeus, Griminaeus, Praetorius,
Dasypodius, Latomus, Celichius, Irenaeus, Zeisius, Nagelius, Keckermannus,
Puteanus, Lycosthenes, de prodigiis ab orb condite, and others; out of whom,
but more especially out of Alstedius his Chronology, I have perfected this
following Breviary of all the Comets that have occurred from Christ's time, to
this very day. As for those that happened before Christ, History mentions not
above ten or eleven, and therein they vary: however the most eminent of them
were that which happened A. M. 3519. before the Peloponnesian War; and those
which preceded Julius Caesar's death, whereof Virgil speaks:

Non alias caelo ceciderunt plura sereno
Fulgura, nec diri toties arsere Cometae.
Quintilius Varus was slain by the Germans, under the conduct of Arminius.

Augustus Caesar was foretold by several bloody Comets.

Claudius died, not only a Comet was seen, but also it rained Blood: as if one
had portended the death of Claudius, and the other the Reign of his wicked
successor Nero; who murdered his Wife, his Mother, and his Schoolmaster Seneca,
besides the many other robberies and exorbitances he committed.

Nero.

Nero, and so proved fatal to the Prince, although favorable to the people.

Laodicea, Hierapolis, and the Inhabitants of Colossis in Natolia suffered much.

Jerusalem, in Judea,

Acontia, from the resemblance it has of a Dart.

Titus the Emperor described in Verse.

Cyprus and other places, where soon after many Cities were shaken with a
dreadful Earthquake.

Rome, succeeded a Comet; which Comet being showed to Vespasian, he jestingly
said, This bushy Star belongs not to me, but the Parthian King, Ipse enim
comatus est, ego vero calvus sum: however Vespasian soon after died,
notwithstanding his Quibble.

Pogonias. At this time the Temple of Peace being burnt, many Wars and Troubles
followed at Rome, which was imputed to the wicked Life of Commodus.



Severus a Comet was seen, it was the opinion at Rome, that it portended some
great Evil.

Arius.



Lucifer, which from its resemblance of a Sword was named Xiphias, and besides
many other Mischiefs, portended the Invasion of Eugenius.

Luciferan Comet was likewise seen.

Arcadius a Comet was seen, which signified his death.

Rome was besieged by Alaricus King of the Goths; besides sundry calamities
that happened as well in the East as West; for then was there so great a
slaughter of men, that no Age can parallel from the beginning of the World: All
Europe suffered, together with great part of Asia and Africa; War, Famine,
Drought, and Pestilence infested the whole Universe: there was also at this
time so great an Eclipse of the Sun, that the Stars appeared at Noonday.

Honorius another Comet appeared, which was succeeded by an Insurrection
throughout all Spain and Italy.

Toulouse.

Attyla, having after a long Siege taken Aquileia, gave terror to Vincentia,
Verona, Millane, Pavia, Basil, Argentina, Vormatia, Cologne, and other Cities
upon the Rhine, till at length he was overthrown in a great Battle in the
Campaign Fields.





Justinian, which was succeeded not only by an Earthquake that lasted for ten
days, but also by a Sedition at Constantinople, and Plague at Antioch, and
other places.

Rome was taken by Totila, and Franconia and Turingia wasted by the Huns.

Persians by Mauritius.

Lombards War in Italy, and vast swarms of Locusts all thereabouts.

Mauritius his slaughter, the future Idolatry of Mahomet, and Tyranny of the
Bishop of Rome, when Boniface the III. (notwithstanding the Patriarch of
Constantinople) commanded of Phocas, that the Church of Rome should be called
and esteemed the Head of all other Churches.

Cosroes King of Persia sacked Jerusalem, and in the year 622. Mahomed began.
There were likewise seen several other Prodigies, as well as horrid Noises
heard of Thundering, etc.

Saracens rendered themselves Masters of Damascus, Jerusalem, and all Syria.



Saracens violently infested the Roman Empire, Sicily-Bellarmine in his
Chronology places this Comet in the year 678. and further adds, that it did not
rain one drop in the 3 following years.



Constantinople, wherein 300000 men lost their Lives; and soon after
Luitprandus King of the Lombards besieges Rome; also the Saracens sailing out
of Africa into Spain, possessed themselves of part of that Province.

Syria, and many sickly Distempers followed.

Turks invaded Armenia.

Turks increase in power.

Charles the Great appeared a most remarkable and dreadful Comet, whereat the
Emperor being struck with terror, (fearing lest it threatened either the loss of
his Kingdom or of his Life) consulted with Eginardus the Philosopher about it;
who being unwilling to increase the Emperor's Melancholy, referred him to that
comfortable place in the Prophet, A signis Coeli nolite timere. Whereupon the
good Emperor replied, We ought not to fear any thing but that God who is the
Creator both of Men and Stars; nevertheless are we bound to praise his
Clemency, who, when we offend, admonishes us by such Signs. Others attribute
this passage to Ludovicus the I. the Son of Charles the Great.

Ludovicus, for his reproving their insolent behavior, excited his own Sons to
conspire against him, to take their Father and imprison him.

Ludovicus Pius his Sons, that arose about the division of the Kingdom. Then it
was also that the Saracens marched out of Africa into Italy, and sacked Rome, in
their return from whence they were drowned.





Triers.

Arnolphus to his Grave. Soon after which, the Huns and Saracens made their
Incursion into Italy.

A Comet appeared before the Hungarians entered and laid waste Germany. Also
about the same time, Berengarius, Emperor of Italy, deprived Ludovicus King of
Lombardy of his Sight.



Hungarians Invasion of Italy, as also the great Inundation of Waters, which
happened chiefly in Saxony; both which things happened soon after.



Italy a Comet of a wonderful bigness was seen, which was attended with Plague,
Famine, and extraordinary Floods of Water.





Otho the III. subdued the growing Greatness of the Patricii, and substituted
seven Electors in their stead.

England for 3 years together, that the living were hardly sufficient to bury
the dead, many Towns being thereby exhausted of Man, Woman, and Child.

Polonia.



Italy.

Hungary succeeded a Comet.

Poland, and Famine in the same Country, were presignifi'd by a Comet.

William the Norman first attacked this Kingdom, which afterward he conquered.
Also in this same year, Pope Gregory the VII. or Hildebrand, excommunicated
Henry the IV. and substituted Rodolphus in his place.





Hildebrand, which he had continued to do from the year 1060. till this present
time 1071. The Rebellion of the Saxons: Caesar made a Petitioner to the Pope:
Rodolphus elected in opposition to Henry, but afterward slain: And last of
all, the insolent Pope himself reduced to great Extremities by Henry the IV.

Conradus and Henry the V. confederated together against his Father Henry the
IV. Then followed the Holy War, which proved very fatal to all Christendom.
Histories likewise tells us of many other Calamities that happened at that
time; as Famine, and almost an universal Plague throughout the World; as
likewise that unhappy War which the Pope waged in Germany, wherein arming the
Saxons against Henry the V. in five several Battles much blood was spilt, and
many gallant Princes lost their Lives: nor would his Holiness be pacified,
until the Emperor abolished the Edict of his Grandfather Henry the III. wherein
it was established, that no one should be acknowledged for Pope, until the
Emperor had first ratified his Election.

Swedes and the Danes revolted from the Emperor Lotharius, by whom they were
afterward reduced.

Saxons, Vandals, and Polanders; also the Nobles in Hassia rebelled.

Tartars breaking into Poland and Silesia, killed a great number of men, and
cut off one Ear from every man they slew, thereby to keep an account how many
were slain.

France, at which time the Pope being at variance with the Emperor Frederick
II. the faction of the Gibellines took part with the Emperor, and the faction
of the Guelphs with the Pope.

Tartars with a vast Army made an incursion into Poland, where destroying all
things with Fire and Sword, they afterward passing through Moravia into
Hungary, made havoc there for three years. At this time also there happened in
Burgundy a most terrible Earthquake, which removed two Mountains, and
overwhelmed diverse men.



Charles with an Army out of France, began his Expedition against Sicily, where
having overcome their King Manfredus, he took possession of the Kingdom of
Naples. Two years after this, the Saracens marched into Spain, where they won
and lost several great Battles, with much slaughter on either side. In Hetruria
also great Tumults arose; and in the third year after the appearing of the
Comet, Banducar King of the Babylonians and Assyrians, with a great Army
invaded Armenia, reduced Antioch, and gave a great discomfiture to the
Christians.

Ottoman Family, which began from Osman or Ottoman, in the year of Christ 1297.
as also a Pestilence which had almost infected the whole World, in the year
1305.

Henry Lutzelburgius was poisoned by a Monk: likewise a Contention or Civil War
did at this time arise about choosing Emperor, which produced great Troubles
in Germany for the space of eight years; as also the greatest Pestilence
amongst both Men and Cattle that ever was known, together with scarcity of Corn.

Ludovicus Bavarus, and Pope Clement the 6th. The Locusts also were then very
pernicious.

English obtained over the French, of whom ten thousand were slain There was at
the same time a Plague taging in Florence, which destroyed fifteen thousand.



John Wickliffe Reformation was introduced by a Comet.

France, as well as Bertholdus the German Monk his invention of Guns in the
year 1380.





Veru, a Dart, and esteem the worst of all others it denoted the Italians
Treachery, who then began to shake off the yoke of the German Empite.

Tamerlane, or Tamyris King of the Scythians and Parthians, with an innumerable
Army invaded all Asia, calling himself the wrath of God, and desolation of the
Earth* Now also it was that Zisca Captain of the Husses, fought successfully
against Sigismund the Emperor.







French King set upon Helvetia: at this time Vladislaus K. of Hungary was slain
by Amurath; also a Sedition broke out in England: And in the year 1454 the Turk
reduced Constantinople.

Turk also did then possess himself of Lemnus, Mitylene, and Euboea.

Nigrum, did variously affect the minds of men: the death of Alphonsus King of
Arragon followed it, which embroiled Aemilia, Sabina, Campania, and all the
Kingdom of Naples in a long and grievous War: a Plague followed not long after;
also the Turk made himself Master of Peloponnesus.

Mahomet the II. who in the year of our Lord 1451. reduced two Empires and
twelve Kingdoms to his subjection.



Charles Duke of Burgundy made War upon his Neighbors, which War lasted many
years, and was ended by his death. Vssanus Cassanus King of Parthia and
Armenia, then fought with Mahomet, which War swept away abundance of men: also
Stephanus the Palatinate of Moldavia, gave Mahomet a great defeat at the
Danubius. The Germans called this Comet a Peacocks Tail, and most thought it
portended the Burgundian War.

Charles of Burgandy seized upon Lorain.

Charles of Burgundy was slain by the Helvetians: and in this year many great
Princes died.

Turks possessed themselves of part of Dalmatia and Sclavonia.

Tartars devastation of Poland, Muscovy, and Lithuania: a little after the
Bavarian War began. There was also at this time a raging Famine and Pestilence.

Philip King of Spain, as also the Wars of the Emperor Maximilian's Sons with
the French and Venetians; besides various Inundations, Winds, and scarcity of
Corn.

Luther (who in the year 1517. wrote against Indulgences) his Reformation
succeeded a Comet.



Turk wasted Hungary, and much hurt was done by the great swarms of Locusts.

Turk besieged Viennal, and became Master of many Cities in Hungary: also the
Sweating-sickness odestroy'd many thousands in England.

Holland and Zealand: also the Tiber overflowed Rome.

Turk broke into Hungary and Austria. King Christians with a great Fleet sailed
into Denmark, to recover his Kingdoms: The Helvetian War began upon the score
of Religion, wherein there were two eminent Battles, in the first of which
Zuinglius was slain.

Turks making an irruption into Hungary, were repelled by the Christians.

Xiphias (from its resemblance of a Sword) was conspicuous: after which
followed Earthquakes in Germany, alterations in the Government of England, and
a contest between Charles the V. and the French, about the Dukedom of Millain.





Buda by the Turks, was signified by a Comet: also Charles the V. his unlucky
Voyage into Africa, wherein many of his Ships and Men were lost by Storm.

Turks, wherein great part of their Forces perished by Sickness: also the Grape
was this year so sour, that no Wine could be drank.

Gallick Persecution.

Germany the Reformed Church at this time labored under great difficulties.

Charles the V. into his retirement, when he resigned his Empire: also in the
year 1566. began the War in the Low Countries, upon the account of the Spanish
Inquisition.

Cassiopeia's Sign, which was by most esteemed a Comet, in which year the
Parisian Nuptials were celebrated with Blood, instead of Wine.

Holland, Hungary, Bohemia, and Germany.

And besides all these, the Blazing-Star before the late Civil Wars, as well as
those two dreadful Comets before the last Plague, and Fire of London, may
(considering the present ill state of this unhappy Nation, and sinful People)
give us just occasion to fear at least no better an Event, after this so much a
worse Comet, than has ever yet appeared; unless Providence grants that happy
Union of Protestants, and Exclusion of Papists, which all good men, that are
not so themselves, must ever wish and pray for.

Having thus given you an account of these Comets, their History, Nature,
Causes, and Effects, according to the most commonly received Opinions; so let
me now conclude this discourse with some small transitory Remarques upon this
present Comet, which (by all the relations I have met with) is far the most
large and terrible that ever yet was seen. After it had shown it self in other
parts, it began to appear to us here in England, on Friday December the 10th.
about half an hour past four in the Afternoon, being of a pale dusky color,
with a prodigious Stream, at least 35. degrees in length: and the Astrologers
say its signification cannot be good, because it is purely Saturuine. Now for
the more difficult and uncertain part, although I shall leave that to those who
dare undertake it; yet concerning the other more easy one, I could not forbear
making some small observation, and collecting some conjecture (among the crowd
of others, for all are no better) from it.

At this Comets first appearing to the view of us near Buckingham, there was
seen an unusual and prodigious stream of Light, arising out of, or from behind
a Cloud at the Horizon, South-West, and darting upward into the Galaxie (or
Milkie way) toward Cassiopeia, North-East; visible, in a clear Sky, as soon as
the retreating light of the Sun would suffer it to be so; and moving Northward
on the Horizon, till about 8. of the clock it disappeared. It then seemed
broadest at the Horizon, growing sharper upwards by degrees, like a Pyramid or
Sword reversed. This first shape of it, though it caused some doubt in me, yet
could not wholly forbid me to think it to proceed from one of those Comets
called Blazing-Stars, concluding the Star it self to be sunk below our Horizon,
either together with, or presently after the great Luminary. On the Wednesday
after this first appearance, was the first time I could perceive the Star at
the bottom of the Light, about five degrees above our Horizon, which though not
very visible, was yet enough to show that I were not mistaken. But now the
shape seemed altered, the Stream sharpest at the Comet, and broader upwards,
(to the wonder of those who apprehended not the reason of it) till at the end
of the Tail it yet continued to appear somewhat narrower than in the middle.

After this, the circular motion of the Comet being slower than that of the
Sun, it appeared higher and higher every Night above the Horizon, declining
still more and more Northward in its setting; in so much that the last time I
have yet seen it, (which was the 4th. of this instant January) when its first
appearance after Sunsetting was (as I could guess without an Instrument) above
fifty degrees above the Horizon, and its setting almost Northward.

In every observation I perceived the Tail or Blaze of light to alter its
pointing from the Star, turning every night from the North-East (as the hand of
a Watch) more Eastward; and still the higher the Star appeared, the Tail
turning a farther compass, till at this time, from pointing North-East (as it
always did) at its first appearing in the Evening, before its setting the Blaze
turns so much as to point almost South. This to some seemed strange, and to me
enough to make me, considering the turning to be constant, and guessing (as
well as I could without a Globe) at the place of the Sun under our Horizon,
easily to fancy (and I thought truly) the Blaze to proceed in a direct Line
from the Sun, by the Body of the Comet, and so to turn its pointing agreeably
to the Suns motion, in a direct Line from it. Now this observation, whether
exactly true or not, yet appeared to me so very near the Truth, as to embolden
me to have some thoughts, first to publish it (at least in discourse) for
others examination, who might have better skill and means to do it; and then to
improve it into this further conjecture at the Nature and Cause of such Comets,
(if it proves so true, as I presume it is) at least of this present Comet, (the
first I ever took so much notice of) for the salving of these Phenomenon
aforesaid: Namely, that wheresoever the place of it is, and whatsoever the
Matter whereof it is composed, it seems to be such as is like a Globe of Glass,
or (it may be) of concrete Water, apt to reflect a glistering shine to all that
behold it in a requisite Position, if not every way: And withal, by its
Transparency to transmit in a direct Line, and in a Blaze from it, those Beams
which it receives from such a Luminary as the Sun is. So that the Body of the
Comet, by a borrowed light from the Sun, somewhat resembles other Stars: but
the Tail, or Blaze, may be not a flame from any burning, (for why then should
it turn so constantly as the Sun directs it?) but only from the Comets being of
a pellucid substance, (which other Stars are not) and so transmitting those
Beams, which shine upon the one side, in such a Blaze, on the opposite side.
This may also afford a Reason why the Star appearing higher toward our Zenith,
the Blaze appears shorter to us, than it did when lower, and nearer to the Sun.

And further, most conjectures of its significancy, as well as most of the
Terror from the thing it self, (for I blame not those who esteem it as Gods
Sign) proceeding from the apprehensions of its dreadful burning, in so much as
some seem to have been in care for the whole Machine of the Universe, from such
vast Conflagrations: I leave it to men to consider rationally, how both these
may be abated and allayed by this opinion, if received as the most probable. In
confirmation whereof, I seemed to my self to want nothing, but the observation
of others, or my own, of more Comets, or of this if it should continue to
appear to us so long, as to have the Sunbeams fall on the reverse of it, that
so I might perceive whether the Blaze be always darted in such a direct Line
from the great Light of the World, wheresoever it be.

But this conjecture seeming at first new, and singular, to my self, and likely
to seem so to others also, I could not persuade my self to think of giving it
vent, save only in some private talk; till by its importunity on my thoughts,
it put me on searching into those few Books I have, that write of such things:
And then I was at last surprised with some satisfaction to find, that the
famous Cardan had the same fancy; and that neither did the as famous Jul.
Scaliger (though so much disposed to quarrel with him) dissent from him in this
subtilty; as whoever thinks it worth the while, may find in Scaliger's 79.
Exereit. de subtle. ad Hieron. Cardan. where Cardan also to my further
satisfaction supplied me with that, which I have said before I wanted, for the
encouragement of this conjecture: Aversa semper a sole cauda est.

FINIS.

