THE Political Anatomy OF IRELAND WITH The Establishment for that Kingdom when
the late Duke of ORMOND was Lord Lieutenant. Taken from the RECORDS. To which
is added VERBUM SAPIENTI; or an Account of the Wealth and Expenses of England,
and the Method of raising Taxes in the most Equal manner. Showing also, That
the Nation can bear the Charge of Four Millions per Annum, when the occasions
of the Government require it.

By Sir WILLIAM PETTY, late Fellow of the Royal Society, and Surveyor-General
of the Kingdom of Ireland.

LONDON: Printed for D. Brown, and W. Rogers, at the Bible without Temple Bar,
and at the Sun over against St. Dunstans Church, Fleetstreet. 1691.

To His Grace the Duke of ORMOND.
MY LORD,
THE Celebrated Author of the following Treatise, had not only the Honor to be
known to Your Grace's Grandfather, the late Illustrious Duke of ORMOND, but
was likewise held by Him in that just Esteem, which he never failed of
expressing toward Men of Learning and Ingenuity. This was a sufficient
Encouragement to me (having the Manuscript-Copy deliver^d into my Hands by a
Worthy and Intimate Friend of the Authors, to dispose of it to the Press for
the public Benefit) to Address it to Your Grace's Patronage. You are so true a
Successor in all the generous Virtues of Your Ancestry, that I cannot doubt of
Your favorable Reception of this Posthumous Work. Your Generosity, that takes
all occasions of exerting it self toward the Living, cannot fail in doing
Justice to the Memory of the Dead. More especially to such Persons as in their
Life took care to oblige Posterity.

The usefulness of the ensuing Discourse at this time, when there is so fair a
prospect of a new Settlement in IRELAND, were sufficient to recommend it to
Your Grace's Protection. Your Grace's Interest in the Re-establishment of that
Kingdom (tho it be considerable) yet is much less than your Share in the
glorious Enterprise toward its Recovery.

You had the Honor of accompanying His MAJESTY in an Adventure that shall
shine in the Annals of Fame, as long as the Boyne shall maintain its Course.
But a single Gallantry appeared not sufficient for the Heir of ORMOND and
OSSERY. You have since accompanied our Royal Master to other Shores, to be
partaker with him in new Scenes of Action, Undertakings of no less Consequence
and Importance, than the Deliverance of Europe. This will afford sufficient
matter for Panegyric, and oblige the Muses to place you in the same high Rank
of Renown with Your Noble and Heroic Predecessors. In the mean time, be
pleased to permit this useful Treatise to wait on you to the Camp, and bring
you the hearty wishes of all good Men here, for Your happy Expedition, and Your
safe Return, which is desired by none with a more particular Zeal, than by

Your GRACE'S Most Devoted Servant, N. TATE.

THE Author's Preface.
SIR Francis Bacon, in his Advancement of Learning, has made a judicious
Parallel in many particulars, between the Body Natural, and Body Politic, and
between the Arts of preserving both in Health and Strength: And it is as
reasonable, that as Anatomy is the best foundation of one, so also of the
other; and that to practice upon the Politic, without knowing the Symmetry,
Fabric, and Proportion of it, is as casual as the practice of Old-women and
Empyricks.

Now, because Anatomy is not only necessary in Physicians, but laudable in
every Philosophical person whatsoever; I therefore, who profess no Politics,
have, for my curiosity, at large attempted the first Essay of Political Anatomy.

Furthermore, as Students in Medicine, practice their inquiries upon cheap and
common Animals, and such whose actions they are best acquainted with, and where
there is the least confusion and perplexure of Parts; I have chosen Ireland as
such a Political Animal, who is scarce Twenty years old; where the Intrigue of
State is not very complicate, and with which I have been conversant from an
Embrion; and in which, if I have done amiss, the fault may be easily mended by
another.

It Is true, that curious Dissections cannot be made without variety of proper
Instruments; whereas I have had only a commo^n Knife and a Clout, instead of
the many more helps which such a Work requires: However, my rude approaches.
being enough to find whereabout the Liver and Spleen, and Lungs lie, though not
to discern the Lymphatick Vessels, the Plexus, Choroidus, the Volvuli of
vessels within the Testicles; yet not knowing, that even what I have here
readily done, was much considered, or indeed thought useful by others, I have
ventured to begin a new Work, which, when Corrected and Enlarged by better
Hands and Helps. I believe will tend to the Peace and Plenty of my Country;
besides which, I have no other end.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Reader is desired to take notice, That by Letter^es, are meant persons
restored to Land by virtue of the Letters of King Charles the Second; and by
Nominees, such persons are intended, as were restored to their Lands by being
named in the Act of Settlement; and Papists per Proviso, were such as had
Provisoes in that Act for their Lands: And by the 49 Officers, are meant such
Commission Officers under the King, who served in Ireland before the year of
our Lord, 1649.

The following Treatise of Sir William Petty's Political Anatomy of Ireland, is
Printed after a Copy Transcribed from the Original, writ by the Author's own
hand; and all the Blanks, as here Printed, were in that Original: And which,
though it may be supposed he could easily have filled up, yet was it not held
proper for any other to attempt, or to add to any thing done by so great a
Master.

This his work of The Political Anatomy of Ireland ends in page 113.

P. 114. begins the famous Report from the Council of Trade in Ireland, which
was not only Drawn, but wholly Composed by Sir William Petty; and with which
that Council concurred unanimously.

P. 132. follows the Copy of the Commission of the late Duke of Ormond to be
Lord Lieutenant; and an Account of the Establishment of the Civil and Military
List in his time; faithfully and carefully taken out of Authentic Records: And
to the Nature of which, the continued Title of The Political Anatomy of
Ireland, on those Pages, agrees well enough.

The Volume concludes with Sir William Petty's Verbum Sapienti, which relates
wholly to England, and shows how Taxes may be equally laid, and how the Nation
may well bear the Tax of Four Millions per Annum.

The Reader is now left with his most Critical attentive Judgment, to enjoy the
benefit of the great Political knowledge that Sir William Petty has taught the
Age; and for which (as one of the greatest Ornaments of it) he deserves
perpetual celebrations. Know Reader in a word, That Nulla ferent talem saecla
futura virum.


The CONTENTS of the Political Anatomy of IRELAND.
OF the Lands of Ireland, with the present distribution and Values of the same.
Page 1 Of the People, Houses and Smokes; their Number, Differences and Values,
7 Of the Church and Benefices, 16 Concerning the late Rebellion and its
effects, 17 Of the future Settlement of Ireland, Prevention of Rebellions, and
its Union with England, 25 Of the Government of Ireland, Apparent and Internal.
36 Of the Militia and Defense of Ireland, 42 Of the Coelum, Solum, and Fruges;
or the Air, Soil and Product of Ireland, 48 Of the Rate which the Lands in
Ireland do bear to each other, with the History of the several Valuations of
the same, 58 Of the Money of Ireland, and the Causes of its Decrease, with the
Remedy for the same, 68 Of the Trade of Ireland, and its Impediments; the
Commodities, and aptitude for Traffic, and incidently of the Clothes and Diet
of the People: Of Sumptuary Laws, Absentees, etc. 75 Of the Religion, Language,
Manners, and Interest of the present Inhabitants of Ireland; as also of the
Present and Ancient Divisions and Names of the Lands, 93 Some Miscellany
Remarques and Intimations concerning Ireland, and the several matters
aforementioned, 103 A Report from the Council of Trade in Ireland, to the Lord
Lieutenant and Council, etc. 114 Considerations relating to the Improvement of
Ireland, 115 Inferences from the Premises, 120 Propositions to His Majesty
concerning the Government of Ireland, 146 The List for Civil Affairs, etc. 157
The Establishment and List, containing all the Payments to be made for Military
Affairs, etc. 181 Officers Provincial, 184 Constables, 186 Sundry Ministers
belonging to the Ordnance, viz. in Lemster, 188 Connaught, 189 Munster, 190
Ulster, 191 Temporary Payments, 196 A Catalogue of the Peers, 199 A List of the
Arch-Bishopricks and Bishoprics, 200 Barons, 201 A List of those Places that
return Parliament Men, etc. 202
Verbum Sapienti.
INtroduction, Page 1 Chap. 1. Containing several Computations of the Wealth of
the Kingdom, 3 Chap. 2. Of the Value of the People, 7 Chap. 3. Of the several
Expenses of the Kingdom, and its Revenue, 10 Chap. 4. Of the Method of
apportioning Taxes, 11 Chap. 5. Of Money, and how much is necessary to drive
the Trade of the Nation, 13 Chap. 6. The Causes of Irregular Taxing, 15 Chap 7.
The Collateral Advantages of these Taxes, 16 Chap. 8. Of the Expense of the
Navy, Army, and Garrisons, 18 Chap. 9. Motives to the quiet bearing of
Extraordinary Taxes, 19 Chap. 10. How to employ the People, and the end
thereof, 22
LICENSED, May the 11th. 1691.

THE Political Anatomy OF IRELAND 1672.
Of the Lands of Ireland.
THERE are in Ireland of Acres of Land, Irish Measure (whereof 121 Acres makes
196 English Measure) near about M. Ac. 10,500 Whereof there is of Rivers,
Highways, Loughs, unpassable Bogs, Rocks and Shrubs, about M. 1,500 Of very
course Land, commonly called unprofitable 1,500 Consequently of good Meadow,
Arrable and Pasture 7,500 10,500 Of which Anno 1641, there did belong to
Papists and Sequestered Protestants 5,200 To the Church, viz. Bishops, Deans,
Chapters and Glebes 300 To the Protestants planted by Queen Elizabeth and King
James 2,000 7500

Of the 5,200 belonging to Papists and Sequestered Protestants Anno 1641.
There was restored to 26 that proved their constant good Affection, per est.
40 210 To His Grace the D. of Ormond. 130 To the Lord Inchiquine, Lord
Roscommon, and others 40 To innocent Papists, near 1,200 To the Church, near 20
140 To the Duke of York, near 120 To Letterees and Nominees Irish-men 60 420 To
Papists, per proviso with Colonel Vernon 360 Left in the Common-Stock of
Course-Land 80 470 To Adventurers 390 To Soldiers since 49. 1,440 To the 49
Officers 280 550 To Protestants per proviso 270 Upon Transplantation Decrees
700 Restored to Mortgagees Protestants, about 100 5,200

So that of all the Lands seized by the Usurpers, the Papists have recovered
about M. 2,340 The new Protestants and Churches Additions 2,400 Of a more
indifferent Nature, ut supra 460/5200 Mem. That Protestants in Connaught
purchased of the Transplantees per estimate. M. 60 Wherefore of the whole 7500
M. of good Land, the English, and Protestants and Church have this Christmas
1672. 5,140 And the Irish have near as much, viz. 2,280 7,500 Remains in the
Common-Stock, near 80 M. The said 7,500 Acres of good, and the 1,500 of course,
making together 9000 M. is worth per Annum. M. l. 900,000 Out of which the
King's Quit-rents, Old-rents, and Composition, 90,000 Rests 810,000 The Tithes
whereof are one fifth, viz. 162,000 Rests 648,000 The benefit of Leases, and
the value of Tenants Improvements upon the said Lands, is viz. 216,000 For the
Landlords 432,000 If the whole 7500 be clearly worth but 432000 l. per Ann.
then the 2,520 gained by the Rebellion, is worth but about thereof (the 80 M.
in the Common Stock being worth very little), viz. 144,000 And the Adventurers
and Soldiers Lands, who served since 1649, worth about of the same, viz.
108,000 And the said Soldiers alone of the whole, viz. M. 86,400 per An.

Mem. That by the Successes of the Army, who served since 1649. and who have
854 col. per An. for their labor, His Majesty has received the several
Advantages following, viz.

1. Augmented the Church, the Duke of York, and by Provisoes. 770 M. Acres. 2.
Has paid the Adventurers, and 49 Officers, besides Housing in Walled Towns 670
M. Acres. 3. Gained a Revenue worth above 80000 l. per Ann. and 15 Years
Purchase l. 1200,000 4. Gained the Years value, etc. worth. 300,000 5. Has
freed himself from the 1648. Articles with the Irish. 6. Restored many of his
Friends to their own Estates.
The value of the said Army's Lands at ten Years Purchase, For all their Pay
and Hazard.
is 854000 l. Out of which deduct a years value and charge, there remains now
but l. 700,000

Mem. That whereas until Anno (...)England always sent Money and other Supplies
into Ireland, now the Revenue is 200,000 l. and the charge Civil and Military
but 170,000 l. which is the gain or ease of England.

The Debentures of Commission Officers, who served eight years till about
December 1649. comes to l. 1,800,000 Wherefore the Pay of private Soldiers to
5,400,000 7,200,000

The whereof is 900,000 l. The one half whereof being for Foot, was, 450,000 l.
per Ann. which, at 15 l. each, maintains 30,000 Foot, and the rest 15000 Horse,
General Officers, and Train of Artillery included; so as there was a British
Army, for eight Years, of at least 45000 Men.

The Army who reduced the Rebelllon, did Anno 1652, consist of near 35000 Men,
as per Debentures.

The Irish transported into Foreign parts, between 1651 and 1654. were 34,000
Men.

The Irish Army could not but be more than double to the English.

The Claymants of Land, or the number of Proprietors before the War was.

Of all that claimed innocence 7 in 8. obtained it.

The restored Persons by innocence and proviso have more than what was their
own, Anno 1641. by at least

They have gotten by forged Feofments of what was more than their own, at least.

Of those adjudged Innocents, not 1/20 were really so.

The King's Revenue in Ireland Anno 1641.

The yearly charge of the Army for 20 years last past.

Of People, Houses, and Smoaks; their Number, Differences, and Values.
THere are of People, Men, Women and Children. 1,100,000 There are of Families
200,000 Of Smoaks 250,000

VIZ
Of the People, there are English 200,000 Of Papists 800,000 Of Non-Papists
300,000 Scots 100,000 Irish 800,000 2,200,000

The Scots are Presbyterians, and the Irish, Papists. But the English are above
100,000 legal Protestants or Conformists, and the rest are Presbyterians,
Independants, Anabaptists and Quakers.

Of the Families.
Such as have no fixed Hearths, are 160,000 Such as have but one Chimney 24,000
Such as have more than one 16,000

Of Smoaks.
The Single-Smoak-houses, are ut supra 184,000 And those Houses that have more
than one Chimney, have but one with another above four in each House, viz. in
all 66,000 250, M. The Number of them of all degrees, who paid Poll-money, Anno
1661. was about 360,000 Dublin has Houses of more than one Smoke. 3,400 Other
Cities, Towns, and Corporations of the like. 6,000 The rest of Ireland of the
like 6,600 165, M.

And of Smiths Forges, near the same number, or rather more.

A more particular Account of the Houses in Ireland, which have more than one
Chimney, viz.
The Castle of Dublin has Chimneys 125 The Earl of Meath's House in Dublin 27
The Houses of Dublin which have above 10, are 164

T he Number of Coaches, besides Hackneys, near the same Number, or rather
fewer.

There be ( ut supra) 160,000 Cabins without Chimneys, whose worth are not
reckoned; but as for the others, we rate as follows, viz. Houses of 1 Chimny of
24000 at 5 l. each 120,000 l. of 2, and 3, 6800 at 40 l. 272,000 l. 4, 5, 6,
5600 at 100 l. 560,000 l. 7, 8, 9, 2500 at 300 l. 750,000 l. 10, 11, 12, 700 at
600 l. 420,000 l. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 400 at 1000 l. 400,000 l.
2,522,000 For 20 Transcendental-houses, per estimate 78,000 Total 2,600,000
Memorandum, That not ^/8; part of the Value of all those Houses do belong to
other than English Protestants. 325,000 To the English 2,275,000 There are of
Non-papists in Dublin 28,000 In the other Cities, Towns, Corporations, etc.
72,000 In the Country 100,000 2,000,000

There is in Nature but one in 500 at most who are Blind, Lame, and under
incurable Impotence; so as not above 2000 in Ireland, whom 12000 l. would
maintain without Scandal.

The number of young Children under seven years old, and not fit for Labor, is
of the whole, viz. 275,000 The said number of Impotents 2000 The number of
Soldiers 3000 280,000

The Masters and Mistresses of 360 Families, wherein are above six Smoaks, are
7,200 Their Servants to their Persons 14,400 The Servants to the Persons of
such as live in 5600 Families of 4, 5, 6. Smoaks, are 11,200 Servants in
Families of 2, and 3, Smoaks 6800 Ministers, Students, etc. 400 320,000

People in all 1100 M. Of above 6 years old 704 16 462 26 297 36 198 46 132 56
88 66 77

So as there are in Ireland fit for Trade 780,000 Which are Employed as
follows, viz. For the Tillage of 500,000 Acres of Land for Corn, Men, and
their Wives 100,000 For Cowherds and Shepherds to Cattle, grazing upon Seven
Millions of Acres, viz. six Millions of black Cattle, or their equivalent in
Horses and Sheep. Men and their Wives. 120,000 220,000

By the other side. 220,000 Employed about the taking of 5000 Hogsheads of
Pilchards, Boats, Nets, Hewers, etc. Men and Women. 1000 Employed about making
1000 Tuns of Iron, Men and Women 2000 Smiths as by account, Men and Women
15,000 Their Servants to the Trade 7,500 Tailors and their Wives 45,000
Carpenters and Masons, and their Wives 10,000 Shoemakers and their Wives 20,000
and Servants 2500 Millers and their Wives 1600 Workers of Wool and their
Wives. 30,000 Tanners and Curriers, and their Wives. 10,000 331,600 Trades of
Fancy and Ornament and their Wives. 48,400 380,000 Wherefore if the present
Employment be performed with 380,000 Persons, it follows that there are to
spare for other uses 400,000

Memorandum, That in Dublin, where are but 4000 Families, there are at one time
1180 Alehouses, and 91 public Brewhouses, viz. near of the whole; it seems,
that in Ireland, there being 200 M. Families, that about 60 M. of them should
use the same Trade.

And consequently, That 180,000 viz. 60 Men, 60 Women, and 60 Servants do
follow the Trade of Drink. 180,000 So as there are yet to spare, who are
Casherers and Fait-neants. 220,000 400,000 Whereas it is manifest, that of the
Alehouses may be spared, even although the same quantity of Drink should be
sold; then there will yet be further to spare of them 120,000 and 220,000
340,000 Having showed that 340,000 of spare hands are in Ireland, it follows to
find Employments for them, which is at 7 l. per head, to earn per Ann.
2,380,000

This Employment may be either in order to Local Wealth, or Universal Wealth.

Local Wealth I understand to be the building of 168,000 small Stone-wall
Houses, with Chimneys, Doors, Windores, Gardens and Orchards, ditch'd and
quicksetted; instead of the lamentable Sties now in use; the which may cost 3
l. each, in all l. 544,000 The planting 5 Millions of Fruit Trees at 4 d. each.
83,000 Planting 3 Millions of Timber Trees upon the Bounds and Meers of every
Denomination of Lands at 3 d. each 360,000 l. Of Enclosures and Quicksets one
Million of Perches at 12 d. per Perch. l. 50,000 Fortifying the City of Dublin
30,000 Building a new Palace for the chief Governor. 20,000 Making there a
Mold for Shipping. 15,000 Making several Rivers navigable and mending
Highways. 35,000 Building of 100 Churches, at 200 l. each 20,000 Workhouses of
several sorts, Tan-Yards, Fishing Crofts, Rape-Mills, Allom and Copperas-works,
as also Madder, Lead, Salt, etc. 50,000

In order to Money and Universal Wealth.
For Ten Thousand Tuns of Shipping 100,000 For a Stock of Wool, Hemp, Flax and
Rawhides for one Years Work 400,000 For the Labor of Men to Manufacture the
same. 1000,000

Of the Church and Benefices.
IF 1/^ the Non-Papists are Non-Conformists, then there are but 50000 Legal
Protestants in Dublin and all other Cities, Towns, etc. which require but 50
preaching Ministers.

And if there are but 50 M. Legal Protestants in the rest of Ireland, they
require but 100 Ministers, at 500 to a Flock, whereof ^/3, viz. 166 are
Children.

If there be in England and Wales about 9000 Parishes, and under 30 Bishops,
then every Bishop must have above 300 Parsons in his Charge.

So as one Bishop in Ireland is more than 30 in England.

Wherefore 25,000 l. would afford 150 l. per Ann. of each of 150 Ministers, and
2500 l. to the Bishop.

The value of the Church Lands and appropriate Tithes, is per Ann. above the
Kings Rent due out of them.

If 100 Ministers can serve all Ireland, they must have Precincts of near 13/14
Miles square, and consequently they must be Itinerants, and as Lecturers on
weekdays; and other honest ordained Men must be Priests.

If 150, nay, if 250 Ministers would serve all Ireland, then 10 per Ann. will
supply their Mortality: And consequently a Nursery of 100 will send forth 10
yearly of 10 years standing. Perhaps the Nursery need not be above half so
large.

Concerning the Late Rebellion.
THE number of the People being now Anno 1672 about 1100,000. and Anno 1652.
about 850 M. because I conceive that 80 M. of them have in 20 years increased
by Generation 70 M. by return of banished and expelled English; as also by the
access of new ones, 80 M. of New Scots, and 20 M. of returned Irish, being all
250 M.

Now if it could be known what number of people were in Ireland, Ann. 1641.
then the difference between the said number, and 850, adding unto it the
increase by Generation, in 11 years will show the destruction of people made by
the Wars, viz. by the Sword, Plague, and Famine occasioned thereby.

I find, by comparing superfluous and spare Oxen, Sheep, Butter and Beef, that
there was exported above more Ann. 1664. than in 1641. which shows there were
more of people, viz. 1466,000; Out of which Sum take what were left Ann. 1652.
there will remain 616,000. destroyed by the Rebellion.

Whereas the present proportion of the British is as 3 to 11; But before the
Wars the proportion was less, viz. as 2 to 11. and then it follows that the
number of British slain in 11 years was 112 thousand Souls; of which I guess to
have perished by War, Plague and Famine. So as it follows that 37,000 were
massacred in the first year of Tumults: So as those who think 154,000 were so
destroyed, ought to review the grounds of their Opinion.

It follows also, that about 504 M. of the Irish perished, and were wasted by
the Sword, Plague, Famine, Hardship and Banishment, between the 23 of October
1641. and the same day 1652.

Wherefore those who say, That not of them remained at the end of the Wars,
must also review their opinions; there being by this Computation near of them;
which Opinion I also submit.

There were transported of them into Spain, Flanders, France, 34,000 Soldiers;
and of Boys, Women, Priests, etc. no less than 6000 more, where not half are
returned. 40,000. If Ireland had continued in peace for the said 11 years, then
the 1466 M. had increased by Generation in that time to 73 M. more, making in
all 1539, which were by the said Wars brought Anno 1652, to 850, viz. 689 M.
for whose Blood some body should answer both to God and the King. M. 689

Anno 1650. there were before the great Plague, above one Million of People,
viz. 2 more than in London Anno 1665. But in that year there died in London by
account 97,000 people, but really were 110 M.

Wherefore, if the Plague was no hotter in Ireland than in England, there must
have died in Ireland 275 M. But 1300 dying in a Week in Dublin, the Plague of
London was but as hot; Wherefore there died in Ireland M. 450

So as substracting 412 M. 500 dying of the Plague, and 37 Massacred English,
it follows that 167 M. died in 11 years by the Sword and Famine, and other
Hardships. Which I think not incredible; for supposing the Number, viz. 87 M.
died in 11 years, of Famine and Cold, Transportation to Spain and Barbados,
etc. it is not hard to believe, that the other 87 M. perished by the Sword,
when the British had Armies of near 40 M. Men, and the Irish of near double,
sometimes on Foot.

Ann. 1653. Debentures were freely and openly sold for 4 s. and 5 s. per l. And
20 s. of Debenture, one place with another, did purchase two Acres of Land; at
which rate all the Land of Ireland, if it were 8 Millions of profitable Acres,
might have been had for a Million of Money, which Ann. 1641. was worth above 8
Millions M. 1. The Cattle and Stock which Ann. 1641. was worth above 4
Millions, reckoning one Beef of 20 s. value, or the Equivalent in other Stock
to two Acres; but Ann. 1652. the people of Dublin fetched Meat from Wales,
there being none here, and the whole Cattle of Ireland not worth l. 500,000

Corn was then at 50 s. per Barrel, which is now, and 1641. under 12.

The Houses of Ireland, Ann. 1641. was worth 2 Millions; but Ann. 1652. not
worth of the same l. 500,000 The value of people, Men, Women and Children in
England, some have computed to be 70 l. per Head, one with another. But if you
value the people who have been destroyed in Ireland, as Slaves and Negroes are
usually rated, viz. at about 15 l. one with another; Men being sold for 25 l.
and Children 5 l. each; the value of the people lost will be about 10,355,000
The Forces kept on Foot by all Parties for the said 11 years, were at least
80,000 Horse and Foot (for even Ann. 1652. the English were 35,000 and 34,000
Irish transported) the Charge whereof, Train of Artillery, and General Officers
included, cannot be less than 15 l. per Head per Ann. which for 11 years comes
to 13 Millions and 200 M. l. 13,200,000 The superlucration above expressed, of
all which adult Men (among which were no Women nor Children) cannot be reckoned
at less than 5 l. per Head, or of the last mentioned Sum, viz. M. 4,400,000

Wherefore the effects of the Rebellion were these in pecuniary value, viz.

By loss of people 10,335,000 By loss of their superlucration of Soldiers
4,400,000 By the superlucration of the people lost, at 10 l. per Head for the
whole 11 years, deducting 80 M. Soldiers 6,000,000 By impairing of the worth of
Lands 11,000,000 Of the Stock 3,500,000 Of the Housing 2,000,000 37,255,000

And the 20 years Rent of all the Lands forfeited, by reason of the said
Rebellion, viz. since the year 1652, to 1673. has not fully defrayed the
Charge of the English Army in Ireland for the said time; nor does the said
Rents at this day do the same with as much more, or above 100 M. l. per An. more

And the Adventurers after 10 years being out of their Principal Money, which
now ought to be double by its Interest, they sold their Adventures for under 10
s. per l. Ann. 1652. in open and free Market.

The Number of Landed Irish-Papists, or Freeholders before the Wars, was about
3000; whereof, as appears by 800 Judgments of the Court of Claims, which fate
Ann. 1663. upon the Innocence and Effects of the Irish, there were not above
1/7 part or 400 guilty of the Rebellion, unto each of whom I allow 20
Followers, which would have made up an Army of 8000: But by the 49 Officers
account, the British Army before 1649. must have been about 40 M. men; upon
whom the said 8000 Nocent Irish so prevailed, as that the Peace ended in the
Art^cles of 1648. By which the Irish were made at least equal Partners with His
Majesty in the Government of Ireland; which shows, that the Irish were men of
admirable Success and Courage: Unless we should rather think, that the said
Court of Claims were abused by their Perjuries and Forgeries, which one would
think, that a Nation, who caused the destruction of so many thousand Lives, for
the sake of God and Religion, should not be so guilty of.

The Estates of the Irish before the Wars, was double to that of the English;
but the number and natural force of the Irish quintuple to that of the English.

The Cause of the War was a desire of the Romists, to recover the
Church-Revenue, worth about 110 M. l. per Ann. and of the Common Irish, to get
all the Englishmens Estates; and of the 10 or 12 Grandees of Ireland, to get
the Empire of the whole. But upon the playing of this Game or Match upon so
great odds, the English won and have (among, and besides other Pretenses) a
Gamester's Right at least to their Estates. But as for the Bloodshed in the
Contest, God best knows who did occasion it.

Of the future Settlement of Ireland, Prorogation of Rebellions, and its Union
with England.
THE English invaded Ireland about 500 years since; at which time, if the Irish
were in number about 1,200,000. Anno 1641. they were but 600 M. in number, 200
years ago, and not above 300,000 M. at the said time of their Invasion; for
300,000 people will, by the ordinary Course of Generation, become 1200 M. in
500 years; allowance being made for the Extraordinary Effects of Epidemical
Diseases, Famines, Wars, etc.

There is at this Day no Monument or real Argument that, when the Irish were
first invaded, they had any Stone-Housing at all, any Money, any Foreign Trade,
nor any Learning but the Legend of the Saints, Psalters; Missals, Rituals, etc.
viz. nor Geometry, Astronomy, Anatomy, Architecture, ^nginery, Painting,
Carving, nor any kind of Manufacture, nor the least use of Navigation, or the
Art Military.

Sir John Davys has expressed much Wit and Learning, in giving the Causes why
Ireland was in no measure reduced to English Government, till in Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, and since; and withal offers several means, whereby what yet
remains to be done, may be still effected.

The Conquest made by the English, and described in the Preamble of the Act of
Parliament past Ann. 1662. for the Settlement of Ireland, gave means for any
thing that had been reasonable of that kind; but their Forfeiters being abroad,
and suffering with His Majesty from the same usurping hands, made some
diversion.

Wherefore ( Rebus sic stantibus) what is now to be done is the Question, viz.
What may be done by natural possibility, if Authority saw it sit?

Some furious Spirits have wished, that the Irish would rebel again, that they
might be put to the Sword. But I declare, that motion to be not only impious
and inhumane, but withal frivolous and pernicious even to them who have rashly
wished for those occasions.

That the Irish will not easily rebel again, I believe from the memory of their
former Successes, especially of the last, had not many Providence interposed;
and withal from the consideration of these following Particulars, viz.

1. That the British Protestants and Church have of all the Lands; of all the
Housing; ^^^ of all the Housing in walled Towns, and Places of strength of the
Foreign Trade. That 6 of 8 of all the Irish live in a brutish nasty Condition,
as in Cabins, with neither Chimney, Door, Stairs nor Window; feed chiefly upon
Milk and Potatoes, whereby their Spirits are not disposed for War. And that
although there be in Ireland 8 Papists for 3 others; yet there are far more
Soldiers, and Soldierlike-Men of this latter and lesser Number, than of the
former.

That His Majesty, who formerly could do nothing for, and upon Ireland, but by
the help of England, has now a Revenue upon the Place, to maintain, if he
pleases, 7000 Men in Arms, besides a Protestant Militia of 25000 more, the most
whereof are expert in War.

That the Protestants have Housing enough within Places of strength within 5
Miles of the Seaside; to receive and protect, and harbor every Man, Woman and
Child belonging to them, and have also places of strength of their own
properly, so situate in all parts of Ireland, to which they can easily travel
the shortest day of the year.

That being able so to secure their Persons, even upon all sudden Emergencies,
they can be easily supplied out of England with Food sufficient to maintain
them, till they have burnt 160 M. of their afore-described Cabins, not worth 50
M. l. destroyed their Stacks and Haggards of Corn, and disturbed their Tillage,
which the embodied British can soon and easily atchieve.

That a few Ships of War, whereof the Irish have none, nor no Skill or Practice
of Navigation, can hinder their relief from all Foreign help.

That few Foreigners can help them if they would. But that none, not the King
of France, can gain advantage by so doing, even tho he succeeded. For England
has constantly lost these 500 years by their meddling with Ireland. And at this
day, than when Ireland was never so rich and splendid, it were the advantage of
the English to abandon their whole Interest in that Country; and fatal to any
other Nation to take it, as has been elsewhere (as I think) demonstrated; and
the advantage of the Landlords of England, to give them the Equivalent of what
they should so quit out of their own Estates in England.

Lastly, Let the Irish know, That there are, ever were, and will be men
discontented with their present Conditions in England, and ready for any
Exploit and Change, more than are sufficient to quell any Insurrection they can
make and abide by.

Wherefore, declining all Military means of settling and securing Ireland in
peace and plenty, what we offer shall tend to the transmuting one People into
the other, and the thorough union of Interests upon natural and lasting
Principles; of which I shall enumerate several, tho seemingly never so uncouth
and extravagant.

1. If Henry the II. had or could have brought over all the people of Ireland
into England, declining the Benefit of their Land; he had fortified, beautified
and enriched England, and done real Kindness to the Irish. But the same Work is
near four times as hard now to be done as then; but it might be done, even now,
with advantage to all Parties.

Whereas there are now 300 M. British, and 800 M. Papists, whereof 600 M. live
in the wretched way above mentioned: If an Exchange was made of but about 200
M. Irish, and the like number of British brought over in their rooms, then the
natural strength of the British would be equal to that of the Irish; but their
Political and Artificial strength three times as great; and so visible, that
the Irish would never stir upon a National or Religious Account.

3. There are among the 600 M. abovementioned of the poor Irish, not above 20
M. of unmarried marriageable Women; nor would above two thousand per Ann. grow
and become such. Wherefore if the said Women were in one year, and the next
transported into England, and disposed of one to each Parish, and as many
English brought back and married to the Irish, as would improve their Dwelling
but to an House and Garden of 3 l. value, the whole Work of natural
Transmutation and Union would in 4 or 5 years be accomplished.

The charge of making the exchange would not be 20,000 l. per Ann. which is
about 6 Weeks Pay of the present or late Armies in Ireland.

If the Irish must have Priests, let the number of them, which is now between 2
and 3 thousand Secular and Regulars, be reduced to the competent number of
1000, which is 800 Souls to the pastorage of each Priest; which let be known
persons, and Englishmen, if it may be. So as that when the Priests, who govern
the Conscience, and the Women, who influence other powerful Appetites, shall be
English, both of whom being in the Bosom of the Men, it must be, that no
massacring of English, as heretofore, can happen again. Moreover, when the
Language of the Children shall be English, and the whole Economy of the Family
English, viz. Diet, Apparel, etc. the Transmutation will be very easy and quick.

Add hereunto, That if both Kingdoms, now two, were put into one, and under one
Legislative Power and Parliament, the Members whereof should be in the same
proportion that the Power and Wealth of each Nation are, there would be no
danger such a Parliament should do any thing to the prejudice of the English
Interest in Ireland; nor could the Irish ever complain of Partiality, when they
shall be freely and proportionably represented in all Legislatures.

The Inconveniences of the Not-Union, and Absurdities seem to be these, viz.
1. It is absurd, that Englishmen born, sent over into Ireland by the
Commission of their own King, and there sacrificing their Lives for the King's
Interest, and succeeding in his Service, should therefore be accounted Aliens,
Foreigners, and also Enemies, such as were the Irish before Henry the VII.
time; whom, if an Englishman had then killed, he had suffered nothing for it;
for it is but Indulgence and Connivance, that now the same is not still in
force. For such formerly was the Condition of Irishmen; and that of Englishmen
is now the same, otherwise than as Custom has relieved them.

It is absurd, that the Inhabitants of Ireland, naturally and necessarily bound
to obey their Sovereign, should not be permitted to know who, or what the same
is, i.e. Whether the Parliament of England, or that of Ireland; and in what
Cases the one, and in what the other. Which uncertainty is or may be made a
pretense for my Disobedience.

It is absurd, that Englishmen in Ireland, should either be Aliens there, or
else to be bound to Laws, in the making whereof they are not represented.

It is absurd if the Legislative Power be in Ireland, that the final judgment
of Causes between man and man, should be in England, viz. the Writs of Error
should remove Causes out of Ireland, to the King's Bench in England. That the
final determination of Admiralty-Causes, and of some Causes-Ecclesiastical,
should be also ended in England; nor that men should know whether the Chancery
of England have jurisdiction in Ireland; and whether the Decrees of Chancery in
one Chancery, can be executed in the other.

As for Inconveniences, it is one, That we should do to Trade between the two
Kingdoms, as the Spaniards in the West Indies do to all other Nations; for
which cause all other Nations have war with them there.

And that a Ship trading from Ireland into the Islands of America, should be
forced to unlade the Commodities shipped for Ireland in England, and afterward
bring them home; thereby necessitating the Owners of such Goods to run
unnecessary hazard and Expenses.

It is inconvenient that the same King's Subjects should pay Customs as Aliens,
passing from one part of the same their own King's Territories to another.

The chief Objection against the remedy of these Evils is;

That his Majesty would by the Union lose much of his Double-Customs. Which
being true, let us see what the same amounts unto; and if it be sufficient to
hinder the remedy of these Evils, and if it be irreparable by some other way.

Ann. 1664. which was the best year of Trade that has been these many years in
Ireland, when neither Plague nor Wars impeached it, and when men were generally
disposed to Splendour and Liberality, and when the Act for hindering Cattle
coming out of Ireland into England, was not yet made; nor that made for
unlading in England Ships bound from America into Ireland; I say, in that year
the Customs upon exported and imported Commodities, between Ireland and
England, was but -- but not thereof, which since, how easily may it be added to
the other Charges upon England and Ireland, which are together perhaps 1500 M.
per Ann?

2. If it be for the good of England to keep Ireland a distinct Kingdom, why do
not the predominant Party in Parliament (suppose the Western Members) make
England beyond Trent another Kingdom, under Commerce, and take Tolls and
Customs upon the new Borders? Or why was there ever a Union between England and
Wales, the good effects and fruits whereof were never questioned? And why may
not the entire Kingdom of England be farther Cantoniz'd, and infinitely for the
advantage of Parties?

As for the Practice; The Peers of Ireland assembled in Parliament, may depute
so many of their number, as make the part of the Peers of England, to be called
by Writ into the Lords House of England: And the Commons in Ireland, assembled
in like manner, may depute the like proportion of other Members to sit with the
Commons of England, the King and that House admitting of them.

But if the Parliament of England be already the Legislative Power of Ireland,
why may they not call a competent Number out of Ireland, (...), or in some
other more convenient manner?

All these Shifts and Expedients are necessary but for the (...) tim^, until
the matter be agreed upon by both Nations, in some one Parliament.

It Is s^ppos'd that the Wealth of Ireland is about the ^ or ^ of that of
England; and the King's Revenue in both Kingdoms seems about that proportion.

Of the Government of IRELAND.
THE Government of Ireland is by the King, 21 Bishops (whereof four are
Archbishops) and the Temporal Peers; whereof some part, -- by reason of the
late Rebellion, do not sit in Parliament.

By about 3000 Freeholders, and the Members of about 100 Corporations, the
University at Dublin reckoned for one, represented in the House of Commons, by
about 270 Knights, Citizens and Burgesses.

The Parliament so constituted, have a Negative upon any Law that the Lord
Lieutenant and Council shall offer to the King, and which the King and his
Council in England shall under the Great Seal remit to the said Parliament.

The Sheriffs of Counties, and of Cities and Counties in Ireland are 40,
finally appointed by the Lord Lieutenant, each of which has about Ten Bailiffs.

The Chief Governor, called sometimes Lord Lieutenant, sometimes Lord-Deputy,
sometimes Lords Justices, with a Council, at this time consisting of about 50
Members, do govern in all Matters belonging to the Peace, Prerogative, etc.

There be five Courts, viz. a Chancery, consisting of a Lord-Chancellor, Master
of the Rolls, and two, three or four Sallariated Masters of Chancery. The
King's Bench, of a Lord-Chief-Justice, and two other Judges. The Common Pleas
of the like: The Exchequer, of a Lord-Chief-Baron, and two other Barons, with
the Treasurer and Chancellor of the Exchequer: And a Prerogative, whereof the
Primate of Armagh is Judge.

There is also a Palatinate-Courtih Tipperary, whereof the Duke of Ormond is
Lord of the Liberties and Regalities to it belonging. There is also a Court of
Admiralty: Every Bishop has also two Courts. And there have been formerly and
lately (but now An. 1672. suspended) a Presidency of Munster, and another of
Connaght, who meddle not with Life or Limb, nor Titles of Land.

There is also a Court- Marshal, for the Affairs of the Army, who in times of
peace often transmit accused persons to the Civil-power.

To all these Courts do belong -- Officers, -- Counselors of Law, whereof I
reckon -- are of the first Classis, gaining by Estimation about 600 l. per Ann.
each -- of the 2d. gaining about 300 l. per Ann. And -- of the 3d gaining not
above 100 l. per Ann. There are also -- sworn Attorneys, gaining about 120 l.
per Ann. one with another.

There are in Ireland about 950 Justices of the Peace, appointed by the
Lord-Chancellor; an Head-Constable for each Barony or Hundred, being 252; and a
Petty Constable for each Parish; whereof are about 2278.

The Ecclesiastical Government is by Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Deans
of Cathedral-Churches, in all which there are now actually but one Quire
entire, and that in Dublin, serving both at Christ-Church, and St. Patrick's.
And the Parsons, Vicars and Curates for the Protestant-Religion, are in all
Ireland at this day near 500, and about half the Tithes are Impropriate, and
belonging to Laymen.

This is the State of the External and Apparent Government of Ireland, so far
as it concerns the Number and Species of Persons managing the same. But the
Internal and Mystical Government of Ireland is thus, viz.

1. There are always about Twenty Gentlemen of the Irish Nation and
Popish-Religion, who by reason of their Families, good Parts, Courtly Education
and Carriage, are supported by the Irish to negotiate their Concernments at the
Court of England, and of the Viceroy in Ireland

These men raise their Contributions by the Priests (who actually and
immediately govern the People.) The Priests are governed by at least 24 Romish
Bishops, all of whom have a long time been conversant in France, Spain, Italy,
Germany, England, whereas Chaplains and Almoners, etc. they have made an
interest with the governing Men and Ministers of State in those several
Kingdoms, and have obtained some Benefits and Preferments from them.

So as the Body of the Irish-Papist's (being about 800 M. whereof near 700 M.
do live in wretched Cabbins, without Chimney or Window) are governed by about
1000 Secular Priests, and 2500 Friars and Regulars of several Orders; whereof
most are Franciscans, next Dominicans and Augustins, but few Capuchins and
Jesuits or Carthusians. These, I say, are governed by their respective Bishops
and Superiors, whom the Ministers of Foreign States do also govern and direct.

So as upon the whole matter, the Irish, who are the Bulk of the Nation, are
governed indirectly by Foreign Power; and so are the aforenamed Lay-Patriots,
their support coming from the Clergy constituted as aforesaid, and who do
notoriously exercise their Spiritual Jurisdiction in Ireland: And do also exert
a Temporal Power, by prevailing with Papist Justices of the Peace, to send such
to Gaol as are disobedient to the Clergy, upon feigned or frivolous Complaints,
which they cause to be brought against them.

The Judges aforenamed, all but the Chancellor, go Circuits, whereof there are
five twice every year, excepting only the one County of Kerry.

There is an University at Dublin, but lying for the most part within one
College, wherein are a Provost and seven Senior and Ruling Fellows; Nine Junior
Fellows; sixty Sch lars; and at this time -- Commoners and other Students

There was about the year 1669 erected a College of Physicians, consisting of a
President, and 13 Fellows.

There are belonging to the Prerogative, Archdeacons Courts, Court Martial and
Admiralty-Courts, not above to Advocates, and 30 Proctors.

There are in the City of Dublin a Lord Mayor, 2 Sheriffs, 24 Aldermen, 48
Sheriffs Peers, and 96 of the Common Council. There are besides, Companies or
Corporations of Tradesmen.

There is lately instituted an Hospital for poor Children, not yet fully
perfected nor endowed.

There is also an Hospital for Sick, Lame, and Old Soldiers, but without
Endowment, and standing but at discretion and pleasure.

There are in and near Dublin, three Public Prisons, and one House of
Correction.

Lastly, I must intimate, that the Footmanship for which the Irish 40 years
agone were very famous, is now almost quite lost among them, every man now
keeping a small Garran to ride on, unless in such rocky and craggy places,
where it is easier to go a foot than to ride.

Of the Militia and Defense of IRELAND.
THERE be in Ireland, as elsewhere, two Militias; one are the Justices of
Peace, their Militia of High and Petty Constables; as also the Sheriffs Militia
of his Servants and Bailiffs, and Posse Comitatus upon extraordinary occasions.

Of these all together there are in Ireland near 3000; all of which are bound
within their several Districts, there to act, and not elsewhere.

There is, or has lately been an Army in Ireland, of about thirty Troops of
Horse, and sixty Companies of Foot, with a Regiment of Guard at Dublin, as a
Lifeguard for the Lord Lieutenant, making in all about five thousand Men.

There is also a Protestant Militia, of about 24000 Men, viz. about ten
thousand Horse, and the rest Foot.

The people of Ireland are all in Factions and Parties, called English and
Irish, Protestants and Papists: Though indeed the real distinction is vested
and divested of the Land belonging to Papists, Ann. 1641. Of which the Irish
that are vested by Restoration, seem rather to take part with the divested. And
the chief Pique which the Popish-Clergy have at the Protestants is, that they
have the Church Livings and Jurisdictions; for the exercise of their Function
they have most freely, and had, when they undertook their Project in 1641. The
differences between the Old Irish, and Old English Papists is asleep now,
because they have a Common Enemy.

The Old Protestants of Queen Elizabeth and King James's Plantation (till of
late) did not much love the New English; who came over since 1641. or rather
since 1646. and 1648. because they envied the great Shares which they had
gotten of the forfeited Lands from the Late Usurpers. But now they also are
well enough together, since the said Old Protestants have had good Proviso's in
the Acts of Settlement and Satisfaction for their Service before June 1649. and
since the Church-Revenues have been augmented by the Forfeitures; but chiefly,
for that the said Old Protestants have all the Power and Preferments Civil,
Military, and Ecclesiastical.

Of the New English, some are Conformists, others not: And some have fallen in
with other Parties, and others not.

Of the Old Protestants, there are also Parties, I cannot say Factions, chiefly
denominated by the Names of their Families, as the Butlers and Fitz-Gerralds
were of old.

But to return; The chief Factions are the vested and divested of forfeited
Lands: all Irish and Papists generally fearing the latter, and most English and
Protestants the former, as appears in all Juries and Testimonies given where
the Lands or Lives of one or other are concerned. Now in some Counties, as in
Kerry, many Forfeitures happened, and few Restorations, and there also few
English were ever planted, nor can well endure to live: So as the first sort of
Militia in these and other like Counties, are Irish-Papists, divested and
discontented Persons. Whereby the few English there, can have no Justice
executed, for want of hand wherewith to do it: Nor can they easily get
indifferent Juries, but that the Sheriffs are English for the most part, and
most commonly Protestants. In which Case, some have been of opinion, that the
other Militia, namely the Army, may both in Law and Reason supply this defect
in times when there is not occasion for them, to guard the Land from Invasion
and Rebellion. For why might not 30 Sheriffs be taken out of 120 Officers of
the Army, viz. 60 Captains and Lieutenants of Horse, and 60 Captains of Foot?
And why may not such be as responsible for executing just Sentences, as any
other? And what Tenor is there in the Force which a Bailiff uses, more than in
that which one called a Soldier carries with him. And why should the Military
Officer or Sheriff use more force or terror than to make the Debtor or
Malefactor answer the Law, and obey the Sentence of a Civil Court? And is it
not more convenient and easy in great riotous Contempts, to bring a Troop or
Company, whose Trade it is to use Arms and apply Force dexterously, than to use
the Posse-Comitatus; that is, to call abundance of men from their Labor and
Calling, to attempt things of Danger, which they do not understand? Moreover,
if the General can quarter the Army where he pleases, and that the Sheriffs or
Constable can, in their respective Precincts, call whom he pleases to his
assistance; then the General can cause such a competent Force to be quartered
in those thin peopled Counties. And the Sheriffs and Justices can call such to
their assistance, excepting where such Soldiers are in formal Garrisons upon
actual Duty, or in other cases to be agreed upon between the Civil and Military
Powers so called, although there can be no Country without Force, nor any Army
without a Policy and Discipline. But of this let the Lawyers talk further.

As for the Military Force of Ireland, vulgarly and properly so called, 1. The
standing Army is such as the present Revenue can well maintain, which perhaps
is, or very lately was about 6000, and is every year or other year changed, as
to his Majesty seems best. 2. The Protestant Militia now already established
and formed, is about 24 or 25 thousand men, most of them already experienced in
the Wars of Ireland.

The Third, of grand Force against Foreign Invasions, I conceive may be 70 M.
Men of the best affected, and least Popeaffected Irish; for so many I conceive
the 30000 of the standing Army and present Militia could well Officer and
Command. Now that 100 M. may be spared to send as Soldiers in a time of
extremity, I think it plain, for that there are 550 M. Males in Ireland,
whereof 150 M. can perform all the necessary Labor of Husbandmen and
Tradesmen; 200 M. of them are perhaps under 16, and above 60. Nor does the
quality of the remaining, exempt them from service, who are to stand for a
reserve.

And this Force I take to be sufficient to resist any number of men which any
Prince of the World has Shipping enough to bring into Ireland, with such
Horse, Arms, Ammunition and Victuals as are for such an Enterprise.

To say nothing, that the substance of Ireland is chiefly Cattle, which be
easily removed to waste the Country where the Enemy shall land.

And how considerable the standing Army of 6000 men, and the Veteran Militia,
of above 24000, who have not only the Command, but the possession and propriety
of all the strong and terrible Places in Ireland, and of all the Horse
serviceable in War, and at least of all Shipping, and England to help and
countenance, has been competently mentioned before; and that the Bulk of the
Irish are the Inhabitants of the aforenamed 160 M. wretched Cabins-men,
slavishly bred and dealt with by their own Lords and Patriots; and that the
restored Irish, restored to their Estates almost by Miracle, will be careful
how they engage any more upon a frivolous, impious Undertaking.

Of the Coelum and Solum of Ireland.
BY the Coelum or Sky, I understand the Heat, Coldness, Drowth, Moisture,
Weight and Susceptions of Air, and the Impressions made upon it, viz. The state
of the Winds, as whether the Wind blows in Ireland in comparison with, or
differently from other Places; as from what points of the Compass the Wind
blows most frequently or fiercely, and what proportion of the whole year from
each Point. 2. As to Heat and Cold, I conceive the same ought to be measured by
the Weather-Glass or Thermometer. 3. As to Wetness or Moisture, by the
shrinking of Lute-strings, by the quantity of Rain falling upon a certain
quantity of level superficies, and by the quantity of Water dried up with the
same time out of a Vessel of like Figure, and equal dimensions.

As for other changes in the Air, supposed to depend upon the gravity or levity
thereof, I suppose the same is to be known by the Instrument called the
Barrimeter. Lastly, To the much or ^ittle Sunshine, whereof Ireland has be^n
much abused; the same is to be measured by an Instrument found for that purpose.

Wherefore since it is small satisfaction to say the Air of Ireland is mild and
temperate, inclined to moisture, etc. And since the true and clear knowledge
thereof depends upon several long, tedious, and r^terated Observations, simple
and comparative, made in the several parts of Ireland, in the several Seasons
of the Year, and compared with the like Observations, made with the same or
like Instruments, in the several parts of the Earth; we must for the present
only say, that there are in being the several Instruments following, viz.

1. An Instrument to measure the motion of the Wind, and consequently its
strength. 2. How many Hours in the day in the whole year it blows from any
point of the Compass. 3. To measure what quantity of Rain falls in the year
upon any quantity or space of ground. 4. What Air is most desiccative of
moistness. 5. What Alterations are made in the gravity and levity of the Air
from Hour to Hour. 6. The Thermometer or Weather-Glass of the better sort. 7.
The Instrument to measure and foretell Frost and Snow.
Which Instruments many men must make use of in the several parts of Ireland,
and the rest of the World, and corresponding with each other, communicate and
correct their Observation by Reason.

In the mean time let it suffice to say, that at Dublin the Wind blows 2 parts
of 5 from the South-West to the West, one part from South-West to the South;
one other from the West to North-East, and the rest from the North-East to the
South; 3 parts of 10 between West and South-West 2/10 between S. W. and S. S.
^. 2/10 between S. S. E. and N. E. by N. 2/10 N. E. by N. to N. and W. or very
near thereabouts.

2. That from the 10th of September. to the 10th of March, it blows a kind of
Storm for some time or other almost every day.

3. That the Snow lies not long in the lower ground of Ireland. Nor does it
freeze more than what it does in France, Holland, or England.

4. The Rain falling at Dublin and London for the Month October, 1663. was but
20 to 19. That the windiness of the same Month was at Dublin 20. and at London
but 17.

5. As for the healthfulness of the Climate, City, or other space of Land; It
must be first known how many people are in a certain day living in it, and then
the quota pars which die per Ann. for many years together; and for the
fruitfulness, how many Births.

6. As to Longaevity, enquiry must be made into some good old Register of
(suppose) 20 persons, who all were born and buried in the same Parish, and
having cast up the time which they all lived as one man, the Total divided by
20 is the life of each one with another; which compared with the like
Observation in several other places, will show the difference of Longaevity,
due allowance being made for extraordinary contingences, and Epidemical
Diseases happening respectively within the period of each Observation.

Wherefore Matters being not as yet prepared for these Experiments, I can say
nothing clearly of them; Only, That it seems by the best Estimates and
Approaches that I have been able to make, that London is more healthful than
Dublin by 3 in 32.

Having said thus much of the Coelum or Air, or rather of the Ingenium, and way
of distinguishing Airs in a better manner than usual: We come next to try the
nature of the Soil by the like Expedients.

To which purpose, first know, that the Perch of Ireland is 21 Foot, that of
England but 16; Wherefore the Acre of 160 Perches is as 121 to 196, that is 121
Irish Acres do make 196 English Statute Acres. Now in Ireland a Milch-Cow, if
English breed, upon two Acres of Pasture, and with as much Hay as will grow
upon Acre of Meadow, will yield prae^er propter 3 Gallons of Milk for 90 days,
one with another, and one Gallon at a Medium for 90 more, and for 90 more
scarce of a Gallon one day with another, and for 90 more, dry. Wherefore it
follows, that such a Cow upon such feeding, gives above one Tun and half; nay,
384 Gallons of Milk per Ann. And that if the Rent of the said two Acres of
Pasture be 5 s. per Ann and of the half Acre of Meadow 3. in all 8 s. That the
Gallon of Milk comes but to a Farthing, expecting what the value and hazard of
the Cow, and the labor of milking and looking to her, shall add unto that
price; which I suppose not above as much more.

The said quantity of Milk will make 2^ C. of Raw-Milk-Cheese, and 1 C. of
Whey-Butter, besides Whey for the Swine: Or else 2 C. of Butter, and 1 C. of
Skim-Milk-Cheese, besides Whey as abovesaid, for Drink to the People, and Food
for Swine.

Mem. That one Bull suffices for about 20 Cows. That a Cow continues Milch and
bearing, from 3 or 4 years old to 12, sometimes 20, tho seldom suffered to live
so long. And that three Dairy-women will manage 20 Cows, and do much work of
other kind between while; and that one Man will look to them and their Food.

An Ox of 6 or 7 years old will not require so much feeding as a Milch-Cow, but
will be maintained with two Acres of good Pasture only, or with 1 Acres of
Pasture, and Acres of Hay, in hard Winters.

An Horse requires 2 Acres, as a Garran, and a small Horse or Irish Garran, or
thereabouts.

Eight or ten Sheep are equivalent for feeding to an Ox.

It is further to be noted, that a Calf at a Month old weighs 1. C. That an Ox
is come to its full growth at 6 years old, and then may weigh alive 7 C. The 4
quarters of such an Ox weighs 5 C. The Hide, The Tallow 80 l. And consequently
the said Ox gains every year of weight in Flesh to eat l. In Hide -- In
Tallow -- The Offal Worth, besides half of the whole.

The difference between lean-Beef and fat Beef in value is as 5 to 9.

In Sheep the increase of their Flesh, Skin and Tallow, is about the same
proportion. And yet Sheeps Flesh is sold dearer than Beef, because of the great
trouble and hazard about Sheep.

A Fleece of Wool in Ireland is about 2 l. weight.

An Hog eats such things as Sheep and Oxen do not, viz. Roots, Acorns, and
consequently the same Land will maintain a proportion of Hogs above Sheep and
Oxen. One-Cowherd will serve an hundred Oxen; one Shepherd 1000 Sheep.

From all that has been said, we collect, that the natural and genuine Rent of
Lands in Ireland, not that of Money, or Gold and Silver; is Of Milk, deducting
Charges -- Gall. Of Beef and Mutton -- Of Hides and Skin -- Of Offall -- Of
Wool. --


So as where Lands produce more or less per Ann. communibus annis of these
Commodities, the same is to be accounted more or less fertile than that of
Ireland.

Moreover from hence we shall endeavor to gather the number of Cattle in
Ireland, as follows, viz.

There being 7 Millions of Acres of good Meadow, Arrable, and Pasture-Land in
Ireland, besides Bog with Shrub-wood, etc. commonly called unprofitable Land;
and for that a Million supplies the Inhabitants with Corn for Bread and Drink,
Man and Beast, Hemp Flax and Rape, as shall be hereafter shown* from the number
of the people, their manner of eating, from the number of Mills, and from the
value of the Tithes, etc. supposing the other 7 Millions to be competently well
stockt, let us first see how many Houses there may probably be.

To which purpose, remember that there are 184 M. Families, whose Houses have
but one or no Chimney. Now I guess, that about ^ of this number keep a small
Horse called a Garran, which is 61,000 Garrans for Tillage; and I suppose that
the 16,000 Families have for the Coach and Saddle near 4^ M. Horses. So as in
Ireland there are about 100 M. Horses, whose Food requires 100 M. Acres of good
Pasture, 50 M. Acres of Meadow, and the of an Acre of OatLand, viz. about
16,000 Acres. In all 166 M. Acres: Or if the Horses be such as require little
or no Hay and Oats, as the Horses of poor people do not, then as aforesaid 2 or
2^ Acres is allowed to each Horse.

The Wool which is usually exported, being a little above 2 Millions of
pounds, grows upon 1000 M. Sheep: And the Wool which clothes the Nation, being
about 1100 M. Bodies, at -- l. each for Cloths, Hats and Stockins, requires
6000 M. more; and so 3 Millions more of Sheep, in all 4 Millions. The feeding
whereof at 5 to an Acre, require 800 M. Acres. So as Horse and Sheep require
one Million of Acres. So as there remains, a Million being allowed for all
other Cattle, Beasts and Vermin) 5 Millions for great Cattle, which will feed
about 3 Millions of that Species.

If there be 3 Millions of Black Cattle, there be 1500 M. of Males, viz. 25 M.
Bulls. 700 M. under 3 years old. 600 between 3 and 6.175 above 6.

Of Females 1500 M. whereof are milchCows, viz. 600 M. 600 M. Calves and
Heifers under 3, and 300 of other sorts.

Where note, that of all the Black-Cattel abovenamed, there are 60 M. exported
alive, and 30 M. dead in Barrels. Of the Sheep not 100 M.

Of Butter, whereof one of the 600 M. Milch-Cows may well yield 1 C. weight per
Ann. but 26000 C, or the proceed of 26000 Cows. From whence may be seen whether
the Trade of those Commodities be yet at best: For I guess that the of the
whole Stock may be annually spent at home, or exported abroad.

It remains only to say, that one Irish Acre of Irish Land, requires of Seed,
and returns as follows.

Seed. Wheat 4 Bushels, and produces 16 to 36. Rye 4 20 to 40. Bean-Barly 6 20
to 48 Oats 6 16 to 32 Barley 4 20 to 40 Pease 4 12 to 18

One Horse plows 10 Acres, and there goes 1 Man to 3 Horses.

Of the Proportion in value, which the several Counties in Ireland do bear to
each other, viz.
THE value or proportion of the several Counties in Ireland, does seem much to
depend upon the number of Acres which each does contain. And therefore, and for
several other Reasons, most of the Land of Ireland has, By Sir John Bodly.
within these last 10 years, been admeasured by the Chain and Instrument, viz.
The King and Queens Counties, about the Year 1630. The County of Londonderry,
when the City of London undertook the Plantation by one Mr. Raven; Connought
and Tipperary, in the Earl of Strafford's time, by several hands, sometimes
conducted by Mr. William Gilbert.

The Lands belonging to Papists Ann. 1641. in the three Provinces of Munster,
Lemster and Vlster, by Sir William Petty. Other Protestant Lands in the same
three Provinces, in order to regulate Contributions, by the Owners of the said
Lands themselves: But in so divided and separated a manner, that little Account
can be given of them, besides what was collected by the said Sir William Petty;
who at his own charge, besides those Maps of every Parish, which by his
Agreement he delivered into the Surveyor-General's Office, he has caused
distinct Maps to be made of every Barony, or Hundred; as also of every County,
engraven in Copper, and the like of every Province, and of the whole Kingdom.
All which, could the Defects of them be supplied with the yet unmeasured*
Lands, would be exposed to public view.

Now as to the value of these Lands, they were Ann. 1642. rated to and by the
Adventurers as follows, viz. in Lemster at 12 s. per Acre; in Munster at 9 s.
in Connaught at 6 s. and in Vlster at 4 s. and to pay 1 Farthing per Ann.
Quit-rent to the King out of each Shillings-worth of Land so rated, viz. 3 d.
or 12 Farthings for an Acre in Lemster rated at 12. s. 9 q. or 2 an Acre for
Lands in Munster, rated at 9 s. and sic de caeteris. Wood, Bog, and Mountain,
to be cast in over and above.

Afterward the Soldiers, who were to have the satisfaction of their Arrears at
the same rate, not being willing to cast Lots upon such desperate hazards, did
Ann. 1653. equalize Counties within each Province, viz. took some in Lemster,
at 1 l. 2 s. per Acre, some at 1 l. etc. And those who were satisfied Ann.
1655. and afterward, did equalize not only Counties, but Baronies also,
valuing some Baronies in Lemster at 1 l. 4 s. per Acre, and some but at 6 s.
and others at all rates between these two extremes. But so as that,
notwithstanding all the said differences, the whole Province should be given
and taken at 12 s. per Acre, according to the then Law. And the Inequality
remaining after this Equalization, was to be corrected by a Lot.

I could here insert all the particulars of these Transactions, but conceive it
impertinent to my purpose, especially since they may be seen upon Record. The
next and best of all preceding equalization, was that which the Concernees of
each County made in order to regulate the heavy Contributions paid to the
Usurpers before His Majesty's Restoration, and when no Quit-Rent was yet due.
And in order to this work, not Baronies as before, but Parishes, nay,
particular Farms were also equalized. What was done herein, was not publicly
recorded, but collected by the curious, and too Bulky to be here inserted. Only
take notice, that these Valuations were made as Parties interested could
prevail upon and against one another by their Attendance, Friends, Eloquence,
and Vehemence; for what other Foundation of Truth it had in Nature, I know not.

Next to this Valuation, there was, in order to a certain Gift presented to His
Majesty, by the Adventurers and Soldiers, of a years value of all their Lands
as it yielded Ann. 1659. next immediately before his Restoration. There issued
a Commission, Ann. 1663. to enquire and settle the said Values. And about 1667.
there were made two several Valuations more; the one in order to reprize such
who had restored Lands to the Innocent Irish in equal value; and another was a
Determination what each Land was worth Ann. 1659. (whatever it yielded): Both
which, especially the latter, are upon Record most authentically. Moreover,
Ann. 1653, and 1654. there were Inquisitions taken of the Values which all and
every parcel of Land in Ireland yielded Ann. 1641. There have been also several
Acts of the chief Powers pro tempore, for apportioning what proportion of a
certain Sum to be levied in general, should in particular be charged on each
County, viz. Ann. 1657. there was an Act of the Usurper's Parliament to that
purpose. Ann. 1662. There was an Act for raising 30 M. l. as a Present to his
Grace the Duke of Ormond; and another for raising of (...) for several public
Uses. And Ann. 1672. for the equal raising of 30000 l. per Ann. upon all the
Lands and Houses of the whole Nation. There be also Accounts of what was raised
out of each County by way of Subsidy and Pole Money, paid Ann. 1661. All which
may be of much light to those who have such designs as the same will answer.
But I being assured by whom, and for what ends, and by what means every such
Valuations and Inquisitions were respectively made, had rather attempt some
Rule in nature, whereby to value and proportionate the Lands of Ireland: The
first whereof I propose to be; That how many Men, Women and Children live in
any Country Parish, that the Rent of that Land is near about so many times 15
s. be the quantity and quality of the Land what it will. 2. That in the meanest
of the 160 M. Cabbins, one with another are five Souls, in the 24000 six Souls.
In all the other Houses Ten a piece, one with another.

The TABLE.
BUT to make nearer approaches to the perfection of this Work, 'twould be
expedient to know the Content of Acres of every Parish, and withal, what
quantity of Butter, Cheese, Corn, and Wool, was raised out of it for three
years consequent; for thence the natural Value of the Land may be known, and by
the number of People living within a Market-days Journey, and the Value of
their housing, which shows the Quality and Expense of the said People; I would
hope to come to the knowledge of the Value of the said Commodities, and
consequently the Value of the Land, by deducting the hire of Working-People in
it. And this brings me to the most important Consideration in Political
Oeconomies, viz. how to make a Par and Equation between Lands and Labor, so as
to express the Value of any thing by either alone. To which purpose, suppose
two Acres of Pasture-land enclosed, and put thereinto a weaned Calf, which I
suppose in twelve Months will become 1 C. heavier in eatable Flesh; then 1 C.
weight of such Flesh, which I suppose fifty days Food, and the Interest of the
Value of the Calf, is the value or years Rent of the Land. But if a Man's labor
-- for a year can make the said Land to yield more than sixty days Food of the
same, or of any other kind, then that overplus of days food is the Wages of the
Man; both being expressed by the number of days food. That some Men will eat
more than others, is not material, since by a days food we understand (...)
part of what 100 of all Sorts and Sizes will eat, so as to Live, Labor, and
Generate. And that a days food of one sort, may require more labor to produce,
than another sort, is also not material, since we understand the easiest-gotten
food of the respective Countries of the World.

As for example, I suppose a pint of Oatmeal equal to half a pint of Rice, or a
quart of Milk, or a pound of Bread, or a pound and quarter of Flesh, etc. each,
in the respective place where each is the easiest gotten food. But if Rice be
brought out of India into Ireland, or Oatmeal carried from Ireland thither;
then in India the pint of Oatmeal must be dearer than half a pint of Rice, by
the freight and hazard of Carriage, and vice-versa, and sic de caeteris. For,
as for pleasant taste, I question whether there be any certainty, or regularity
of the same in Nature, the same depending upon Novelty, opinion of Virtue, the
recommendation of others, etc. Wherefore the days food of an adult Man, at a
Medium, and not the days labor, is the common measure of Value, and seems to
be as regular and constant as the value of fine Silver. For an ounce, suppose,
of Silver in Peru is equivalent to a days food, but the same in Russia is
equivalent to four days food, by reason of the Freight, and hazard in carrying
the same from Peru to Russia; and in Russia the price of Silver shall grow to
be worth more days labor, if a Workman can by the esteem and request of Silver
Utensils earn more than he can on other materials. Wherefore I valued an Irish
Cabin at the number of days food, which the Maker spent in building of it.

By the same way we must make a Par and Equation between Art and Simple Labor;
for if by such Simple Labor I could dig and prepare for Seed a hundred Acres
in a thousand days; suppose then, I spend a hundred days in studying a more
compendious way, and in contriving Tools for the same purpose; but in all that
hundred days dig nothing, but in the remaining nine hundred days I dig two
hundred Acres of Ground; then I say, that the said Art which cost but one
hundred days Invention is worth one Man's labor for ever; because the now Art,
and one Man, performed as much as two Men could have done without it.

By the same way we make an Equation between Art and Opinion. For if a
Picture-maker, suppose, make Pictures at 5 l. each; but then, find that more
Persons would employ him at that rate than his time would extend to serve them
in, it will certainly come to pass that this Artist will consider whether as
many of those who apply to him at 5 l. each Picture, will give 6 l. as will
take up his whole time to accommodate; and upon this Computation he pitcheth
the Rate of his Work.

By the same way also an Equation may be made between drudging Labor, and
Favor, Acquaintance, Interest, Friends, Eloquence, Reputation, Power,
Authority, etc. All which I thought not amiss to intimate as of the same kind
with finding an Equation between Land and Labor, all these not very pertinent
to the Proportionation of the several Counties of Ireland.

Wherefore to return to the matter in hand, I say, that the Quantity of
Commodity produced, and the Quantity of the -- shows the effects of the Land;
and the number of People living thereupon, with the Quality of their housing,
shows the Value of the Commodity; for one days delicate and exquisit Food may
be worth ten of ordinary. Now the Nature of Peoples feeding may be estimated by
the visible part of their Expense, which is their housing. But such helps of
knowing the Value of Lands, I am not yet able to furnish.

Of the Money of IRELAND.
MOney is understood to be the uniform Measure and Rule for the Value of all
Commodities. But whether in that sense there be any Money, or such Rule in the
World, I know not, much less in Ireland, tho most are persuaded that Gold and
Silver Money is such. For 1. The proportion of value between pure Gold and fine
Silver, alters as the Earth and Industry of Men produce more of one than of the
other; that is to say, Gold has been worth but twelve times its own weight in
Silver; of late it has been worth fourteen, because more Silver has been
gotten. That of Gold proportionably, i. e. about twelve times as much Silver
has been raised as of Gold, which makes Gold dearer. So there can be but one of
the two Metals of Gold and Silver to be a fit matter for Money. Wherefore, if
Silver be that one Metal fit for Money; then Gold is but a Commodity very like
Money. And as things now stand, Silver only is the matter of Money; and that
elsewhere as well as in Ireland.

2. The value of Silver rises and falls it self; for Men make Vessels of coined
Silver, if they can gain by the Workmanship enough to defray the Destruction of
the Coynage, and withal, more than they could expect by employing the same
Silver as Money in a way of Trade. Now the Accidents of so doing, make Silver
rise and fall, and consequently take from the perfect Aptitude for being an
uniform steady Rule and Measure of all other things.

The Mischiefs and Inconveniences hitherto mentioned, are common to all times
and places; but in Ireland are more particular; and stand thus, viz.

A piece of 8 Rials being full 17. penny weight, passes for 4 s. 9 d. if it
want but a grain of the weight, tho half a grain of Silver be worth but the of
a Farthing, or of a Penny, then it passes for 3 d less, viz. 4 s. 6 d. and if
it weigh ten grains above 17 d. weight, it passes but for 4 s. 9 d. On the
other hand, if it weigh but 12 d. weight, it passes nevertheless for 4 s. 6 d.
And if the Silver be course, if not so course, as not to be called Silver, yet
still it passes for the same Moreover, the fineness cannot be determined by
common Eyes scarce at all, by the best not within 4 d. in an Ounce, by the
Touchstone not within 2 d. and by the Test it self not within an halfpenny.
Lastly, The Scales and Weights differ so much from each other, as what is 4 s.
9 d. in one House, is but 4 s. 6 d. in the next, and vice versa. From whence it
comes to pass, that all pieces weighing above 17 d. weight, are culled out to
buy or make pieces of 14 d. weight pass for 4 s. 6 d.

2. Other Species of Coin, which pro rata contain the same quantity of the like
Gold and Silver, with the piece of eight Rials, goes in one Species for more,
in another for less. What has been said of the Silver-species, may be said of
the Gold-species; and what differences are between Silver and Silver, and
between Gold and Gold, is also between Silver and Gold Coyns. So as it becomes
a Trade to study and make Advantages of these Irregularities, to the prejudice
of the good People, who are taught, that whatever is called Money, is the same,
and regular, and uniform, and a just Measure of all Commodities. From whence it
has happened, that all English Money which has a great and deserved
Reputation in the World for its intrinsic Goodness, is quite carried away out
of Ireland, and such Money brought instead of it, as these studied Merchants do
from time to time bring in for their Advantage upon the Common People, their
Credulity and Ignorance.

But Money, that is to say, Silver and Gold, do at this day much decrease in
Ireland, for the following Reasons.

1. Ireland, Anno 1664. did not export to a much greater Value than it
imported, viz. about 62 M. Since which time there has been a Law made to
prohibit the Importation of great Cattle and Sheep, alive or dead, into
England; the Value whereof carried into England in that very year 1664. was
above 150 M. l. The which was said to have been done, for that Ireland drained
away the Money of England. Whereas in that very year England sent to Ireland,
but 91 M. less than it received from thence; and yet this small difference was
said to be the reason why the Rents of England fell, that is 1600 M. in 8
Millions. Which was a strange conceit, if they consider farther, That the value
of the Catrel alive or dead, which went out of Ireland into England, was but
132 M. the Hides, Tallow, and Freight whereof were worth about ^ that Money.

2. Whereas the Owners of about, both of all the real and personal Estate of
Ireland, do live in England, since the business of the several Courts of Claims
was finished in December 1668. all that belongs to them goes out, but returns
not.

3. The gains of the Commissioners of that Court, and of the Farmers of the
Revenue of Ireland, who live in England, have issued out of Ireland without
returns.

4. A considerable part of the Army of Ireland has been sent into England, and
yet paid out of Ireland.

5. To remit so many great Sums out of Ireland into England, when all Trade
between the said two Kingdoms is prohibited, must be very chargeable; for now
the Goods which go out of Ireland, in order to furnish the said Sums in
England, must for Example go into the Barbados, and there be sold for Sugars,
which brought into England, are sold for Money to pay there what Ireland owes.
Which way being so long, tedious and hazardous, must necessarily so raise the
exchange of Money, as we have seen 15 per Cent. frequently given, Anno 1671,
and Anno 1672. Although in truth, exchange can never be naturally more than the
Land and Water-carriage of Money between the two Kingdoms, and the ensurance of
the same upon the way, if the Money be alike in both places.

But Men that have not had the faculty of making these Transmissions with
dexterity, have chose rather to give 15. per Cent. Exchange, as aforesaid, than
to put themselves upon the hazard of such undertakings, and the mischief of
being disappointed.

Now the extraordinary decrease of Gold and Silver, put Men, whose Affairs were
much disturbed, thereby upon extraordinary Conceits, and some very absurd ones
for Remedy, as namely the raising of Spanish pieces of Eight, called Cobs in
Ireland, from 4 s. 9 d. to 5 or 6 Shillings, which were before about 5 d. above
the Value of English, that is 4 s. 4 d. English Money weighed the same with a
Cob called 4 s. 9 d. For these distracted People thought, that calling their
Money by a better Name, did increase its value.

2. They thought that no Man would carry Cobs of 5 s. out of Ireland into
England, where they were called but 4 s. 4 d. although he was necessitated to pay
4 s. 4 d. in England, and had no other effects to do it with. They thought that
all Men who lived in England, would return to their Estates in Ireland, rather
than pay 15. per Cent. for Exchange; not considering, that when Cobs were
raised, that Exchange would also rise proportionably. They fancied, that he who
sold a Stone of Wool for two Cobs, called 9 s. when Cobs were raised, would
sell his Stone of Wool of 1^ Cob when called 9 s. Nor did they think how this
frivolous conceit would have taken away a proportionable part of all Landlords
Estates in Ireland. As for Example, those who acted moderately, would have the
Money raised 1/20 part, and the 1/20 part of all the Money of Ireland, was then
thought to be but about 20,000 l. The whole Cash of Ireland being then
estimated, but 400 M. l. whereas the Landlords of Ireland, whose Revenue is 800
M. l. per Annum, must have lost 1/20 part of their whole Estates for ever, viz.
40 M. l. per Annum upon that empty expedient.

But others, no less sensible of the distress of the People, and the
obstructions of Trade by reason of the said decay of Bullion, considering that
about 600 M. l. would drive the Trade of that Kingdom; for that 300 M. would
pay one half years Gale of all the Land; 50 M. would pay rent of all the
Housing, and that 150 M. would more than pay a Weeks expense of all the People
of Ireland; and that the whole Cash moved chiefly in those Three Circles; They
therefore thought to make up their 400 M. l. present Cash by a Bank of 200 M.
l. more, the bottom and support whereof should be Land; for the Lands and
Houses of Ireland being worth about 8 Millions, whereof 200 M. l. was but the
1/4^ part. 'Twas thought easy to find many Fortieth parts so free from
Encumbrances or question as to give a being to such a Bank.

Note, that Interest in Ireland is 10 per Cent, which is a great hinderance to
Trade; since the Interest must inflame the price of Irish Commodities, and
consequently give to other Nations the means of underselling.

Of the Trade of IRELAND.
IF it be true, that there are but about 16,000 Families in Ireland, who have
above one Chimney in their Houses; and above 180 M. others; It will be easily
understood what the Trade of this latter sort can be, who use few Commodities;
and those such as almost every one can make and produce. That is to say, Men
live in such Cottages as themselves can make in 3 or 4 Days; Eat such Food
(Tobacco excep^ed) as they buy not from others; wear such Clothes as the Wool
of their own Sheep, spun into Yarn by themselves, does make; their Shoes,
called Brogues, are but so much worth as a Pair of English Shoes; nor of more
than in real use and value. A Hat costs 20 d. a Pair of Stockins 6 d. but a
good Shirt near 3 s. The Tailors work of a Doublet, Breeches and Coat, about 2
s. 6 d. In brief, the Victuals of a Man, his Wife, Three Children, and Servant,
resolved into Money, may be estimated 3 s. 6 d. per Week, or 1 d. per Diem. The
Clothes of a Man 30 s. per Ann. of Children under 16, one with another 15 s.
the House not worth 5 s. the Building; Fuel costs nothing but fetching. So as
the whole Annual expen^e of such a Family, consisting of 6 in Number, seems to
be but about 52 Shillings per Ann. each head one with another. So as 950. M.
Inhabitants of these Edifices, may spend 2,375. M. l. per Ann. And the 150,000
who inhabit the 16,000 other Houses, may spend 10 l. per Ann. each one with
another, viz. One Million and half. So as the whole People of both sorts spend
under 4 Millions, whereof 1/10 part, viz. 400 M. l. is for Foreign
Commodities, Tobacco included, whereof every 1000 Souls spend one Tun per Ann.
or every 1000 Tobacco-takers, viz. People above 15. Years old, spend two Tuns
one with another: for it appears by the latest account of importance, that what
is here said, is true to a trifle. From whence I observe by the way, that the
King's Revenue, viis and modis, being about 200 M. l. per Ann. that it is ^
part of the whole Expense; which in some of the Grecian Commonwealths was
thought too much, although the Israelites allowed 1/10 to the Levites only, tho
perhaps to defray the whole charge of the Government, the Supremacy amongst
that People being then Sacerdotal.

I observe also by the way, that the Lands and Housing of Ireland being worth
about one Million per Ann. that the Labor of the People may be worth three
Millions, which is earned by about 750,000 (of the 1,100 M.) who by their Age
and Quality are Fit and Applicable to Corporal Labors, and consequently each
Laboring Person Earns but 4 s. per Ann. if all Work. Or if each earns 8 l.
then but half of them work, or all but half their full time, or otherwise in
other proportions. But be it one way or the other; I am as certain that the
Hands of Ireland may Earn a Million per Ann. more than they now do, as I am
certain that there are 750,000 in Ireland who could earn 2 s. a week, or 5 l.
per Ann. one with another, if they had suitable employment, and were kept to
their Labor.

I further observe, that if there be naturally but 2000 Impotents in Ireland,
and that 50 Shillings per Ann. does maintain the poorer sort of People; It
follows, that 8,000 l. per Ann. would amply maintain all the Impotent^ of
Ireland, if well applied. For other Beggars, as also Thieves, and Rebels, which
are but bigger Thieves, are probably but the faults and defects of Government
and Discipline.

As for the fitness of Ireland for Trade, we say as follows.

1 st. That Ireland consisting of above 18,000 square Miles; it is not one
Place with another above 24 Miles from the Sea, because it is 750 Miles about.
Wherefore forasmuch as the Land-carriage of Gross that will be easy in such a
Country; it is fit for Trade, because the greatest and most profitable part of
Trade, and the Employment of Shipping, depends upon such Goods, viz. Metals,
Stones, Timber, Grain, Wood, Salt, etc.

2 dly. Ireland lies Commodiously for the Trade of the new American world;
which we see every day to Grow and Flourish.

It lies well for sending Butter, Cheese, Beef, Fish, to their proper Markets,
which are to the Southward, and the Plantations of America.

Thus is Ireland by Nature fit for Trade, but otherwise very much unprepared
for the same; for as has been often said, the Housing thereof consists of 160
M. nasty Cabbins, in which neither Butter nor Cheese, nor Linen, Yarn nor
Worsted, and I think no other, can be made to the best advantage; chiefly by
reason of the Soot and Smoaks annoying the same; as also for the Narrowness and
Nastiness of the Place; which cannot be kept Clean nor Safe from Beasts and
Vermin, nor from Damps and Musty Stenches, of which all the Eggs laid or kept
in those Cabbins do partake. Wherefore to the advancement of Trade, the
reformation of these Cabbins is necessary.

It may also be considered, whether the Institution of these following
Corporations would not be expedient, viz. 1. of Cattle, 2. of Corn, 3. of Fish,
4. of Leather 5. of Wool, 6. of Linen, 7. of Butter and Cheese, 8. of Metals
and Minerals: For unto these, almost all the Commodities exportable out of
Ireland, may be referred.

It may also be considered, whether the Taxing of those Cabbins with
Hearth-money be proper, but rather with Days Labor; the former being scarce
possible for them to have, but the latter most easy. Insomuch as it is more easy
for them to give 40 Days Labor per Ann. at seasonable times, than to pay 2 s.
in Silver at a pinch, and just when the Collectors call for it.

The Diet, Housing and Clothing of the 16,000 Families abovementioned, is much
the same as in England: Nor is the French Elegance unknown in many of them, nor
the French and Latin Tongues. The latter whereof is very frequent among the
poorest Irish, and chiefly in Kerry, most remote from Dublin.

The Housing of 160 M. Families, is, as has been often said, very wretched.
But their Clothing far better than that of the French Peasants, or the poor of
most other Countries; which advantage they have from their Wool, whereof 12
Sheep furnishes a competency to one of these Families. Which Wool, and the
Cloth made of it, does cost these poor people no less than 50 M. l. per Ann.
for the dying it; a trade exercised by the Women of the Country. Madder,
Alum, and Indico, are import^d, but the other dying Stuffs they find nearer
home, a certain Mud taken out of the Bogs serving them for Copperas, the Rind
of several Trees, and Saw-dust, for Galls; as for wild and green Weeds, they
find enough, as also of Rhamnus-Berries.

The Diet of these people is Milk, sweet and sower, thick and thin, which also
is their Drink in Summertime, in Winter Small-Beer or Water. But Tobacco taken
in short Pipes seldom burnt, seems the pleasure of their Lives, together with
Sneezing: Insomuch, that 2/7 of their Expense in Food, is Tobacco. Their Food
is Bread in Cakes, whereof a Penny serves a Week for each; Potatoes from August
till May, Muscles, Cockles and Oysters, near the Sea; Eggs and Butter made very
ra^cid, by keeping in Bogs. As for Flesh, they seldom eat it, notwithstanding
the great plenty thereof, unless it be of the smaller Animals, because it is
inconvenient for one of these Families to kill a Beef, which they have no
convenience to save. So as it is easier for them to have a Hen or Rabbet, than a
piece of Beef of equal substance.

Their Fuel is Turf in most places; and of late, even where Wood is most
plentiful, and to be had for nothing, the cutting and carriage of the Turf
being more easy than that of Wood. But to return from whence I disgressed, I
may say, That the Trade of Ireland, among 12/22 parts of the whole people, is
little or nothing, excepting for the Tobacco abovementioned, estimated worth
about 50,000 l. for as much as they do not need any Foreign Commodities, nor
scarce any thing made out of their own Village. Nor is above part of their
Expense other than what their own Family produces, which Condition and state
of living cannot beget Trade.

And now I shall digress again to consider, whether it were better for the
Commonwealth to restrain the expense of 150 M. Optimates below 10 l. per Ann.
each; or to beget a luxury in the 950 M. Plebeians, so as to make them spend,
and consequently earn double to what they at present do.

To which I answer in brief, That the one shall increase the sordidness and
squallor of living already too visible in 950 M. Plebeians, with little benefit
to the Common Wealth; the other shall increase the splendour, Art and Industry
of the 950 M. to the great enrichment of the CommonWealth.

Again, Why should we be forbid the use of any Foreign Commodity, which our own
Hands and Country cannot produce, when we can employ our spare Hands and Lands
upon such exportable Commodities as will purchase the same, and more.

3. The keeping or lessening of money, is not of that consequence that many
guess it to be of. For in most places, especially Ireland, nay, England it
self, the Money of the whole Nation is but about 1/16 of the Expense of one
Year; viz. Ireland is thought to have about 400 M.l. in Cash, and to spend
about 4 Millions per Ann. Wherefore it is very ill-husbandry to double the Cash
of the Nation, by destroying half its Wealth; Or to increase the Cash otherwise
than by increasing the Wealth simul and semel.

That is, when the Nation has 1/10 more Cash, I require it should have 1/10
more Wealth, if it be possible. For, there may be as well too much money in a
Country, as too little. I mean, as to the best advantage of its Trade; only
the Remedy is very easy, it may be soon turned into the magnificence of Gold
and Silver Vessels.

Lastly, Many think that Ireland is much impoverished, or at least the money
thereof much exhausted, by reason of Absentees, who are such as having Lands in
Ireland, do live out of the Kingdom, and do therefore think it just that such,
according to former Statutes, should lose their said Estates.

Which Opinion I oppose, as both unjust, inconvenient, and frivolous. For 1st.
If a man carry Money or other Effects out of England to purchase Lands in
Ireland, why should not the Rents, Issues and Profits of the same Land return
into England, with the same Reason that the Money of England was diminished to
buy it?

2. I suppose of the Land of Ireland did belong to the Inhabitants of England,
and that the same lay all in one place together; why may not the said quarter
of the whole Land be cut off from the other three sent into England, were it
possible so to do? and if so, why may not the Rents of the same be actually
sent, without prejudice to the other three parts of the Interessors thereof?

3. If all men were bound to spend the Proceed of their Lands upon the Land it
self; then as all the Proceed of Ireland, ought to be spent in Ireland; so all
the Proceed of one County of Ireland, ought to be spent in the same; of one
Barony, in the same Barony; and so Parish and Manor; and at length it would
follow, that every eater ought to avoid what he has eaten upon the same Turf
where the same grew. Moreover, this equal spreading of Wealth would destroy all
Splendour and Ornament; for if it were not fit that one place should be more
splendid than another, so also that no one man should be greater or richer than
another; for if so, then the Wealth, suppose of Ireland, being perhaps 11
Millions, being divided among 1,100 M. people, then no one man having above
101. he could Probably build no House worth above 31. which would be to leave
the face of Beggary upon the whole Nation: And withal such Parity would beget
Anarchy and Confusion.

Of the other Impediment of Trade, the not raising of Money above the value
which the generality of the whole World has of it, that is, the intrinsic
value, I have spoken before: And now return to other matters relating to the
Trade of Ireland.

Having shown that there is little or no Trade or Commutation of Commodities,
where people live so simply, and as it were exsponte creatis; as the
Inhabitants of 184 M. do live; It follows, that what Trade is in Ireland must
be found in the 16,000 other Houses of above one Chimney in each, and amongst
the Inhabitants of them. Though Trade, properly speaking, be the Commutation of
Commodities; that generally speaking, it is the way whereby to purchase Riches
and Power, the Parents of Pleasure: Not only by getting Commodities out of the
Earth and Sea; by ploughing, fishing, Mines, Vecture, etc. by getting away
those Commodities from them, who first got them out of the Earth and Sea, as
aforesaid. And not only, or at all increasing the whole Wealth of the Nation,
but ones own former share and proportion of the whole, though diminished; that
is to say, Supposing the whole Wealth of Ireland were 10 Millions, and the
Share of A. was 1000 1. thereof; I say, it is commonly more the care of A. to
make his 1000 l. 3000, though by lessening the whole Stock 2000 l. than to make
the whole Stock 30 Millions, by lessening his own 1000 l. to 300.l.

Now this is the Trade of Ireland, and I think of most other places, but
exercised in Ireland by the following ways, viz.

Whereas the Lands of Ireland have within 150 years been most of them
forfeited, and the Lands of Monasteries have since then fallen into the King's
hands, by the dissolution of the said Monasteries, and several Defects found in
the Titles, older than that of time; It has come to pass, that all the said
Lands have been granted to several others; some legally and formally, some
otherwise; some under one Condition, some under another. So as by several
Defects in the said Grants, or by nonperformance of Conditions, and many other
ways needless to enumerate, the King in strictness may find a Title to the
Estates of many men who have been long in possession of their respective
Holdings, (tho some more, some less, some upon better, and some upon worser
grounds.) A principal Trade in Ireland, to find out these Flaws and Defects, to
procure Commission for such Inquiries. And a Branch of this Trade, is to give
to such seekers flattering and delusive Informations to bring on other Designs;
and withal, prevail with persons conversant with the Higher Powers, to give
Grants of these Discoveries, and thereupon, right or wrong to vex the
Possessors, at least into such a Composition, as may be of profit to the
Prosecutors. Whereby it falls out, that the time of all the persons exercised
pro and contra in these matters, who do only take from one another like
Gamesters (the Lawyers taking from both) is lost, without advancing at all the
Public Wealth. Now this is no Trade, but a Calamity upon the Nation.

2. Whereas the Branches of the Public Revenue being manifold; and the
Accounts of the same vast and numerous, and the Laws, with the Cases and
Accidents relating to the same, intricate and new; but chiefly the Officers
employed about the Premises, such as could make Friends for their Places,
whether Persons of Skill, Experience and Trustiness, or not; It has come to
pass, even in Ireland, in former times, that Principal Officers of the
Exchequer have represented the State of the Public Treasury near 200 M. l.
differently from each other: So as new men have been admitted to take the whole
to farm, who expected vast Advantages, by mending and clearing what others had
marred and confounded, though they had still their Places and Perquisites
notwithstanding: And in this case the people thought fit to pay any thing that
was required, rather than to pass the Fire of this Purgatory, even tho they
need no burning.

This and other Practices of Farming, taken with the whole Doctrine of
Defalcations, has been a great Trade in Ireland, but a Calamity on the people
who have paid great Wages to them that have made Faults, but three times
greater to those who would but undertake to mend them, tho indeed they could
not.

A Third great Trade and Calamity to the people of Ireland, has been the Gains
made by the aforementioned. Difference, Confusion, and badness of Coins,
exorbitant Exchange, and Interest of Money, all following also from the
Premises.

A Fourth Calamity is implicating poor Workmen, and trapanning them into
Crimes, Indictments, Bishops-Courts, etc. feigning and compounding of
Trespasses, not without making benefit by the Office of Justice of Peace.

A Fifth may be from the manner of making Sheriffs, the execution of their
Offices, Accounts in the Exchequer, etc.

A Sixth, from raising Moneys at the Assizes, by Authority of the Grand Juries,
but raising too much, and in spending or not spending what was to be raised.

None of these Six Trades do add any more to the Commonwealth than Gamesters,
and even such of them as play with false Dice, do to the Common-Stock of the
whole Number.

And in these Trades it is thought of those who inhabit the aforementioned
16,000 Houses, do exercise themselves, and are the Locusts and Catterpillars of
the Commonwealth, as the Inhabitants of the other 184 M. Cottages are the
untilled part of the same. Wherefore it remains to see what Trade is to be
found among the rest; which I take to be as follows, viz.

1. In Domestic Wealth: Of which sort is building fine Houses and Gardens,
Orchards, Groves, Inns, Mills, Churches, Bridges, HighWays, Causeys; as also
Furniture for Houses, Coaches, etc. In which kind I guess the Improvement of
Ireland has since the Year 1652. 1673. advanced from one to four, and I think
to a better state than before 1641. that is, than perhaps ever it yet was.

The Foreign Trade, if you will believe the Accounts of Customs, Ann. 1657. and
now, has been advanced from one to seven, but in reality, I think, from one to
two: For the Customs yielded Ann. 1656. clear under 12,000 l. but were within a
year or two, let for above three times the sum, but are now at about 80,000
intrinsecally.

But to speak more clearly and Authentically upon this Subject, I shall insert
the following Tables of exported and imported Commodities, and from them make
the subnexed Observations, viz.

The TABLES.
1. THAT the Customs, managed by the States-Officers, yielded Anno 1657. under
12,000 l. but was farmed Ann. 1658. for above thrice that Sum. 2. That the
Stock which drives the Foreign Trade of Ireland, does near half of it belong to
those who live out of Ireland. 3. That Ann. 1664. before the Cattel-Statute, of
the Ireland Foreign Trade was with England, but now not part of the same. 4.
That the Manufacture bestowed upon a years Exportation out of Ireland, is not
worth above 8000 l. 5. That because more eatables were exported Anno 1664. than
1641. And more Manufactures 1641. than Ann. 1664. It follows, there were more
people in Ireland, Ann. 1641. than 1664. and in that proportion as was formerly
mentioned. 6. That the Exportations appear more worth than the Importations,
excepting that the Accounts of the former are more true, but of the latter very
conjectural, and probably less than the Truth.
Of the Religion, Diet, Clothes, Language, Manners, and Interest of the several
present Inhabitants of IRELAND.
WE said, that of the 1100 M. Inhabitants of Ireland, about 800 M. of them were
Irish; and that above 600 M. of them lived very simply in the Cabbins
aforementioned. Wherefore I shall in the first place describe the Religion,
Diet, etc. of these, being the major part of the whole; not wholly omitting
some of the other species also.

The Religion of these poorer Irish, is called Roman Catholic, whose Head is
the Pope of Rome, from whence they are properly enough called Papists. This
Religion is well known in the World, both by the Books of their Divines, and
the Worship in their Churches: wherefore I confine my self to what I think
peculiar to these Irish. And first, I observe, that the Priests among them are
of small Learning; but are thought by their Flocks to have much, because they
can speak Latin more or less; and can often out-talk in Latin those who Dispute
with them. So as they are thereby thought both more Orthodox and Able than
their Antagonists.

Their Reading in Latin is the Lives of the Saints, and Fabulous Stories of
their Country. But the Superior Learning among them, is the Philosophy of the
Schools, and the Genealogies of their Ancestors. Both which look like what St.
Paul has Condemned.

The Priests are chosen for the most part out of old Irish Gentry; and thereby
influence the People, as well by their Interest as their Office.

Their Preaching seems rather Bugbearing of their flocks with dreadful Stories,
than persuading them by Reason, or the Scriptures. They have an incredible
Opinion of the Pope and his Sanctity, of the happiness of those who can obtain
his Blessing at the third or fourth hand. Only some few, who have lately been
abroad, have gotten so far, as to talk of a difference between the Interest of
the Court of Rome, and the Doctrine of the Church. The Common Priests have few
of them been out of Ireland; and those who have, were bred in Covents, or made
Friars for the most part, and have humble Opinions of the English and
Protestants, and of the mischiefs of setting up Manufactures, and introducing
of Trade. They also comfort their Flocks, partly by Prophecies of their
Restoration to their Ancient Estates and Liberties, which the abler sort of
them fetch from what the Prophets of the Old Testament have delivered by way of
God's Promise to restore the Jews, and the Kingdom to Israel. They make little
esteem of an Oath upon a Protestant Bible, but will more devoutly take up a
Stone, and swear upon it, calling it a Book, than by the said Book of Books,
the Bible. But of all Oaths, they think themselves at much liberty to take a
Land-Oath, as they call it: Which is an Oath to prove a forged Deed, a
Possession, Livery or Seisin, payment of Rents, etc. in order to recover for
their Contrymen the Lands which they had forfeited. They have a great
Opinion of Holy-Wells, Rocks, and Caves, which have been the reputed Cells and
Receptacles of men reputed Saints, They do not much fear Death, if it be upon a
Tree, unto which, or the Gallows, they will go upon their Knees toward it, from
the place they can first see it. They confess nothing at their Executions,
though never so guilty. In brief, there is much Superstition among them, but
formerly much more than is now; for as much as by the Conversation of
Protestants, they become ashamed of their ridiculous Practices, which are not
de side. As for the Richer and bettereducated sort of them, they are such
Catholics as are in other places. The Poor, in adhering to their Religion,
which is rather a Custom than a Dogma amongst them, They seem rather to obey
their Grandees, old Landlords, and the Heads of their Septes and Clans, than
God. For when these were under Clouds, transported into Spain, and transplanted
into Connaught, and disabled to serve them as formerly, about the year 1656.
when the Adventurers and Soldiers appeared to be their Landlords and Patrons,
they were observed to have been forward enough to relax the stiffness of their
pertinacity to the Pope, and his Impositions. Lastly, Among the better sort of
them, many think less of the Pope's Power in Temporals, as they call it, than
formerly; and begin to say, that the Supremacy, even in Spirituals, lies rather
in the Church diffusive, and in qualified General-Councils, than in the Pope
al^ne, or than in the Pope and his Cardinals, or other Iuncto.

The Religion of the Protestants in Ireland, is the same with the Church of
England in Doctrine, only they differ in Discipline thus, viz.

The Legal Protestants hold the Power of the Church to be in the King, and that
Bishops and Archbishops, with their Clerks, are the best way of adjusting that
Power under him. The Presbyterians would have the same thing done, and perhaps
more, by Classes of Presbyters National and Provincial. The Independents would
have all Christian Congregations independent from each other. The Anabaptists
are Independent in Discipline, and differ from all those aforementioned in the
Baptism of Infants, and in the inward and spiritual Signification of that
Ordinance. The Quakers salute not by uncovering the Head, speak to one another
in the second Person, and singular Number; as for Magistracy and Arms, they
seem to hold with the Anabaptists of Germany and Holland; they pretend to a
possibility of perfection, like the Papists; as for other Tenants, it is hard to
fix them, or to understand what things they mean by their Words.

The Diet of the poorer Irish, is what was before discoursed in the Chapter.

The Clothing is a narrow sort of Frieze, of about twenty Inches broad,
whereof two foot, called a Bandle, is worth from 3^ to 18 d. Of this, Seventeen
Bandles make a Man's Suit, and twelve make a Cloak. According to which Measures
and Proportions, and the number of People who wear this Stuff, it seems, that
near thrice as much Wool is spent in Ireland, as exported; whereas others have
thought quite contrary, that is, that the exported Wool is triple in quantity
to what is spent at home.

As for the Manners of the Irish, I deduce them from their Original
Constitutions of Body, and from the Air; next from their ordinary Food; next
from their Condition of Estate and Liberty, and from the Influence of their
Governors and Teachers; and lastly, from their Ancient Customs, which affect
as well their Conscien^es as their Nature. For their Shape, Stature, Color,
and Complexion, I see nothing in them inferior to any other People, nor any
enormous predominancy of any humor.

Their Lazing seems to me to proceed rather from want of Employment and
Encouragement to Work, than from the natural abundance of Phlegm in their Bowels
and Blood; for what need they to Work, who can content themselv^s with
Potato's, whereof the Labor of one Man can feed forty; and with Milk, whereof
one Cow will, in Summer time, give meat and drink enough for three Men, when
they can every where gather Cockles, Oysters, Muscles, Crabs, etc. with Boats,
Nets, Angles, or the Art of Fishing; can build an House in three days? And why
should they desire to fare better, tho with more Labo^r, when they are taught,
that this way of living is more like the Patriarchs of old, and the Saints of
later times, by whose Prayers and Merits they are to be relieved, and whose
Examples they are therefore to follow? And why should they breed more Cattle,
since it is Penal to import them into England? Why should they raise more
Commodities, since there are not Merchants sufficiently Stocked to take them of
them, nor provided with other more pleasing foreign Commodities, to give in
Exchange for them? And how should Merchants have Stock, since Trade is
prohibited and fettered by the Statutes of England? And why should Men
endeavor to get Estates, where the Legislative Power is not agreed upon; and
where Tricks and Words destroy natural Right and Property?

They are accused also of much Treachery, Falseness, and Thievery; none of all
which, I conceive, is natural to them; for as to Treachery, they are made
believe, that they all shall flourish again, after some time; wherefore they
will not really submit to those whom they hope to have their Servants; nor will
they declare so much, but say the contrary, for their present ease, which is
all the Treachery I have observed; for they have in their hearts, not only a
grudging to see their old Proprieties enjoyed by Foreigners, but a persuasion
they shall be shortly restored. As for Thievery, it is affixt to all
thin-peopled Countries, such as Ireland is, where there cannot be many Eyes to
prevent such Crimes; and where what is stolen, is easily hidden and eaten, and
where it is easy to burn the House, or violate the Persons of those who
prosecute these Crimes, and where thin-peopled Countries are governed by the
Laws that were made and first fitted to thick-peopled Countries; and where
matter of small moment and value must be tried, with all the formalities which
belong to the highest Causes. In this case there must be thieving, where is
withal, neither encouragement, nor method, nor means for Laboring, nor
Provision for Impotents.

As for the Interest of these poorer Irish, it is manifestly to be transmuted
into English, so to reform and qualify their housing, as that English Women may
be content to be their Wives, to decline their Language, which continues a
sensible distinction, being not now necessary; which makes those who do not
understand it, suspect, that what is spoken in it, is to their prejudice. It is
their Interest to deal with the English, for Leases, for Time, and upon clear
Conditions, which being performed they are absolute Freemen, rather than to
stand always liable to the humor and caprice of their Landlords, and to have
every thing taken from them, which he pleases to fancy. It is their Interest,
that he is wellpleased with their Obedience to them, when they see and know
upon whose Care and Conduct their well-being depends, who have Power over their
Lands and Estates. Then, to believe a Man at Rome has Power in all these last
mentioned Particulars in this World, and can make them eternally happy or
miserable hereafter, it is their Interest to join with them, and follow their
Example, who have brought Arts, Civility, and Freedom into their Country.

On the contrary, What did they ever get by accompanying their Lords into
Rebellion against the English? What should they have gotten if the late
Rebellion had absolutely succeeded, but a more absolute Servitude? And when it
failed, these poor People have lost all their Estates, and their Leaders
increased theirs, and enjoyed the very Land which their Leaders caused them to
lose. The poorest now in Ireland ride on Horseback, when heretofore the best
ran on foot like Animals. They wear better loathes than ever; the Gentry have
better Breeding, and the generality of the Plebeians more Money and Freedom.

Several Miscellany Remarks and Intimations, concerning Ireland, and the
several Matters aforementioned.
WIthout recourse to the Authority of Story, but rather diligently observing
the Law and Course of Nature, I conjecture, that whatever is fabled of the
Phoenicians, Scythians, B^scayers, etc. their first Inhabiting of Ireland; that
the places near Carrickfergus were first peopled, and that with those, who came
from the parts of Scotland opposite thereunto. For that Ireland was planted by
some body in Caesar's time, is most certain. That the Art of Navigation was not
before Caesar's time so well understood and practiced, as to bring Men from any
other Part of the World thither, save from Great Britain: That from St.
Davids-head in South Wales, and from Holy-head in North Wales; Ireland is not
clearly at any time discerned, nor often at all. That the Inhabitants of those
two British Head-lands had neither Boats sit to pass that Sea, is most
probable. But that Carrickfergus may be always seen from Scotland, is well
known; and that a small Boat may Row over in three or four hours, is
experienced. That the Language of those Parts differ very little. That the
Country about Carrickfergus is far better than that of Scotland opposite. That
the chief Bishops Seat of Ireland, and probably the first, is near those Parts,
are all notorious Truths. From all which it is more probable, that Ireland was
first Peopled from Scotland, than all the other remote Parts aforementioned.

It has been much observed, That the Lieutenants and Chancellors of Ireland
have often been at variance; the reason whereof seems to be at their Powers,
and too near an Equilibrium; for the Lieutenant Commands an Army perhaps of
3000, and the Chancellor makes 900 Justices of Peace, who make 2500 Constables,
which are the Civil Sword, who Act in times of Peace, and every where, and in
all matters; whereas the Army acts only upon rare occasions, and are more
Mercenary Men. So as the Civil-Sword seems of far more extent and effect than
the Military-Sword.

The Lieutenant disposes perhaps of four or five hundred Places and
Employments; but the Chancellor, of the said nine hundred Justices of Peace,
and several others. The Lieutenant can hurt very few Persons, who do not depend
upon the favor of Employments; but the Chancellor can affect all Men, of
Estates and Dealing in the World, by the Power of his Court, and by the Harmony
of his own Will with the King's Conscience.

The Lieutenant is for the most part a Stranger to Ireland; but the Chancellor
seldom such, but a Person of great Family and Acquaintance. Moreover, all the
Lieutenants, Deputies, and Lords Justices, that have been these 150 years, have
not, one with another, continued two years in the Office; but the Chancellors
have much more, and are seldom removed but by Death, and General Revolutions.
The Chancellor has ordinarily some other Dignity and Office annexed, for they
be often Eminent Prelates and Churchmen; but the Lieutenant is confined to
Temporals. The Chancellor is Speaker in Parliament, and by keeping the Seal,
can check the Lieutenant in many cases. The Chancellors are bred to Eloquence
and Arguing; the breeding of a Lieutenant is casual.

Men that bring great Estates into Ireland, do not increase them proportionably
with them who come over with nothing. Not to quote the Examples hereof on both
sides, the reason seems not to be very abstruse, viz.

The Language of Ireland is like that of the North of Scotland, in many things
like the Welsh and Manques; but in Ireland the Fingallians speak neither
English, Irish, nor Welsh; and the People about Wexford, tho they agree in a
Language differing from English, Welsh, and Irish, yet it is not the same with
that of the Fingalians near Dublin. Both these two sorts of People are honest
and laborious Members of the Kingdom.

The Irish Language, and the Welsh, as also all Languages that have not been
the Languages of flourishing Empires, wherein were many Things, many Notions
and Fancies, both Poetical and Philosophical, has but few words; and all the
names of Artificial things brought into use, since the Empire of these
Linguists ceased, are expressed in the language of their Conquerors, by
altering the Termination and Accents only.

Ireland is now divided into Provinces, Counties, Baronies, Parishes, and
Farmlands, and those, so as that they may be, and have been Geometrically
delineated; but formerly it was not so, but the Country was cal'ed by the names
of the Lords who governed the People. For as a Territory bounded by Bogs, is
greater or lesser as the Bog is more dry and passible, or otherwise: So the
Country of a Grandee or Tierne in Ireland, became greater or lesser as his
Forces waxed or weaned; for where was a large Castle and Garrison, there the
Jurisdiction was also large.

And when these Grandees came to make peace, and parts one with another, the
limits of their Land-agreements were no lines Geometrically drawn; but if the
Rain fell one way, then the Land whereon it fell, did belong to A. if the other
way, to B. etc.

As to their Town-lands, Plough-lands, Colps, Gneeres, Bullibos, Ballibelaghs,
Two's, Horsmens, Beds, etc. they are all at this day become unequal both in
Quantity and Value, having been made upon grounds which are now Obsolete and
Antiquated.

For sometimes lands were divided by what certain Societies of men held, which
I conceive were Town-lands or Tythings.

Sometimes by Plow-lands, viz. such a -- of Lands as contained enough of every
species of Land Arrable, Meadow, and Pasture, Mountain, Turf-bog, Wood, etc. as
served for the whole Use of man, especially of the Owner of such a Plowland.

Sometimes by the Share or Proportion of Land, which an Undertaker would engage
to plant and defend according to Articles.

Sometimes by the Share which each Servitor had given him in reward for his
Service, after a Rebellion or Insurrection.

Sometimes by what belonged to the Cell of some Religious Man or Men. But now
all the Lands are Geometrically divided, and that without abolishing the
Ancient Denominations and Divisions abovementioned. So that it is yet wanting
to prevent the various spelling of Names not understood, that some both
comprehending the Names of all public Denominations according as they are
spelled in the latest Grants, should be set out by Authority to determine the
same for the time to come. And that where the same Land has other Names, or
has been spelled with other Conscription of Letters or Syllables, that the
same be mentioned with an alias. Where the public and new authenticated
Denominations is part of a greater antiquated Denomination, that it be so
expressed, as by being called the East, West, South or North part thereof. And
if the said Denomination comprehend several obsolete or inconsiderable Parcels,
that the same be expressed likewise.

The last Clause of the Explanatory Act, enabled men to put new Names on their
respective Lands, instead of those uncouth, unintelligible ones yet upon them.
And it would not be amiss if the significant part of the Irish Names were
interpreted, where they are not, or cannot be abolished.

SOME have thought that little Shipping belongs to Ireland, by the great Policy
of the English, who (as they wittily expressed it) would keep the Chain or
DrawBridge between both Kingdoms, on the English side: But I never perceived
any Impediment of Building, or having Ships in Ireland, but men's own
indisposition thereunto, either for not having Stock for so chargeable a Work,
or not having Workmen of sorts enough to sit out a Ship in all particulars; as
for that they could hire Ships cheaper from the Dutch, than to build them; or,
that the Irish had rather eat Potatos and Milk on dry Land, than contest with
the Wind and Waves with better Food; or that there is not encouragement, to a
full Employment, for an able Ship-wright to reside in Ireland. Nevertheless at
this day there belongs to several Ports of Ireland Vessels between 10 and 200
Tuns, about 8000 Tuns of several sorts and Sizes: And there are Five
Light-Houses erected for the safety of sailing upon the Coasts.

Concerning the Ambergreece, taken upon the Western Coasts of Ireland, I could
never receive any clear satisfaction, neither of its Odor, nor any other
Virtue, nor what use was or could be made of that Stuff which has been so
called, which is of several Appearances.

What is said of the Herb Mackenbory, is fabulous, only that it is a Tythemal,
which will purge furiously, and of which there are vast quantities in that part
of Kerry called Desmond, where the Arbutus Tree grows in great numbers and
beauty.

There be in Ireland not ten Iron Furnaces, but above 20 Forges and Bloomeries,
and but one Lead-work, which was ever wrought, tho many in view, which the
pretended Patents of them have hindered the working of. There is also a place in
Kerry, fit for one Allum-work, attempted, but not fully proceeded upon.

There are in the West of Ireland, about 20 Gentlemen, who have engaged in the
Pilchard-fishing, and have among them all about 160 Saynes, wherewith they
sometimes take about 4000 Hogshheads of Pilchards per Ann. worth about 10,000
l. Cork, Kingsale, and Bantry are the best places for eating of Fresh Fish, tho
Dublin be not, or need not be ill supplied with the same.

The Clothing-Trade is not arrived to what it was before the late Rebellion.
And the Art of making the excellent, thick, spungy, warm Coverlets, seems to be
lost, and not yet recovered.

Near Colrane is a Salmon-Fishing, where several Tuns of Salmon have been taken
at one Draught, and in one Season.

The English in Ireland before Henry the VII's time, lived in Ireland as the
Europians do in America, or as several Nations do now upon the same Continent;
so as an Englishman was not punishable for killing an Irishman, and they were
governed by different Laws; the Irish by the Brehan-Law, and the English there
by the Laws of England.

Registers of Burials, Births and Marriages, are not yet kept in Ireland,
though of late begun in Dublin, but imperfectly.

English in Ireland, growing poor and discontented, degenerate into Irish; and
vice versa; Irish, growing into Wealth and Favor, reconcile to the English.

Eleven Iri^^ Miles make 14 English, according to the proportion of the Irish
Perch of 21 Feet, to the English of 16^.

The admeasurement of Land in Ireland, has hitherto been made with a
Circumferencer, with a Needle of 3 long, as the most convenient Proportion; but
'twill be henceforth better done by the help of some old Geometrical Theoremes,
joined with this new property of a Circle, demonstrated by Dr. R. Wood.

The DIAGRAM.
Although the Pro^estants of Irel^nd, be to Papists, as three to eight; yet,
because the former live in Cities and Towns, and the Scots live all in and
about five of the 32 Counties of Ireland; It seems, in other open Counties, and
without the Corporations, that the Irish and Papists are twenty to one.

A Report from the Council of Trade in Ireland, to the Lord Lieutenant and
Council, which was drawn by Sir William Petty.
IN Obedience to your Lordship's Act of Council, of January the 2^th. 1675. we
have spent several days in considering how, as well the Wealth of this Kingdom
in general, as the Money thereof in particular may be increased. And in order
thereunto, we have first set down to the best of our knowledge, the state of
this Kingdom in reference to Trade. Secondly, We have noted such Inferences
from the same, as do show the several Causes of the smalness of Trade, want of
Money, and the gen^ral Poverty of this Nation. And in the last place, we have
offered such general Remedies and Expedients, in the respective Cases, as may
be obtained and practiced, without any new Law to be made in Ireland. And we
are ready so to enlarge upon the Branches we have offered, as to make such of
our Proposals practicable, as your Lordships shall please to select and approve
of for that purpose.

March the 25th. 1676.
Considerations relating to the Improvement of IRELAND.
1. THE whole Territory of Ireland consists of about 12 Millions of Acres (
English Measure) of Arrable, Meadow, and good Pasture Land; with about two
Millions of Rocky, Boggy, and Scrubby Pasture, commonly called Unprofitable,
(tho not altogether such): The rest being absolute Boggs, Loughs, Rocks, Sands,
Strands, Rivers and Highways, etc. Of all which, several Lands, the yearly
Rent (comprehending Their Majesty's Quit-Rents, Tithes and Tenants
Improvements) is supposed to be about 9^0,000 l. and worth to be purchased at
Nine Millions.

2. The value of all the Housing in Ireland, which have one or more Chimneys in
them, (excluding all Cabbins which have none) is supposed to be Two Millions
and a half.

3. The Cattle and Live-Stock, Three Millions.

4. Corn, Furniture, Merchandise, Shipping, etc. about One Million.

5. The Coined and Current Money, now running in Trade, is between 300, and
350,^00 l. or the 5^th part of the value of the whole Kingdom, which we suppose
to be about 16 Millions.

6. The number of people in Ireland is about 1100,000, viz. Three Hundred
Thousand English, Scotch, and Welsh Protestants, and 800,000 Papists, whereof
^th are Children unfit for Labor, and about 75,000 of the Remainder are, by
reason of their Quality and Estates; above the necessity of Corporal Labor; so
as there remains 750,000 Laboring Men and Women, 5^0,000 whereof do perform
the present Work of the Nation.

7. The said 1100,000 people do live in about 200,000 Families or Houses,
whereof there are but about 16,000 which have more than one Chimney in each;
and about 24,000 which have but one; all the other Houses, being 160,000, are
wretched nasty Cabbins, without Chimney, Window or Door shut, and worse than
those of the Savage Americans, and wholly unfit for the making Merchantable
Butter, Cheese, or the Manufactures of Woollen, Linen or Leather.

8. The Houses within the City and Liberties of Dublin, are under 5,0^0, viz.
in the City 1150. And the Alehouses within the same about 1200. And it seems,
that in other Corporations and Country Towns, the proportion of Alehouses is
yet greater than in Dublin, viz. about of the whole.

9. The Counties, Baronies and Parishes, of Ireland, are now become
marvellously unequal, so as some are twe ty times as big as others, the County
of C rk seeming in respect of people and Parishes to be ^th of the whole
Kingdom, and other Counties not being above the 2^th part of the County of
Cork; It has been found very difficult to get fit persons for Sheriffs, and
Juries; and the often holding of Assizes and Quarter Sessions in the said
smaller Counties, has been found an unnecessary burden upon them.

10. There are now in Ireland 32 Counties, 252 Baronies, and 2278 Parishes; so
as the number of Sheriffs, and Sub-Sheriffs, Sheriff Bailiffs, High and
Petty-Constables, are about three thousand Persons, whereof not above ^ are
English or Protestants. So as the remainder (being about 27^0) are Irish
Papists, and are the Civil Militia of this Kingdom, and have the executing of
all Decrees of Courts, and of Justices of the Peaces Warrants.

11. This Civil Militia, and the rest of the Irish Papists being 'about
80^,000, are influenced and guided by about 3000 Priests and Friars, an^ they
governed by their Bishops and Superiors, who are for the most part, of the Old
Irish Gentry, men of Foreign Education, and who depend upon Foreign Princes and
Prelates, for Benefices and Preferments.

12. The Irish Papists (beside^ Sundays and the 29 Holidays appointed by the
Law) do one place with another, observe about 24 days more in the year, in
which they do no Corporal Labor, so as they have but about 266 Working-days;
whereas Protestants not strictly observing all the Legal Holy Days, by a total
forbearing of Labor, have in effect 300 Working-days in the year, that is, 34
days more than the Papists, or at least five of six days in each, or ^ part of
the whole year.

13. The expense of the whole people of Ireland is about four Millions per Ann.
the part whereof being 80,000 l. and the Quarter of Annual House-Rent being
about 6^,000 l. together with 450,^00 l. more, being the value of half a years
Rent, Tithes and Quit-Rent, do make 59^,000 l. as that sum of Money which will
completely and plentifully drive the Trade of this Kingdom.

14. The value of the Commodities exported out of Ireland, and the Freight of
the Shipping employed in the Trade of this Nation, together with the fishing of
Herrings, is about Five Hundred Thousand pounds per Annum.

15. The value of the Estates in Ireland of such persons as do usually live in
England; the Interest of Debts of Ireland, due and payable to England; the pay
of the Forces of Ireland, now in England; the Expense and Pensions of Agents
and Solli^itors commonly residing in England about Irish Affairs; the Expense
of English and Iri^h Youth now upon their Education beyond the Seas; and
lastly, the supposed Profit of the two great Farms now on Foot, do altogether
make up near 2^0,0^0 l. per Ann. as a Debt payabl^ to England out of Ireland.

16. The value of the Cattle, viz. live Oxen and Sheep, carried out of Ireland
into England, was never more than 140,000 l. per Annum; the Freight, Hides,
Tallow, and Wool of the said live Cattle, were worth about 60,000 l. of the
said 140,000 l. And the value of the Goods imported out of England into Ireland
(when the Cattel-Trade was free) was between Treble and Quadruple, to the neat
value of the Ox, and She^ps Fle^h transported from hence into England.

17. The Customs of Exported and Imported Goods, between England and Ireland,
abstracted from the Excise thereof, was in the freest Trade, about 32,000 l.
per Ann.

Inferences from the Premises.
1. BY comparing the Extent of the Territory with the number of people, it
appears that Ireland is much underpeopled; for as much as there are above 1^
Acres of good Land to every Head in Ireland, whereas in England and France
there are but four, and in Holland scarce one.

2. That if there be 250 000 spare^^ands capable of Labor, who can earn 4 or
five l. per Ann. one with another, it follows that the people of Ireland, well
employed, may earn one Million per Ann. more than they do now, which is more
than the years Rent of the whole Country.

3. If an House with Stone-Walls, and a Chimney well covered, and half an A^re
of Land well ditched about, may be made for 4 or 5 l. or thereabouts; then of
the spare hands of Ireland can in one years time build and fit up 160,000 such
Houses and Gardens, instead of the like number of the wretched Cabbins
abovementioned: And that in a time when a Foreign-Trade is most dead and
obstructed, and when Money is most scarce in the Land.

4. The other third part of the said spare hands within the same year (besides
the making of Bridges, Harbors, Rivers, Highways, etc. more fit for Trade) are
able to plant as many Fruit and Timber Trees, and also Quick-set Hedges, as
being grown up, would distinguish the Bounds of Lands, beautify the Country,
shade and shelter Cattle, furnish Wood, Fuel, Timber and fruit, in a better
manner than ever was yet known in Ireland or England. And all this in a time
when Trade is dead, and Money most scarce.

5. If the Gardens belonging to the Cabbins above mentioned, be planted with
Hemp and Flax, according to the present Statute, there would grow 120,000 l.
worth of the said Commodities, the Manufactures whereof, as also of the Wool
and Hides now exported, would by the labor of the spare hands abovementioned,
amount to above One Million per Annum more than at present.

6. The multitude and proportion of Alehouses abovementioned, is a sign of
want of Employment in those that buy, no less than those that sell the Drink.

7. There being but 800 Thousand Papists in Ireland, and little above 2,000
Priests; It is manifest that 500 Priests may, in a competent manner, Officiate
for the said number of People and Parishes. And that two Popish Bishops if any
at all be necessary) may as well Govern the said 500 Priests, and two Thousand
Parishes; as the 26 Bishops of England do Govern near Ten Thousand Parishes.

8. If the Protestants, according to the present practice and understanding of
the Law, do work one tenth part of the Year more than the Papists: And that
there be be 750 Thousand working People in Ireland, whereof about 600 Thousand
Papists. It follows that the Popish Religion takes off 60 Thousand workers,
which, at about 4 l. per Annum each, is about 250 Thousand Pounds per Annum of
it self; besides the Maintenance of 25 Hundred superfluous Churchmen, which at
20 l. per Annum each, comes to fifty thousand pounds per Annum more.

9. The Sheriffs of Ireland at 100 l. per Annum, the High Constables at 20 l.
per Annum, and the Petty Constables at 10 l. per Annum, each, being all English
Protestants (with some other incident Charges for the Administration of
Justice) may be fallarated and defrayed for thirty thousand Pounds per Annum,
consistent with His Majesty's present Revenue, Forces, etc. which said
Sallaries, may also be lessened, by Uniting some of the smaller Countie's,
Baronies and Parishes, according to the proportion of People Inhabiting within
them.

10. If there be not 350 ^housand Pounds Coined Money in Ireland; And if 590
Thousand Pounds (or near double what there now is) be requisite to drive the
Trade thereof; then it follows, that there is not enough in Ireland to drive
the Trade of the Nation.

11. If the Lands of Ireland and Housing in Corporations, be worth above 10
Millions to be now sold (and if less than One Million of stock will drive all
the Trade aforementioned, that Ireland is capable off) reckoning but two
returns per Annum: It is certain that the lesser part of the said Ten Millions
worth of real Estate, being well contrived into a Bank of Credit, will with the
Cash yet remaining, abundantly answer all the ends of Domestic Improvements,
and Foreign Traffic whatsoever.

12. If the whole substance of Ireland be worth 16 Millions, as above said: If
the customs between England and Ireland, were neverworth above thirty two
thousand Pounds per Annum: I^ the Titles of Estates in Ireland, be more
hazardous and expensive, for that England and Ireland be not under one
Legislative Power: If Ireland till now, has been a continual Charge to
England: If the reducing the late Rebellion did cost England three times more
in men and money, than the substance of the whole Country, when reduced, is
worth: If it be just, that men of English B^rth and Estates, living in Ireland,
should be represented in the Legislative Power; and that the Irish should not
be judged by those who, they pretend, do usurp their Estates: It then seems
just and convenient, That both Kingdoms should be United and Governed by one
Legislative Power. Nor is it hard to show how this may be made practicable, nor
to satisfy, repair, or silence those who are Interested or Affected to the
contrary.

13. In the mean time, it is wonderful that men born in England, who have Lands
granted to them by the King, for service done in Ireland to the Crown of
England, when they have occasion to reside or negotiate in England, should by
their Countrymen, Kindred and Friends there, be debarred to bring with them out
of Ireland food whereupon to live, nor suffered to carry money out of Ireland,
nor to bring such Commodities as they fetch from America directly home, but
round about by England, with extreme hazard and loss, and be forced to trade
only with Strangers, and become unacquainted with their own Country; especially
when England gains more than it loses by a free Commerce; as exporting
hither three times as much as it receives from hence: In so much as 95 l. in
England, was worth about 100 l. of the like Money in Ireland, in the freest
time of Trade.

14. It is conceived that about d of the Imported Manufactures, might be made
in Ireland and d of the remainder might be more conveniently had from Foreign
parts, than out of England, and consequently that it is scarce necessary at all
for Ireland to receive any goods of England, and not convenient to receive
above th part from hence of the whole which it needs to Import, the value
whereof is under 100 Thousand Pounds per Annum.

The application of the Premises, in order to remedy the defects and
impediments of the Trade of Ireland.
1. Forasmuch as the consideration of Raising Money, has already, and so
lately, been before your Lordships; therefore without giving this Board any
further trouble concerning the same: We humbly offer, in order to the
regulation of the several species thereof; That whereas Weighty Plate pieces,
together with Ducatoons, which estimate to be three quarters of the Money now
current in Ireland; do already pass at proportionable Rates; and for that all
other species of Silver Money, are neither rated proportionably to the said
weighty pieces, nor to one another; That Whole, Half and Quarter Cobbs of
Sterling Silver (if light) may pass at 5 s. 7 d. per Ounce; but that the other
Species of courser Silver, as the Perrues, etc. may pass as Commodity, or at 5
s. per Ounce, until there shall be convenience for new Coining thereof into
smaller Money.

2. That forthwith Application may be made unto England, to restore the Trade
from the Plantations, and between the two Kingdoms (and particularly that of
Cattle) as heretofore; and in the mean time to discover and hinder, by all
means possible, the carrying of Bullion out of Ireland into England; to the end
that those in England who are to receive Moneys from hence, may be necessitated
to be very earnest in the said Negotiation.

3. That Endeavors be used in England, for the Union of the Kingdoms under one
Legislative Power, proportionably, as was heretofore and successively done in
the case of Wales.

4. For reducing Interest from Ten to Five, or Six, per Centum, for disposing
moneyed men to be rather Merchants than Usurers, rather to trade than purchase,
and to prevent the bad and uncertain payments, which Gentlemen are forced to
make unto Tradesmen, whose Stock and Credit is thereby soon buried in debts,
not to be received without long and expensiv^ Suits, and that a Bank of Land be
forthwith contrived and countenanced.

5. That the Act of State which mitigates and compounds, for the Costoms of
some Foreign goods, purposely made high to hinder their Importation, and to
encourage the Manufacture of them here, be taken into consideration (at least
before it be renewed).

6. That the Lord Lieutenant and Council, as also the Nobilit, Courts of
Justice and Officers of the Army, and other Gentlemen in and about Dublin, may
by their engagement and example, discountenance the use of some certain Foreign
Commodities, to be pitched upon by your Lordships: And that Gentlemen and
Freeholders in the Country, at their Assizes, and other Country meetings; and
that the Inhabitants of all Corporations, who live in Houses of above two
Chimneys in each, may afterward do the same.

7. That there be a Corporation for the Navigation of this Kingdom, and that
other Societies of men may be instituted, who shall undertake and give security
to carry on the several Trades and Manufactures of Ireland; and to see that all
goods Exported to Foreign Markets, may be faithfully wrought and packt: Which
Societies may direct themselves, by the many several proposals and reports
formerly, and of late made by the Council of Trade, and which they are now
again ready to enlarge and accommodate to the said several proposals
respectively, and more particularly to the Manufactures of Woollen, Linen, and
Leather.

8. That the Corporations of Ireland, may be obliged to engage no Manufactures,
but according to their Primitive Instructions; which was to carry on such great
works, as exceeded the strength of single Persons; and particularly that they
may cause some such like proportions of Yarn, Linen, and Woollen, as also of
Worsted, to be Spun, as Mr. Hawkins has Propounded.

9. That the Pattents, which hinder the working of Mines may be considered.

10. That the Justices of Peace, may be admonished to protect the Industrious,
and not suffer their Labors to be interrupted by vexatious and frivolous
Indictments.

11. That the Inhabitants of the wretched Cabbins in Ireland, may be encouraged
to reform them; and also compelled thereunto, as an easy and Indulgent
Committing for the Penalty of Nine-Pence per Sunday payable, by the Statute;
and likewise to make Gardens, as the Statute for Hemp and Flax requires. And
that other the wholesome Laws against Idlers, Vagabonds, etc may be applied to
the prevention of Beggary and Thievery: Whereunto the orderly disposing of the
said Cabbins into Townships would also conduce.

12. That the People be dissuaded from the observations of superfluous HolyDays.

13. That the exorbitant Number of Popish-Priests and Friars, may be reduced to
a bare competency, as also the Number of Alehouses.

14. That the Constable, Sheriff, and Bailiffs, may also be English
Protestants, (though upon Salary)

From all which, and from the settlement of Estates; it is to be hoped, that
men seeing more advantage to live in Ireland than elsewhere, may be invited to
remove themselves hither; and so supply the want of People, the greatest and
most fundamental defect of this Kingdom.

CAROLUS Secundus, Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex,
Fidei Defensor, etc. Omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint salutem.
Cum praedilectus, perquam fidelis consanguineus and Consiliarius noster Jacobus
Dux Ormondiae in r^gno nostro Hiberniae, qui plurima egregia servitia
serenissimo patri nostro Beatissimae memoriae in eodem regno, in loco and
qualitate Domini Locum-tenentis generalis and generalis Gobernatoris ejusdem
regni nostri per multos annos in temporibus maximae calamitatis summa cum
prudentia and integritate praestiterit, ac sese fidum and fortem assertorem
Coronae Angliae jurium continue comprobaverit, ut pote qui dicto patri nostro
per totam flagitiosam illam Subditorum suorum nuperam defectionem, magnanimiter
adhaerescens in praelio primus and audax, in consilio prudens, and nemini
secundus extiterit; at que nobis etiam tum extremis exilii nostri angustiis,
tum restitutione nostra, inseparabilis and indesatigabilis adfuerit comes and
adjutor: Nos praemissa perpendendentes aequum duximus, in tesseram favoris
nostri, eundem Ducem Ormondiae Locum-tenentem nostrum generalem regni nostri
Hiberniae praedicti, and generalem in eodem regno Gubernatorem constituere.
Sciatis, quod nos de provida circumspectione and industria praefati Iacobi
Ducis Ormondiae plurimum consitentes de advisamento Concilii nostri and ex
certae Scientia and mero motu nostris assignavimus, fecimus, or^inavimus,
constituimus and deputavimus and per praesentes assignamus, facimus, ordinamus,
constituimus and deput amus eundem Duc^m Ormondiae Locum-tenentem nostrum
generalem regni nostri Hiberniae praedict' necnon G^bernator nostrum generalem
regni nostri illius, Habendum tenendum, gaudendum, exercend' and occupand'
offic' praed' praefato Jacobo Duci Ormondiae una cum omnibus and singulis vad'
feod' stipend and assocation' eidem officio spectan' and pertinen' durante
beneplacito nostro; Dantes and concedentes eidem Locum-tenenti nostro generali
and Gubernatori nostro generali plenam tenore praesentium potestatem and
authoritatem ad pacem nostram and ad leges and consuetudin^s regni nostri
praedict' custodiend' and custodi^e faciend' and ad omnes and singulos Ligeos
nostros tam Anglicos quam Hibernicos dicti regni nostri ac alios quoscunque,
per nos super dictum Locum-tenent' nostrum generalem and Gubernatorem nostrum
generalem, stipendiatos and alias quascunque personas, ibidem contra nos, aut
pacem, consu^tudinem and leges praedict' qualecunque delinquend' and
contraveniend' juxt a eorum demerita, secundum leges and consuetudines nes
praedictas, viis and modis quibus melius pro honor and proficuo nostro fieri
poterit: ac pro bana gubernatione dicti regni nostri ac Ligeorum and Subditor'
nostrorum ibidem juxta discretionem dicti Locum-tenentis nostri general' and
Gubernatoris nostri general castig and' and puniend' ac puniri and castigari
faciend' necnon ordinationes and Statuta pro salvo and bono regimine regni
nostri praedict' juxta advisamentum consilii nostri ibidem ordinand' Statuend'
and stabiliend' ac super inde proclamationes faciend' debitaeque executioni
demandand' ac quoscunque contravenientes and delinquentes castigand' and
incarcerand' at que incarceratos solvend' and deliberand' Necnon ad recipiend'
and admittend' per dictum advisament' Consilii nostri ad fidem and pacem
nostram, tam Anglicos quam Hibernicos, and alios quoscunque infra praedict'
regnum nostrum Hiberniae habitantes vel commorantes intutand' seu commorand'
qui nobis, legibus nostris consuetud' praedict' Rebels and contrarii
extiterint aut existunt vel existent; and ad concedend' faciend' and dand' per
hujusmodi advisament' plenam pardonationem, remissionem, relaxationem and
absolutionem tam general' quam Specialem, illis and eorum cuilibet hujusmodi
pardonationem petent' aut habere volen' ac sectam pacis nostrae quae ad nos
pertinet tam pro Homicid Rober' Felon' Murdr' Rapt mulierum, Latrociniis,
falsis allegation' adhaesion' inimicis Vtlagar' transgression' contempt' and
aliis offensis quibuscunque in dicto regno nostro per aliquas hujusmodi
personas ante haec tempora fact' seu in posterum faciend' and little
forisfactur' and firmam pacem nostram eis and eorum cuilibet literas patentes
sub magno sigillo quo ^timur in regno nostro praedicto in forma debita
concedend' donand' and deliberand' ac etiam eosdem alios quoscunque ad fines
and redemptiones hujusmodi offens' and eorum quamlibet qui fines and
redemptiones facere debuerunt seu voluerunt' accipiend' and recipiend' Et
singul' personis juxta leges and consuetudines praed' justitiam faciend' and
fieri niandand' Ac etiam ad universos and singulos tam Anglos Rebels quam
Hibernicos dicti regni nostri and alios quoscunque dictum regnum nostrum in
posterum invadend' ac ipsum regnum nostrum subditosque nostros ejusdem
depraedare, gravare seu alio modo destruere seu devastare intendent' ac se
juxta leges, and consuetudines praedict' justificare volentes, si necesse
fuerit, cum potestate nostra Regia, ac aliis viis and modis, quibus melius
fieri poterit juxta eorum demerita puniend' and si opus fuerit ultimo supplicio
demandand' ac Subditos nostros provide commovend' convocand' and levand' ac cum
eisdem Subditis nostris sic levat' contra dictos Rebels congrediend' cesque
invadend' vincend' and castigand' and si opus fuerit terr' ipsorum aliis qui
nobis servire volunt and intendunt de advisamento praedict' locand' and
demittend' Ac etiam cum eis pacisicand' and pacem componend' ac ipsos paci
nostrae restorand' toties quoties in praemissis vel circa ea opus fuerit.
Proviso tamen semper, quod super quamlibet talem dimissionem and location' per
praefat Iacobum Ducem Ormondiae ac praedict' advisament' Consilii nostri praed'
in posterum virtute harum literarum nostrarum patentin' saciend annual' reddit'
superinde debit sit nobis, haeredibus and Successoribus nostris, omnino
reservat' Damus insuper and concedimus eidem Iacobo Duci Ormondiae
Locum-tenenti nostro generali and Gubernatori nostro generali, tenore
praesentium, plenam potestatem and authoritatem omnes proditiones, necnon
felon' murdr' rapt' mulier' ibidem and alias causas and offensam quascunque per
Subditos ejusdem regni nostri Hiberniae, vel alios ibidem residend' commiss'
sive comittend' prodition' quae destructionem vitae nostrae concernerunt
tantummodo except' pardonand' abolend' remittend and relaxand' literasque
nostras Patentes sub dicto magno Sigillo nostro superinde cuicunque personae
regni nostri Hiberniae praed nomine nostro concedend' componend' and ad casdem
Sigilland' Cancellar' nostro vel Custod' Sigilli dicti nostri regni nostri
Hiberniae mandand' tradend' and deliberand'. Damus praeterea and concessimus
eidem Iacobo Duci Ormondiae Locum-tenenti nostro generali and Gubernatori
nostro generali, plenam potestatem and authoritatem quoscunque de Stirpe
Anglicano existend' in officio in regno praedict tam secundo Baroni Scaccar'
nostri and quorumcunque computand' ac aliar' officiar' persicere, ipsosque
officiar' intra regnum nostrum praedictum facere, deputare and constituere;
Habendum eis and little cuilibet and quibuslibet, durante beneplacito nostro,
and quamdin in eodem se been gerunt ad libitum ejusdem Locum-tenentis nostri
general' and Gubernatoris nostri general' una cum vad' and. regard' eisdem
officiar' ab antiquo, debit' and consuet' offic' Cancellar' Thesaurar
Subthes^urar' Iusticiar' utriusque Banci and Capital' Baron' Scaccar' nostri
offic' Magistri Rotulorum ac offic' ^hesaurar' ad gueram offic' Marescall'
offic' magistri ordination Clerici de le Checque' offic' praesiden' Munster and
Connaght, ac officium Attor and Sollicitator' nostri ejusdem regni nostrae
Hiberniae tantumodo except' Statut and Parliamen' Domini Henrici nuper Regis
Angliae Septimi Progenitor nostri inclytae memoriae, Anno regni sui decimo,
coram Edwardo Poyning Milite tunc deputato regni nostri Hiberniae tent' edit'
and provis' non obstante. Concessimus etiam praefato Locum-tenenti nostro
generali potestatem quod ipse durante beneplacito nostro omnia officia
Ecclesiastica, tam jurat' quam non jurat' viz. Vicar' Parsonat Praebendar'
Cantur' Capeil' Hospital' Dignitat' Archionat' and alia beneficia quaecunque
nominatione Archiepiscopor' and Episcopor' tantum except' tam in Ecclesiis
Cathedral' quam Collegiat' Hospitat' and Paroch' in quocunque loco in regnum
nostrum Hiberniae quocunque titulo jam vacan' seu in posterum ex causa
quacunque vacare contingen' and ad praesentationem, collationem sive donationem
nostram quocunque modo spectan' personis idoneis quibuscunque sibi placuerit
dand' concedend' and conferend' and ad eadem omnia and Singula quorum ad nos
praesentationis, donationis sive collationis spect' and pertinent, and stat'
and possess' omnium and singulorum qui de eorum aliquibus possessionat'
existunt ratificand' approbanda' and confirmand' ac privileg' libertat'
imunitat' and concess' per praedecessores nostros quoscunque aut aliquos alios
ante haec tempora fact' sive concess' prout eidem Locum-tenenti nostro general'
and gubernatori nostro general' per advisament' and consensu Consilii nostri in
regno nostro praed' melius expedire videbitur ratificand' approband' and
confirmand' Concessimus in super eidem Iacobo Duci Ormondiae Locum-tenenti
nostro generali and gubernatori nostro General' potestat' and fidelit'
provision' and renuntiation' Archiepiscopor' and Episcopor' in codem regno
nostro Hiberniae, tempore praeterito sive futuro, fact' ordinat' and consueta
acceptand' faciend' ordinand' and constituend' ac omnia alia ad nos debit'
nomine nostro recipiend' eisdem Archiepiscopis, Episcopis and car' quilibet
temporalia sua Cancellar' nostro regni nostri praedict' deliber' mandand' cum
omnibus and singulis juribus Emolumen' proficuis and reven tionibus ratione
vacationis deor' beneficior' dignitat' Archiepiscopat' sive Episcopat' nobis
reservat' ac etiam Homag' omnium and singulorum tam Spiritual' quam temporal'
tenen and Subditor' nostrorum quorumcunque in regno nostro praedicto nomine
nostro recipiend' and terras and tenement' sua de hereditate sua Cancellar'
nostro deliba^i mandand' manusque nostras exinde amovend' ac Victual'
sufficien' and necessar' pro expens' Hospitii sui and soldar' suor' in
quocunque infra dictum regnum Hiberniae per provisor' Hospitii sui and alios
Ministr' suos una cum carria^' sufficien' pro eisdem, tam infra libertates quam
extra, pro denar' suis rationabil' solvend' providend' and capiend juxta formam
Statuti de hujusmodi provision' ante haec tempora fact' nisi aliter per
composition' fact' cum intutan' Com' infra parts vulgariter vocatos The
English Pale aliosque Com' extra deces parts provisum sit aut post hac
provideatur, quod praed Locum-tenens general' and Gubernator noster general
habeat vel habere possit summam pecuniae annuatim in dicta compositione ante
haec limitat' pro compensatione and recompensatione pro hujusmodi Virtual'
providend' and capiend' pro provisor hospitii sui, quam quidem compositionem
censemus observand' pro beneficio Subditor' nostror' necnon ad Summonend' and
Sumonire faciend' atque tenend' secundum Leges, Statut' and Consuetudin' regni
nostri Hiberniae praedict' unum duntaxat Parliament' quandoquidem sibi melius
expediri videbitur, consensu tamen nostro in ea part semper habit' and ad idem
Parliament' prorogand and adjournand' toties quoties necesse fuerit, and infra
deos annos a tempore interceptionis ejusdem plene determinand' and siniend' and
quoscunque sic Summonit' absentes and non legitime impedit' mulctand' and
puniend' Concessimus insuper dicto Locum-tenenti nostro general' and
Gubernator' nostro' general' plenam and sufficien' authoritatem and potestat'
ad omnimod' officiar' computabil' Thesaurar' and Subthesaurar' regni nostri
praedict' duntaxat except' coram eisdem Thesaurar', Subthesaurar' nostris and
Baron Seaccarii nostri dicti regni nostri Hiberniae, computare faciend' and ad
hujusmodi comput' reddend' compelland' ac etiam ad inquirend' and inquiri
faciend' viis and modis quibus melius sibi videbitur, faciend de quibuscunque
bonis and cattallis quae fuer' ill' sive alior qui erga nos seu Progenitores
nostros forisfecerunt vel forisfacient, and a nobis concelat' existunt vel
imposterum existent, and ad omnia and singula alia quae ad offic' locum
tenentis nostri generalis and Gubernatoris nostri generalis jure, usu and
consuetud' regni nostri praed' pertinent aut pertinere deberent and pro bono
regimine and Salvatione and pro bono custod' pacis regni nostri praed and
quiet populi nostri ibidem, and recuperatione jurium nostrorum in regno nostro
Hiberniae necessar' fuerit; Salvis super reservatis faciend' exercend'
exequend' and ordinand' omnia alia nomine nostro and pro nobis in dicto regno
nostro Hiberniae faciend' exercend' and ordinand sicut nos faceremus aut facere
possemus si ibidem in propria persona nostra essemus. Damus insuper praefato
Iacobo Duci Ormondiae Locum tenenti nostro Generali and Gubernatori nostro
generali potestatem and authoritatem Navibus nostris quibuscunque aut aliis
quae circa littora dicti regni nostri Hiberniae sunt in Servitio nostro, aut in
posterum quacunque occasion erunt and mittentur pro defensione dicti regni
nostri Hiberniae, imperand and utend' pro servitio nostro and tutamine dicti
regni nostri, prout ipse secundum discretionem suam and per advisamentum
Concilii nostri ejusdem regni nostri Hiberniae visum, erit' nisi nos Special'
Commission' nostra aut Admiralli nostri Angliae ordinatione special'
Gubernator' and Capitan' praed' Navium nostrarum aut aliis mittend' speciali
instructione mandat' and servic' imperaverimus aut imperaverit. Constituimus
etiam praesat. Iacobum Ducem Ormondiae Gubernator' and Prefect. nostrum
general' exercitus nostri in dicto regno nostro Hiberniae, tam praesentis quam
futuri, quam diu nobis placuerit, cum Alacationibus inde debit' and consuet. Ac
eidem Duci Praefecto generali ex ercitus nostri ibidem plenam potestatem and
authoritatem concedimus faciend' constituend' and ordinand' leges, ordinationes
and proclamationes de tempore in tempus, ut casus exegerit, pro bono regimine
exercitus nostri praedict' ac omnes quorumcunque sub mandato and Gubernatione
ejusdem praefectus generalis exercitus nostri eas demque leges, ordinationes
and proclamationes exequendi ac debitae executioni mandand' ac etiam insligere,
adjudicare and assidere timor' poenas corporales, imprisonamenta, fines,
forissactur' ac omnes alias poenas and penalitates quascunque in and super
omnes delinquentes si ve offendentes contra hujusmodi leges, ordinationes and
proclamationes qualis and quae eidem Gubernatori and praefecto nostro exercitus
nostri requisit' and necessar' fore videbuntur' Quae omnia leges, ordinationes
and proclamationes, sic ut praefert' faciend' observari volumus sub poenis in
eisdem continend'. Et ei damus potestatem and authoritatem utendi and exercendi
infra regnum nostrum praedictum si opus fuerit, lege Mariscal' Sive Martial'
necnon substituend' assignand' and appuntuand' sub se infra dictum regnum
nostrum per literas nostras Patentes sub magno Sigillo nostro dict' regni
nostri praedict' faciend' tot and tales Marriscallos, Commissarios and al'
officiar' ad legem Armor' sen legem Martial' exercend' and exequend' prout
praefat' Locum-tenenti nostro general' and Gubernator' nostro general' de
tempore in tempus expedire videbit ad exercend' utend' and exequend' praed'
leges, quotie^ opus and necesse fuerit, and juramenta praestare, aliaque omnia
per se vel per alios facere, erigere, quae ad leges praedictas exercend'
aliqualiter pertineant. Et quia valde necessar' nobis videatur ut praefat'
Locum tenens noster generalis and Gubernator noster generalis pro negotiis
nostris magni momenti personam nostram Regiam in propria persona sua sicut
nobis visum suerit attendat' Ideo ulterius damus, and per praesentes praefato
Iacobo Duci Ormondiae Locum-tenenti and Gubernator' nostro general' plenam
potestatem and authoritatem concedimus nominand' and assignand per literas
nostras Patentes sub magno Sigillo nostro, dicti regni nostri Hiberniae nomine
nostro, tam nunc quam de tempore in tempus imposte um, consiciend' quamcunque
aut quoscunque dictus Locum-tenens and Gubernator noster general' in hac pa^te
idoneum sive idoneos duxerit sore deputat vel deputatos quocunque nomine
assignatos durante beneplacito nostro pro Gubernatione dicti regni nostri
Hiberniae in a^sentiae sua, donec idem Locum-tenens and Gubernator noster in
dictum regn' Hiberniae gubernatione ejusdem ut praefert' redierit, volentes
tamen quod in eisdem literis Patentibus alicui personae seu personis sicut
praefert' faciend Deputat' aut Deputatos in absentia sua tantum provis and
nomine nostro mand' sit quod non licebit alicui tal Deputat' vel deputatis The
saurar' seu pecunias nostras cuicunque solvere vel erogare, authoritat' seu
warrant' ipsius Deputat' vel ipsorum Deputat' tantum sed quod omnia erod'
mandat' and Warrant' per Thesaur' and pecuniis nostris per ipsum sient and
Signabunt non solum manu propria praefat' Deput' vel praefator' Deputator' sed
etiam manibus praedilectorum and sidel Consiliar' nostrorum Magistri Curiae
Wardor' Capital' Baron' Scaccar nostri' Cancellar' Scaccar' nostri and primar'
Secretarii nostri ibidem pro tempore existente vel saltem manibus duorum
illorum. Damus ulterius universis, singulis Archiepiscopis, Ducibus, Comitibus,
Vice-Comitibus, Episcopis, Baron' Iusticiar' Militibus, liberis hominibus and
aliis Subditis nostris de regno nostro praedict' firm in mandatis, quod
praefato Iacobo Duci Ormondiae Locum-tenenti nostro general and Gubernatori
nostro general' in eodem regno nostro intendentes sive assidentes, auxiliantes
and consultantes, ac ipsius mandatis in omnibus prout decet aut decebit
obedientes sint, aliquo statut' Actu, Ordinatione, provisione, jure, usu,
consuetudine sive restriction' in contrar' inde fact edit' ordinat' sive
provis' aut aliqua alia re, causa vel materia quacunque in aliquo non obstante.
In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes Test
meipso apud Westmonaster' Vicessimo primo die Februarii Ann. regni nostri
quarto decimo

Inrotulat' in Rotulls patentibus Cancellariae Hiberniae de Ann. regni Regis
Caroli Secundi decimo quarto and Examinat' per I. TEMPLE. Per ipsum Regem
BARKER.


At the Court at Hampton Court, JUNE 22. 1662.
Propositions to be considered of by his Majesty, concerning the governing of
Ireland.

CHARLES R.

1. THAT his Majesty may declare his express Pleasure, that no Irish Suit by
way of reward be moved for by any of his Servants, or others, before the
Ordinary Revenue there become, able to sustain the necessary charge of that
Crown, and the Debts there of befully cleared.

This is most reasonable, it standing with no sound rule of Judgment, to
exercise the Acts of bounty in a place which does not discharge it self, and
will prove the readiest and most expedient way to recover his Majesty's affairs
thereby, thus carrying the Revenues in their natural Channel; and indeed this
course being constantly pursued, will much increase the annual profits above
what they now are, and entirely draw the dependence of the inferiors from the
great Lords upon his Majesty, and so the interest and assurance the Crown shall
have in the Natives thereof, be of no less consequence and advantage than the
very profits:

2. That there be an express Caveat entered with the Secretary, Signet, Privy
Seal and Great Seal here, That no Grant, of what nature soever, concerning
Ireland, be suffered to pass, till the Lord Lieutenant be made acquainted, and
it first pass the seal of that Kingdom, according to the usual manner.

This will be of great intelligence and safety to his Majesty; for on the one
side he will clearly see into the true inward value all things, which formerly,
albeit of very great worth, have from so great a distance slipped away here, as
little understood by the Crown; as is acknowledged by those that obtain them;
who generally, in these causes, sacrifice rather to their own Wit, than the
Goodness and Bounty of Kings. And on the other side, nothing can pass to the
disadvantage of the Crown; and proper Ministers, instructed with these Affairs,
may be immediately faulted and justly called to a severe Account for their
Negligence and Unfaithfulness therein; which will give them good reason to look
more narrowly into his Majesty's Rights, and their own Duties.

3. That His Majesty Signify his Royal Pleasure, that special Care be taken
hereafter, that sufficient and credible Persons be chosen to supply such
Bishoprics as shall be void, or admitted of his Privy Council, or sit as
Judges, and serve of his learned Council there; that he will vouchsafe to hear
the advice of his Lieutenant before he resolve of any in these cases, that the
Lieutenant be commanded to inform his Majesty truly and impartially, of every
man's particular Diligence, and Care in his Service there, to the end his
Majesty may truly and graciously reward the well-deserving, by calling them
home to better preferment here.

This will advantage the service; it being altogether impossible for the
Lieutenant, be he never so industrious and able, to administer the public
Justice of so great a Kingdom, without the round assistance of other able and
well-affected Ministers. This will encourage the best men to spend their
stronger years there, when they shall see their elder age recompensed with ease
and profit in their own native Soil; and content and settle the Natives, when
they find themselves cared for, and put in the hands of discreet and good men
to govern them.

4. That no particular Complaints of Injustice or Oppression be admitted here
against any, unless it appears, That the Party made first his Address unto the
Lieutenant.

This is but justice to the Lieutenant, who must needs in some measure be a
delinquent, if the complaint be true; for that he ought as in chief,
universally to take care that his Majesty's Justice be truly and fully
administered; and therefore good reason that his Judgment should be informed,
and his integrity first tried, before either be impeached; Nay, it is but
justice to the Government it self, which would be exceedingly Scandalized
through the liberty of complaints, and the Ministers therein extremely
discouraged upon any petty matter, to be drawn to answer here, when as the
thing it self is for the most part either Injurious or such as the party might
have received good satisfaction for at his own doors: but where the complaint
appears formally grounded, that is, where due application has been made to
the Lieutenant, without any help or relief to the party, as may be pretended;
let it in the name of God be thoroughly examined, and severely punished,
wheresoever the fault prove to be; especially if it be found to be corrupt or
malicious: for thus shall not his Majesty only magnify his own Justice, but
either punish an unfaithful Minister, or a clamorous Complainer; and so his
Service be bettered by either example.

5. That no Confirmation of any Reversion of Office within that Kingdom be had,
or any new Grant of Reversion hereafter to pass.

That disposing of Places thus aforehand, much abates men's endeavors, who are
many times stirred up to deserve eminently in the Commonwealth, in hope of
those preferments; and being thus granted away, there is nothing left in their
Eye, for them to expect and aim at, which might nourish and quicken those good
desires in them, besides Places there closely and covertly passed, the persons
are not for the most part so able and fitted to the Duties thereof, as when
there is choice made out of many public pretenders, which commonly occur, when
they actually fall void by Death.

6. That the Places in the Lieutenants Gift, as well in the Martial as Civil
List, be left freely to his disposing; and that his Majesty may be graciously
pleased not to pass them to any person, upon Suits made unto him here.

This course held, preserves the Rights of the Lieutenants Place, and his
Person in that Honor and Esteem which can only enable him to do service; and
if the contrary happen, it is not only in diminution to him, but draws off all
necessary dependence upon him, and regard that ought to be had of him, in all
ready obedience in such things he shall command, for the Kings Service, when
they shall discern that the natural Powers of the Place are taken from him,
whereby he might kindle their cheerful endeavors by the preferring and
furnishing such as deserve those places.

7. That no New Offices be erected within that Kingdom before such time as the
Lieutenant be therewith acquainted; his opinion first required and certified
accordingly.

Suits of this Nature, however they pretend the public, their chief end is the
private Profit of the Propounder; and for the most part, in the Execution prove
burdens, not benefits to the Subjects; therefore thoroughly to be understood
before they pass, as more easy and less scandalous to the State, to be staid at
first than afterward recalled, and if they be really good, his Majesty may be
better informed by his Lieutenants approbation, and so proceed with more
assurance to the effecting thereof.

8. That his Majesty would be pleased, not to grant any License of absence out
of that Kingdom, to any Councillors, Bishops, Governors of any Province or
County, or Officers of State, or of the Army, or to any of the Judges, or
learned Council, but that it be left to his Lieutenant to give such License.

This is but reasonable, because the Lord Lieutenant who is chiefly entrusted
under his Majesty with the Care and Government of that Kingdom, is the most
competent and proper Judge, who in public employment may be spared, and how
long, without Prejudice to his Majesty, or the public.

9. That all Propositions moving from the Lieutenant, touching matters of
Revenue, may be directed to the Lord Treasurer of England only, and that the
Address of all other Dispatches for that Kingdom be by special direction of his
Majesty applied to one of the Secretaries singly, and his Majesty, under his
Handwriting does Specify, that his Majesty will have this done by Mr.
Secretary Nicholas.

These Propositions made unto his Majesty, by his Grace the Duke of Ormond Lord
Steward of his Majesty's Household, and Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, were
received and approved at the Council board, the 22 day of June 1662, there
being present the King's most excellent Majesty his Royal Highness the Duke of
York, his Highness Prince Rupert, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, Duke
of Albemarle, Duke of Ormond, Marquess of Dorchester, Lord Great Chamberlain,
Lord Chamberlain, Earl of Barkshire, Earl of Portland, Earl of Norwich, Earl of
Anglesey, Earl of Lauderdail, the Lord Hatton, Lord Hollis, Lord Ashly, Sir
William Compton, Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Vice Chamberlain, Mr Secretary Nicholas,
Mr. Secretary Morris.

By His Majesty's Command, EDWARD NICHOLAS


At the Court at Hampton Court, JUNE 22. 1662.
Present, The King's Most Excellent Majesty. His Highness, the Duke of York.
His Highness, Prince Rupert. Lord Chancellor. Lord Treasurer. Duke of Albemarl.
Duke of Ormond. Marquess of Dorchester. Lord Great Chamberlain. Earl of
Berkshire. Earl of Portland. Earl of Norwich. Earl of Anglesey. Earl of
Lauderdale. Lord Hatton. Lord Hollis. Lord Ashly. Sir William Compton. Mr.
Treasurer. Mr. Vice-Chamberlain. Mr. Secretary Nicholas. Mr. Secretary Morris.


Charles R.

HIS Majesty's express pleasure is, That the Masters of Requests, and every of
them, in their several Months of attendance at Court, do Constantly observe
these ensuing Directions, viz.

Not to move his Majesty in Petitions for any Irish Suit, by way of Reward,
either for any of His Majesty's Servants, or others before the ordinary Revenue
of that Kingdom become able to maintain the necessary Charge of that Crown, and
the Debts thereof be fully cleared.

For any particular Complaint of Injustice or Oppression, pretended to be done
there, unless it appear the Party made his first Address unto the Lord
Lieutenant, for confirmation of any Reversion of Offices within that Kingdom,
or any new Grant of Reversion hereafter; any places in the Lord-Lieutenants
gift, either of the Civil or Military List, when any such shall fall void.

Any erection of a new Office in that Kingdom, before such time as the
Lord Lieutenant be therewithal acquainted, his Opinion required and certified
back accordingly.

By His Majesty's Command, EDWARD NICHOLAS.


CHARLES R.

THere being nothing more conducible to the quiet and safety of a Kingdom, than
a frugal and regular ordering and disposing of the Revenue that is to maintain
the Public Charge and Expense of the Government, both Civil and Military; We
have thought fit, with the advice of our Council, upon a Prospect made of all
our Revenue, certain and casual, and the just means in view upon the settlement
of Estate in that Kingdom, now in hand for improveing thereof, to begin by this
Establishment, both to bring our Payments as near as may be to the compass of
our Receipts, and to provide especially for our Public Affairs, by supporting
Civil Justice and Government, and by maintaining our Forces in the present
Strength and Fullness; intending hereafter, as our Charge may grow less, and our
Means increase, to extend our Favor and Bounty according to our gracious
Inclinations, and the Merit of persons, to the further encouragement of
Particulars, as cause shall require: Whereof we have already given a proof, in
the liberal Addition we have made to the Judges, for their better Support, in
the impartial administration of Justice.


The LIST FOR CIVIL AFFAIRS;
Containing the several Entertainments, by the Year, of all Officers and
others, serving in our Courts of Justice, in the several Provinces of Ireland:
Officers belonging to the State; Officers of our Customs; Officers of the
Excise: Creation-Money; with other Perpetuities and particular Payments for our
Service; Which We require henceforth to be duly paid out of our Revenues
there, by the Hands of our Vice-Treasurer, or Receiver General for the time
being, according to the Cautions here mentioned; the same to begin for, and
from the First day of April. 1666.

THESE following Payments are the constant Fees to be continued to the several
Officers, without change from time to time.

l. s. d. The Right Honorable Arthur, Earl of Anglesey, Vice-Treasurer, and
General Receiver. 050 00 00 Sir Robert Meredith Knight. Chancellor of the
Exchequer. 100 00 00 John Busse Esquire Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer. 600 00
00 Sir Richard Kennedy Knight. Second Baron of the Exchequer. 300 00 00 John Povey
Esquire Third Baron of the Exchequer. 220 00 00 Sir Audly Mervin Knight. His Majesty's
prime Sergeant at Law. 020 10 00 Sir William Domvile Knight. His Majesty's Attorney
General. 075 06 00 Sir John Temple Knight. His Majesty's Sollicitor-General. 075 00
00 Philip Fernely, Esquire His Majesty's Chief Remembrancer 030 00 0^ Sir James
Ware, Knight. His Majesty's Auditor-General, for his ancient Fee per Ann. ^84 l. 6
s. 3 d. and for an Augmentation thereof, allowed by the former Establishment 50
l. in all 234 06 0^ Sir Allen Brodrick, The Court of Exchequer.
Knight. His Majesty's Surveyor-General. 060 00 00 Frances Lee, Escheatour of the
Province of Leinster. 006 13 04 Escheatour of the Province of Vlster. 020 05 00
Escheatour of the Province of Munster. 020 05 00 Escheatour of the Province of
Connaght. 020 05 00 Henry Warren, Esquire Second Remembrancer. 007 17 06 Nicholas
Loftus, Esquire Clerk of the Pipe. 015 00 00 Roger Moor, Esquire Chief-Chamberlain. 010
00 00 Sir Robert Kennedy, Bart. Second Chamberlain. 005 00 00 Maurice Keating,
Controllor of the Pipe. 007 00 00 John Longfield, Usher of the Exchequer, for
his Fee per Annum, 2 l. 10 s. and for his allowance for Ink, for the Exchequer,
10 l. per Annum. In all, per Annum. 012 10 00 Thomas Lea, Transcriptour and
Foreign Opposer. 015 00 00 Edward Ludlow, Summonitor of the Exchequer. 007 05
00 John Burniston, Marshal of the four Courts. 004 00 00 Sir Theophilus Jones,
Knight. Clerk of the Pells. 030 00 00 John Exham, Clerk of the first fruits, and
twentieth parts. 027 10 00 Thomas Gibson, Crier of the Court of Exchequer. 001
14 04 The Court of Kings Bench.
The Right Honorable James, Baron of Santry, Lord Chief Justice of His
Majesty's Bench. 800 00 00 Sir Will. Aston, Knight. second Justice of the said
Court. 300 00 00 Thomas Stockton, Esquire third Justice of the said Court. 300 00
00 Sir Will. Usher, Knight. Clerk of the Crown, of the said Court. 007 10 00 The
Court of Chancery.
The most Reverend Father in God, Michael Lord Archbishop of Dublin, Lord
Chancellor of Ireland. 1000 00 00 Sir John Temple Sen. Knt. Master of the
Rolls. The Court of Chancery.
144 03 04 Dr. Dudley Loftus one of the Masters of the Chancery. 020 00 00
Robert Mossom, Esquire another Master of the Chancery. 020 00 00 George Carlton
Clerk of the Crown in Chancery. 025 00 00 The said George Carlton, Clerk of the
Hanaper, for his Fee per Annum 10 l. 1 s. and for an allowance of Paper and
Parchment for the Chancery, per Annum 25 l. In all 035 10 00 1244 13 04 Sir
Edward Smith, The Court of CommonPleas.
Knt. Lord Chief Justice of the CommonPleas. 600 00 00 Sir Jerome Alexander,
Knt. Second Justice of the said Court. 300 00 00 Robert Booth, Esquire Third
Justice of the said Court. 300 00 00 Sir Walter Plunkett, Knt. Prothonotary of
the said Court. 007 10 00 1207 10 00 Star Chamber.
Sir George Lane, Knt. Clerk of the Star Chamber. 010 00 00 George Rutlidge,
Marshall of the Star Chamber. 010 00 00 020 00 00 Officers attending the State.
Sir Paul Davis, Knt. Secretary of State, for his Fee 200 00 00 The said Sir
Paul Davis for Intelligences 100 00 00 The said Sir Paul, Clerk of the Council,
for his ancient Fee, per Ann. 7 l. 10 s. and for an Allowance for Paper and
Parchment 40 l. in all 047 10 00 Richard St. George, Esquire Vlster King at Arms
026 13 04 Richard Carvy Athlong, Pursivant, 010 00 00 Philip Carpinter, Esquire
Chief Sergeant at Arms, at 5 s. 6 d. per diem 100 07 06 George Pigott, second
Sergeant at Arms for like Allowance 100 07 06 George Wakefield, Pursivant, 020
00 00 William Roe, Pursivant, 020 00 00 Arthur Padmor, Pursivant, 020 00 00
Thomas Lee, Keeper of the Council Chamger. 018 05 00 Six Trumpeters and a
Kettle-drum, at 60 l. each per Ann. 420. for their Fee, and 6 l. per An. each
Board-wages 42 l. in all per Ann. 162 00 00 1125 03 04 The Chief, Charge of
Circuits.
and other Justices of Assizes in every of the five Circuits twice a year, per
Annum 1000 00 00 Robes for the Judges, viz. Three in the Exchequer, three in
the King's Bench, three in the Common Pleas, Master of the Rolls, and three of
the King's Council, at 13 l. 6 s. 8 d. apiece per Annum, making in all 173 06
08 Incidents.
Liberates under the Seal of the Exchequer yearly, viz. the Chancellor of the
Exchequer 13 l. 6 s. 8 d. the Chief Remembrancer 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. Clerk of the
Pipe 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. the Usher 10 l. the Second Remembrancer 5 l. the Chief
Chamberlain 5 l. the Second Chamberlain 5 l. Clerk of the Common Pleas of the
Exchequer 5 l. Summonister and Comptroller of the Pipe 5 l. The Customer at
Dublin for Wax Paper, Parchment and Ink 3 l. 15. s. in all per Ann. 082 01 08
Rent of a House for the Receipts 025 00 00 Keeper of the House for the Receipts
005 00 00 Singers of Christ-church in Dublin for singing in the Exchequer, and
praying for His Majesty, at 10 s. for every Term per Ann. 002 00 00 Pursivants
of the Exchequer for carrying Writs 071 05 00 Paper and Parchments to the
Courts 150 00 00 The Nobility, Bishops and Counselors which shall reside and
keep house in Ireland for impost of Wines, according to His Majesty's special
grace Besides impost of Wines.
508 13 04 William Halsy, Provincial Officers.
Esquire Chief Justice of the Province of Munster 100 00 04 John Nayler, Second
Justice of Munster 066 13 04 Henry Batthurst, Attorney of the Province of
Munster 013 06 08 William Carr, Esquire Clerk of the Council of the said Province
007 10 00 Walter Cooper, Sergeant at Arms there 020 00 00 Oliver Jones, Chief
Justice in the Province of Connaght 100 00 00 Adam Cusack, Esquire second Justice
of that Province 066 13 04 John Shadwell, Esquire Attorney for the said Province 020
00 00 Sir James Cuss, Knt. Clerk of the Council there 007 10 00 Thom. Elliot,
Sergeant at Arms there 020 00 00

OFFICERS of the Customs.
l. s. d. (...)
Thomas Worsop, Esquire Customer of the Port of Dublin 007 10 00 Will. Maul, Esquire
Comptroller 007 10 00 Will. Scott, Esquire Searcher 005 00 00 020 00 00 Waxford
George Wakefeild, Customer 010 00 00 Hugh Poulder, Comptroller 005 00 00 015
00 00 Waterford and R^st.
Sir John Stephens, Customer 015 00 00 Frederick Christian, Comptroller 015 00
00 Thom. Tint, Searcher 006 13 04 036 13 04 Cork.
Rich. Scudamore, Customer 006 13 04 Robert Williams, Searcher 005 00 00 011 13
04 Robert Southwell, Kingsale.
Customer 13 06 08 John Brown, Searcher 06 13 04 20 00 00 John Selby, Dingle,
^oush.
Customer 05 00 00 The Customer Limerick.
13 06 08 Montfort Westrop Comptroller. 13 06 08 John Lynch, Searcher. 05 00 00
31 13 04 John Morgan, Galloway:
Customer. 13 06 08 The Searcher. 05 00 00 18 06 08 Thomas Willis, Drogheda,
Dundalle, and Carlingsord.
Customer. 07 10 00 John Bulteele, Comptroller. 07 10 00 Hugh Mountgomery,
Searcher. 05 00 00 20 00 00 Roger Lindon, Carricksergus.
Customer. 07 10 00 Samuel Willby, Searcher. 06 13 04 14 03 04 Nicholas Ward,
Strangford
Customer at Strangford. 07 10 00 Newcastle, Dundrum, etc.
Robert Hard, Searcher at Newcastle, Dundrum, Killaleagh, Bangor, Hollywood,
Bellfast, Olderst^ct, St. David, Whitehead, Ardglasse, Strangford,
Ballintogher, and Donagh^dee. 06 13 04 The Office and Officers of the Excise
For the Salaries due to the Officers of the Excise. 4269 00 00 The Contingent
Charge of the Excise. 1200 00 00 5469 00 00

These two Sums are to be distributed and apportioned as the Lord Lieutenant,
or other Chief Governor, or Governors, and Council, shall think fit, the Custom
and Excise being now Farmed. These two Sums are to cease for the time of the
Farm, and are not cast up in the Total.

Commissioner-General of the Customs and Excise.
The said Commissioners, which are to be but five in number, are to have the
allowance of one Penny in the pound each, for all Money to be received for
Customs and Excise.

l. s. d. For the Salaries of four Commissioners of Appeals in Causes of
Excise, Commissioners of Appeal.
and New Impost. viz. Sir James Ware, Knight. John Povey, Esquire Sir William Usher,
Knight. and Peter Weybrants, Alderman, at 150 l. a piece, per Annum. 600 00 00 Dr.
Robert Wood, Accomptants-General of the Customs and Excise.
and James Bonnell, Accomptants General of the Customs and Excise, per Annum.
200 00 00 The Duke of Ormond Creation-Money.
40 00 00 The Marquess of Antrim 40 00 00 The Earl of Castlehaven 20 00 00 The
Earl of Desmond 15 00 00 The Earl of Westmeath 15 00 00 The Earl of Arglasse 15
00 00 The Earl of Carbury 15 00 00 The Earl of Cavan 15 00 00 The Earl of
Donnegale 15 00 00 The Earl of Clanbrazill 20 00 00 The Earl of Inchiquin 20 00
00 The Earl of Orrery 20 00 00 The Earl of Montrath 20 00 00 The Earl of
Tyrconnel 20 00 00 The Earl of Clancarty 20 00 00 The Earl of Mount-Alexander
20 00 00 The Earl of Carlingford 20 00 00 The Lord Viscount Grandison 10 00 00
The Lord Viscount Willmot 10 00 00 The Lord Viscount Valentia 10 00 00 The Lord
Viscount Dillon 10 00 00 The Lord Viscount Nettervil 10 00 00 The Lord Viscount
Killulla 10 00 00 The Lord Viscount Magennis 10 00 00 The Lord Viscount
Sarsfield and Kilmallake 10 00 00 The Lord Viscount Ranelaugh 10 00 00 The Lord
Viscount Wenman and Tuam 10 00 00 The Lord Viscount Shannon 13 06 08 The Lord
Viscount Clare 10 00 00 The Lord Baron of Cahir 11 05 00 484 11 08

Where Creation-Money is granted to one and the same Person for two Honors,
that Sum which is granted with the highest Title, is only to be paid.

l. s. d. The Provost and Fellows of Trinity-Colledge near Dublin, Perpetuities.
by Patent, dated 12. August, 1612. as a perpetuity, per Annum. 388 15 00 The
Dean and Chapter of Christ-Church, Dublin, grant in perpetuity, 12. Iunii, 1604
per Annum. 045 06 08 The Lord Archbishop of Dublin, for Proxies due unto him
out of diverse Churches belonging to the late Monasteries of Thomas Court, St.
Mary's Abbey, and St. John of Jerusalem, near Dublin, per Annum. 018 05 06 The
Lord Bishop of Mead out of the Manor of Trim. 003 15 00 The Mayor, Sheriffs,
Commons, and Citizens of Dublin, per Annum. 500 00 00 The Chaunter of
ChristChurch, Dublin, for the Rent of a Plat of Ground, near His Majesty's
Castle of Dublin. 027 00 00 983 02 02

The Payments hereafter following, are to be continued to the present Gran^ees,
during their Grants; but to cease afterward, and not to be regranted, or paid
to any other.
l. s. d. The most Reverend Father in God, Mich^el Lord ArchBishop of Dublin,
Lord Chancellor of Ireland. 814 17 06 The Right Honorable Richard Earl of
Cork, Treasurer. 365 00 00 Nicholas Lostus Esquire, Clerk of the Pipe. 025 00 00
Maurice Keating, Comptroller of the Pipe. 008 00 00 Sir Theophilus Jones Knight.,
Clerk of the Pells. 061 05 00 Bryan Jones Esquire Auditor of the Foreign Accompt^
and Prests, at 6 s. 8 d. per diem granted him by Letters Patents; dated 2.
April. Anno 2 do. Caroli primi, during his good behavior, per Annum. 121 13 04
Edward Cook Esquire, one of the Masters of the Chancery. 020 00 00 John Westly Esquire,
one of the Masters of the Chancery. 020 00 00 Anthony Walsh, Keeper of the
Room, as also of the Robes, Hanging and Clock in the Castle of Dublin at 12 d.
per diem. 018 05 00 John Crook, Printer to His Majesty in Ireland. 008 00 00
Thomas Mall Esquire, Surveyor General of the Customs. 100 00 00 1649 16 10 William
Maule, Temporary payments.
Comptroller of the Customs at Dublin. 012 10 00 Marcus Viscount Dungannon,
Master of the Game. 050 00 00 Sir George Lane Knight., for his Fee, as Keeper of
the Records in Brimingham's Tower. 010 00 00 James Buck, Clerk of the Market of
all Ireland. 020 00 00 The Countess of Tyrconnell. 300 00 00 Edward
Fitz-Gerrald. 100 00 00 Sarah King, Widow. 080 00 00 Jane Carry, Widow. 050 00
00 John Dogharty at 18 d. per diem. 027 07 06 Iepson Macquire. 040 00 00 Sir
Robert Meredith. 100 00 00 Sir George Blundell at 6 s. per diem. 109 10 00 Ann
Conocke. 050 00 00 William Awbry, at 1 l. per week 052 00 00 Patrick Archer.
205 00 00

To be paid unto him until he be satisfied the sum of 5883 l. 19 s. 6 d. and
410 l. 5 s. 6 d. by Letters Patents dated 13 March 1662. and His Majesty's
Letters of the 2 d of May 1663.

l. s. d. Pensions and Annuities.
Dr. John Stern. 060 00 00 Luke German Esquire, per annum 100 00 00 Patrick
Cowurcey, and his Son John Cowurcey, per annum. 150 00 00 Sir James Dillon per
annum 500 00 00 Dr. Robert George, per Annum 109 10 00 Thomas Piggot Esquire, per
Annum 300 00 00 Mrs. Mary Warren, per Annum 080 00 00 Arthur Earl of Anglesey,
per Annum 600 00 00 Captain William Rosse, per Annum 300 00 00 3313 07 06
Commissioners of Accounts, Commissioners of Accounts and Clerks allowances.
for the yearly Accounts by them to be taken by virtue of His Majesty's
Commission at 20 l. each of them per Annum, 220 l. And to the Clerks and others
employed in the said Accounts, 65 l. 10 s. In all, 285 10 00 Payments for
extraordinaries by Concordatum.
For Fraught and Transportation, carrying of Letters and other Expresses, Gifts
and Rewards, Sea-service, Repairing and Upholding sufficiently our Houses,
maintaining our Forts, finishing of needful undertakings of that kind, begun in
other places, but not finished; erecting of more strengths of the like kind,
and other fit and necessary places. Diets and Charges, in keeping of poor
Prisoners, and sick and maimed Soldiers in Hospitals; Printing, Riding and
Traveling Charges; Prests upon Account, and all other payments by Concordat of
our Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Governors, and Council, not to be
exceeded without special direction first had from us, or our PrivyCouncil in
England. 9000 00 00 Sum total of the payments aforesaid upon the Civil List
amounts unto per Annum. 25601 4 8

Memorandum. That the Impost of Wines, for the Nobility, Bishops and
Councillors, the Officers of the Excise, and Commissioners-general of the
Customs and Excise, are not included in the abovesaid Sum.

AND Our Pleasure is, That no Payment or Allowance be made by Concordat, but by
Warrant drawn by the Clerk of the Council of Ireland, and passed openly at our
Council Board there, and signed by our Lieutenant or other Chief-Governour, or
Governor, Chancellor, Treasurer, or Vice-Treasurer, Chief-Baron and Secretary,
or other four of them at the least, the Lieutenant or Chief-Governour being
one; and in default, either by exceeding the Sum limited by anticipation or
otherwise, or by not observing of this our Direction and Commandment in every
Point; Our Pleasure is, That all Sums which shall otherwise be allowed and paid
there, shall be set insuper, as Debts upon our said Lieutenant, or other
Chief-Governour, or Governors; and our Undertreasurer, upon his Accounts to
be defaulked to Our use, upon their several Entertainments.

And Our further Pleasure is, That this Establishment and List, containing all
our Payments to be made for Civil-Causes, be duly paid according to our
Directions, and be not exceeded, nor any of the Payments which are no ed to be
but temporary, or to cease after Death, or surrender of the Party, or upon
determination of his Grant, to be continued or renewed to any other, either in
concurrence, reversion or otherwise. And We require our Auditor-General, That
once every Year, immediately upon the passing the Accounts of our Vice
^reasurer, or Receiver General, a Transcript of the same Accounts, both for
Receipts of every nature, and the particular Payments, be returned to our
Treasurer of England, to the end we may be truly informed, both of the increase
of our said Revenues yearly, and also of the Abatements of Payments contained
in this List.

ARLINGTON.


By the Lord-Lieutenant-General, and General Governor of Ireland.
INstructions for our dearest Son, Thomas Earl of Ossory, nominated by Us by
virtue of His Majesty's Letters Patents, under His Great Seal of England,
bearing date the 21st day of February, in the 14th Year of His Reign, and
constituted by His Majesty's Letters Patents, under the Great Seal of this
Kingdom of Ireland, bearing date the 21st day of May, in the 16th Year of His
Reign, His Majesty's Deputy of this His said Kingdom, during His Majesty's
Pleasure, and only in our Absence, until we shall return into this Kingdom.


ORMOND.
WHereas We the Lord Lieutenant received Instructions from the King's Most
Excellent Majesty, under His Royal Signatures, bearing date the 22d day of
June, 1662. We do herewith deliver you a Copy of the said Instructions signed
by Us. And We do hereby require you to observe those Instructions, inall such
Parts of them, as were to be observed by Us, and are now appliable to you, in
the Place of His Majesty's Deputy of this His Kingdom.

You are to take care, That in your giving Commands, or Warrants for Payments
of any of His Majesty's Treasure, or Moneys, you observe the Rule prescribed to
you, in such Cases, by His Majesty's Letters Patents, whereby you are
constituted His Majesty's Deputy of this His Kingdom.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the 30 th day of May, 1664.

G. LANE.


The ESTABLISHMENT and LIST; Containing all the Payments to be made for
Military Affairs in Ireland, to be duly paid by the Hands of our
Vice-Treasurer, and Treasurer at Wars, according to the Cautions hereafter
mentioned; the same to begin for and from the 1st Day of April, 1666.

Signed, CHARLES Rex.


OFFICERS General.
l. s. d. THE Lord Lieutenant and Governour-General of Ireland, for his Fee per
Ann. viz. for his Diet, at 100 l. per mensem; a Retinue of 50 Horse, with
Officers at 2 l. 19 s. 6 d. per diem; an Allowance of 1000 l. per Ann. in lieu
of cess, an Allowance of 235 l. per Ann. in lieu of 235 Beefs, formerly paid to
the Lord Lieutenant, out of the County of Cavan; an Allowance of 240 l. per
Ann. formerly paid to the Lord Lieutenant out of the Tithes of Dunbogne, making
in all per Ann. 3860 17 06 Lord Lieutenant.
As General of the Army per Ann. 4331 06 08 As Capt. of a Troop of Horse per
Ann. 0723 18 04 As Colonel of Foot, per Ann. 0608 06 08 As Capt. of a
Foot-Company, per Ann. 0261 11 08 9786 00 10 For His Guard of Halberteers,
consisting of a Capt. at 11 l. 4 s. each Calendar Month; a Lieutenant at 9 l.
16 s. two Sergeants at 3 l. 10 s. each; and 60 Halberteers at 2 l. 2 s. each,
making per Ann. 1848 00 00 The Lieutenant General of the Army at 1 l. per diem.
365 00 00

To Cease post mortem, or other Determinations of the Grant made to Thomas Earl
of Osserey.

l. s. d. The Sergeant Major General of the Army, at 1 l. per diem, per Ann.
365 00 00

To Cease post mortem, or other Determinations of the Grant made to Roger Earl
of Orery.

l. s. d. Sir Henry Titchburn, Knight. Marshal of Ireland, for his Entertainment at
3 s. 9 d. per diem; a Trumpeter at 6 d. ob q. per diem, and a Retinue of 30
Horse, at 9 d. a piece per diem, making per Ann. 489 06 07 The Commissary
General of the Horse, at 1 l. per diem, per Ann. 365 00 00

To Cease post mortem, or other Determinations of the Grant, to John Lord
Kingston.

l. s. d. The Muster-Master General, General Officers.
and Clerk of the Cheque, for his Entertainment, at 4 s. per diem, at 10
Horsemen, at 1 s. the piece per diem; for any increase of his Entertainment 3
s. 6 d. per diem, with an Allowance for one Clerk at 2 s. 6 d. per diem making
per Ann. 365 00 00 3066 08 03 Six Commissaries of the Musters, at 100 per Ann.
each. 600 00 00 One Corporal of the Field, viz. Colonel Beverly Usher, at 5 s.
per diem; per Ann. 091 05 00

To Cease post mortem, or other Determinations of the Grant in being.

l. s. d. The Advocate General of the Army at 6 s. 8 d. per diem. 121 13 04 The
Physician-General of the Army at 10 s. per diem. 182 10 00 Surgeon of the
Army in Ireland, and of the Hospital of Dublin. 121 13 04

OFFICERS Provincial.
l. s. d. q. THE Lord President of Munster, for His Fee at 100 l. Sterling per
An. for his Diet, and the Councils there, at 7 l. 10 s. per Week, and for his
Retinue of 30 HorseMen, and 20 Footmen, at 1 l. 2 s. 6 d. ob. per diem, in all
per Annum. 908 19 09 ob. The Lord President of Connau^ht, for his Fee at 100 l.
Sterling per Ann. for his Diet, and the Councils there, at 7 l. 10 s. per Week,
and for his Retinue of 30 Horsemen, and 20 Footmen, at 1 l. 2 s. ^ d. ob per
diem, in all per Ann. 908 19 09 ob. The Provost-Marshal of Lemster, for His
Entertainment at 4 s. 2 d. ob. q. per diem, making per Ann. 077 03 07 ob. 2126
14 02 ob. The Provost-Marshal of Munster, Provinci Officers.
for his Entertainment at 4 s. 2 d. ob q. per diem, making per Ann. 077 03 07
ob. The Provost-Marshal of Connaught, for his Entertainment, at 4 s. 2 d. ob.
q. per diem, making per Ann. 077 03 07 ob. The Provost Marshal of Vlster, for
his Entertainment at 4 s. 2 d. ob. q. per diem, making per Ann. 077 03 07 ob.

All the said Provost-Marshals, with the Entertainment due unto them
respectively, to cease post mortem, or other Determinations of their Grants.

CONSTABLES.
l. s. d. q. The Constable of DublinCastle, for his Entertainment at 20 l. per
Ann. 020 00 00 The Porter of Dublin-Castle at 9 d. per diem, per ann. 013 13 09
The Constable of LimerickCastle, for his Entertainment, at 10 l. per ann. and a
Porter at 6 d. ob q. per diem, per ann. 018 07 09 ob. The Constable of
Athlone-Castle, for his Entertainment, at 8 l. 2 s. 6 d. per ann, and a Porter
at 6 d. ob q. per diem, per ann. 018 07 09 ob. The Constable of
Roscomon-Castle, for his Entertainment, at 3 s. 4 d. per diem. 060 16 08 The
Constable of Carrickfergus, for his Entertainment, at 2 s. 6 d. per diem, per
ann. 045 12 06 178 06 00 ob.

The Master of the Ordnance, with other Officers thereunto belonging, and Train
of Artillery.

l. s. d. The Master of the Ordnance, for himself at 6 s. 8 d. per diem; a
Lieutenant at 1 ^. 6 d. per diem; a Cornet ^ 9 d. and 18 Horsemen at 1 s. the
piece per diem, per an. 491 04 07 The Lieutenant of the Ordnance, at 7 s. per
diem, per an 127 15 00

To cease after the death of Albert Cunningham, now Patentee, Officers of the
Ordnance.
or other determination of his Grant.

l. s. d. The Ingineer, Overseer, Surveyor, and Director-General of His
Majesty's Fortifications, etc. at 5 s. per diem, per annum 091 05 00

To cease after the death of Captain John Pain and Capt. John Ha^^am, now
Patentees, or other determinations of their Grant.

l. s. d. Captain Hugh Magill, Comptroller of the Ordnance, for his Fee, at 5
s. per diem, and for an allowance of 1 s. per diem for his Clerk, both per
annum. 109 10 00 819 14 07

Sundry Ministers belonging to the Ordnance, viz. in LEMSTER.
l. s. d. A Master-Gunner at 3 s. per diem, his Mate at 1 s. 6 d. per diem; six
Gunners for the Train, at 1 s. 2 d. each per diem; one Gentleman of the
Ordnance at 3 s. per diem; Clerk of the Ordnance and Stores at Dublin at 4 s.
per diem, his Clerk at 1 s. per diem; Gunsmith, Blacksmith, Carpenter and
Wheeler, at 1 s. 4 d. per diem each, Armorer, Cutler, Cooper, at 9 d. each per
diem; six Matrosses at 8 d. each per diem; three Waggoners at 10 d. each per
diem; at Duncannon, a Clerk of the Stores 1 s. 8 d. per diem, a Gunner at 1 s.
per diem, a Matross, at 8 d. per diem; at Passage, a GunnersMate at 10 d. per
diem; making per annum 774 02 01

CONNAVGHT.
l. s. d. At Athlone, a Clerk of the Stores at 1 s. 8 d. per diem; a Gunner at
1 s. per diem; a Matross at 8 d. per diem. Galloway, a Clerk of the Stores at 1
s. 8 d. per diem; a Gunner at 1 s. per diem; a Matross at 8 d. per diem. At
Sligo, a Gunner at 1 s. per diem; Isle of Arran, a Gunner at 1 s. per diem;
Innisbussin, a Gunner at 1 s. per diem; making per annum, 176 08 04

MUNSTER.
l. s. d. (...).
Waterford, a Gunner, at 1 s. per diem; a Matross at 8 d. per diem. Limerick, a
Clerk of the Stores at 1 s. 8 d. per diem; a Gunner at 1 s. per diem; a Matross
at 8 d. per diem. Cork, Clerk of the Stores at 1 s. 8 d. per diem; a Gunner at
1 s. per diem; a Matross at 8 d. per diem. At Halvowling, a Gunners-Mate 10 d.
per diem; Youghall, a Gunner, at 1 s. per diem; Kingsale, a Gunner, at 1 s. per
diem; at the Block-house, a Gunners-Mate, at 10 d. per diem; at Crook-haven, a
Gunner, at 1 s. per diem; at Innisherkin, a Gunners Mate, at 10 d. per diem;
Valentia, a Gunner, at 1 s per diem; in all per annum. 270 14 02 1358 02 10

VLSTER.
l. s. d. Londonderry, a Clerk of the Stores, at 1 s. 8 d. per diem; a Gunner
at 1 s. per diem; a Matross, at 8 d. per diem. At Culmore, a Gunners-mate at 10
d. per diem. At Carrickfergus, a Clerk of the Stores, at 1 s. 8 d. per diem; a
Gunner at 1 s.; a Matross at 8 d. per diem. In all, per annum. 136 17 06

HORSE.
l. s. d. The King's Guard of Horse consisting of a Captain at ^9 l. 12 s. each
Calendar Month; a Lieutenant at 12 l. 12 s.; a Cornet at 12 l. 12 s.; a
Quartermaster at 9 l. 16 s.; six Corporals at 6 l 6 s. each; two of the King's
Trumpets at 6 l. 6 s. each; four more of the King's Trumpets, and a Kettle drum
at 3 l. 10 s. each, besides their standing-allowances in the Civil List: A
Sadler, Farrier, and Armorer, at 4 l. 18 s. each; and 100 Horsemen at 4 l. 18
s. each making in all per men's. 627 l. 4 s. which amounts for the whole Pay of
the said Guard per An. unto 7526 8 The Lord Lieutenant's Troop, consisting of a
Captain at 19 l. 12 s. each Calendar Month; a Lieutenant at 12 l. 12 s. and a
Cornet at 9 l. 16 s.; a Quartermaster at 7 l. three Corporals and two Trumpets
more at 6 l. 6 s. each; and fifty private Horsemen at 2 l. 2 s. each; making in
all per men's. 184 l. 2 s. which amounts for the whole Pay of the said Troop per
an. unto 2209 4 Five Troops more belonging to the General Officers, viz. to the
Lieutenant General of the Army, the Sergeant Major General of the Army, the
Lord President of Connaught, the Commissary General of the Horse, and the
Scoutmaster-General of the Army, each Troop consisting of a Captain at 19 l. 12
s. each Calendar Month, a Lieutenant at 12 l. 12 s. a Cornet at 9 l. 16 s. a
Quartermaster at 7 l. Three Corporals, and two Trumpets at 3 l. 10 s. each, and
50 private Horsemen, at 2 l. 2. s. each making in all per mensem for each
Troop, 171 l. 10 s. which amounts for the whole pay of the said five Troops per
annum unto 10290 1226 8 Twenty three Troops, which consisting of the like
Officers, and forty five private Horsemen, making in all per mensem to each
Troop 16 1 l. which amounts for the whole pay of the said twenty three Troops
per annum unto 44436

FOOT
l. s. d. The Lord Lieutenant's Company, consisting of a Captain at 11 l. 4 s.
each Callendar Month. A Lieutenant at 5 l. 12 s. an Ensign at 4 l. 4 s. Two
Serjean^s at 2 l. 2 s. each; three Corporals and two Drums at 1 l. 8 s. each,
and one hundred private Footmen ^t 14 s. each, making in all per mensem 102 l.
4 s. which amounts for the whole pay of the said Company per annum unto 1226 8
0 Fifty nine Companies more, each consisting of a Captain at 11 l. 4 s. each
Calender Month, a Lieutenant at 5 l. 12 s. an Ensign at 4 l. 4 s. two Sergeants
at 2 l. 2 s. each; three Corporals, and one Drummer at 1 l. 8 s. each, and
sixty private Footmen at 14 s. each, making in all per mensem for each Company
72 l. 16 s. which amounts for the whole pay of the said fifty nine Companies
per annum unto 51542 0 3 A Ward at Sligo under the command of Major Robert
E^geworth consisting of two Sergeants at 2 l 2 s. each, every Calender Month;
three Corporals, and one Drummont 1 l. 8 s each and sixty private Footmen, a 14
s. each; making in all per mensem 51 l. 16 s. which amounts per annum unto 0621
12 53390 8

Regiment of Guards.
l. s. d. The Royal Regiment of Guards, consisting of twelve Companies, viz. a
Colonel as Colonel and Captain at 28 l. per mensem a LieutenantColonel, and
Captain at 21 l. per mensem. A Major and Captain at 16 l. 16 s. Nine Captains
more at 11 l. 4 s. each; twelve Lieutenants at 5 l. 12 s. each; twelve Ensigns
at 4 l. 4 s. each; forty Sergeants at 2 l. 2 s. each; thirty six Corporals at 1
l. 8 s. each; Drum-Major at 2 l. 16 s. Twenty four Drummers at 1 l. 8 s. each;
a Piper to the Kings Company at 1 l. 8 s. Twelve hundred Soldiers at 1 l. 3 s.
4. d. each; a Chaplain at 9 l. 6 s. 8 d. An Adjutant, Quartermaster, and
Chyrurgeon at 5 l. 12 s. each, and Surgeons Mate at 3 l. 10 s. making in all
per men's. at 28 days to the Month 1886 l. 00. 08. which amounts unto per annum
24518 8 8

Temporary Payments.
l. s. d. Sir Henry Titchburn, Knight, Marshall of Ireland, 198 1 9

To cease Post-mortem or other Determination of his Grant.
l. s. d. Sir Theophilus Jones, Scoutmaster General of the Army, for his
Entertainment at 6 s. 8 d. per diem, and for an increase of his Entertainment
at 100 l. per annum making in all 221 13 4

To cease Post-mortem or other Determination of his Grant.
l. s. d. Sir George Lane Knight, for his Entertainment as Secretary at War to
his Majesty, at 1 l. per diem for himself, and 5 s. per diem for his Clerk per
annum 456 5 0

To cease Post-mortem, or other Determination of his Grant.

l. s. d. Captain Richard St. George the pay of a Captain of Foot toward his
maintenance during his life being 11 l. 4 s. per mensem; per annum 134 8 Arthur
Earl of Donnegall for his Entertainmont at 4 s. 2 d. per diem for himself and
for nine Horsemen at 9 d. each per diem during his life, by virtue of a Grant
thereof, dated the last of July in the 13 th. year of King James, per ann. 199
4 7 The Mayor of the City of Dublin for his Entertainment at 8 s. per diem 146
2255 9 4

Particular Governors.
l. s. d. The Governor of the County of Clare for his Fee at 10 s. per diem;
per annum 182 10 The Governor of the Castle of Dublin for his Fee 1 l. per
diem; per annum 365 The Governor of the Fort of Sligo for his Fee at 10 s. per
diem; per annum 182 10 The Governor of the Fort of Halbolling for his Fee at 6
s. per diem; per annum 109 10 The Constable of Hilsboro^gh at 3 s. 4 d. per
diem; per annum 060 16 8

These Temporary Payments to cease Post mortem, or other determination of the
said Grants, except that of the Halboling.
l. s. d. Sum total of the payments aforesaid upon the Military List amounts
unto per ann. 163810 3 11 ob.

By His Majesty's Command ARLINGTON.

A Catalogue of the PEERS.
DUke of Ormond Duke of Leinster Marquess of Antrim
EARLS
Kildare Thomond Cork Desmond Barrymore Mead Ossory Roscommon Londonderry
Donnigall Arran Conaway Carberry Ardglass Rannalagh Cavan Inchiquin Clancarty
Orrery Mamtroth Drogheda Waterford Mount-Alexander Down Longford Tyrone
Bellomont. Clanrickard Castlehaven Westmeath Fing all Castlemaine Carlingford
Viscounts.
Grandison Wilmot Losius of Fly Swords Kilmurry Valentia Mareborough Castleton
Chaworth Sligo Waterford Strangford Tuam Cashell Carlo Cullen Shannon Mazareene
Dromoor Dungarvan Dungannon Kells Fitzharding Clare Charlemount Powerscourt
Blesington Granard Lansborough Ross. Castalo Merrion Fairfax Fitz Williams
Gormanston Rathcoole Barefore Brucher Galmoy Kingsland Mountgarret Douth Evagh
Killmallock Ikernie Glanmalegra Claine Down Trazey.
Archbishopricks and Bishoprics in Ireland.
Archbishopric of Armagh -- Dublin -- Cashells Archbishop. of Tuam Bishopric
of -- -- Mead -- Kildore -- Waterford -- Clonfert -- Elphin -- Fernes and
Laghlin -- Clogher -- Dromore -- Ossory -- Derry -- Down -- Killallow -- Cork
-- Limerick -- Cloyne -- Killalla -- Rapho -- Kilmore
BARONS.
Kingsale Kerry Hoath Mountjoy Folliot Maynard Dundalk Digby Lifford Herbert
Lochlin Colraine Leitrim Donamore Blare Killard Kingston Colooney Sautrey Lough
Glawnalley Castle-Steward Atheury Cashir Baltimore Strabane Slane Trimleston
Dunscany Dunboyne Upper Ossery Castle-Comell Brittas
A List of those Places that return Parliament Men in Ireland
Leinster.
County of Catherlough 2 Borough of Catherlough 2 B. of Old-Leighlen 2 County
of Dublin 2 City of Dublin 2 University of Dublin 3 Bur. of Newcastle 2 B. of
Swords 2 Village de Drogheda 2 County of Killkenny 2 Bur. of Callen 2 B. of
Thomas-Town 2 B of Gowrin 2 B. of Kells 2 B. of Emisteogue 2 B. of Knoctopher 2
B. of St. Kennis 2 City of Kilk^nny 2 County of Kildare 2 Bur. of Kildare 2 B.
of Nass 2 B. of Athy 2 Com. Regis 2 Bur. of Phillipps-Town 2 B. of Byrr 2 B of
Banagher 2 County of Mead 2 Bur. of Trim 2 B. of Kells 2 B. of Navan 2 B. of
Athbuy 2 B. of Duleeke 2 B. of Ratooth 2 Com. Regine 2 Bur. of Bellakill 2 B.
of Marlborough 2 Port Arlinton 2 County of Westmeath 2 Bur. of Athlone 2 B. of
Four 2 B. of Kilbegan 2 B. of Mullingar 2 County of Wicklow 2 Bur. of Wicklow
2 B. of Carisford 2 B. of Baltinglass 2 County of Wexford 2 Town of Wexford 2
Town of Ross 2 Bur. of Eniscourthy 2 B. of Featherd 2 B. of Bannow 2 B. of
Cloghmaine 2 B. of Arkloe 2 B. of Taughman 2 B. of Newburrough 2 County of
Longford 2 Borough of Lanisborough 2 County of Louth 2 Bur. of Dundalke 2 B.
of Arthdee 2 B. of Carlingford 2
Munster.
County of Cork 2 City of Cork 2 Borough of Mallow 2 B. of Baltimore 2 B. of
Clognekilty 2 B. of Bandonbridge 2 B. of Kingfaile 2 B. of Youghall 2 County of
Clare 2 Bur. of Insh 2 County of Kerry 2 Bur. of Traly 2 B. of Dinglecough 2 B.
of Ardsart 2 County of Limerick 2 City of Limerick 2 Bur. of Kilmallock 2 B. of
Askaton 2 County of Tipperary 2 Town of Tipperary 2 Bur. of Clonmell 2 B. of
Feathard 2 Town of Cashell 2 B. of Thurles 2 County of Waterford 2 City of
Waterford 2 Bur. of Dungarvan 2 B. of Lismore 2 B. of Tallow 2
Ulster.
County of Armagh 2 Borough of Armagh 2 B. of Charlemont 2 Connty of Antrim 2
Bur. of Belfast 2 B. of Carickfergus 2 B. of Lisborne 2 B. of Antrim 2 County
of Cavan 2 Bur. of Cavan 2 B. of Bellturbet. 2 Co^nty of Down 2 Bur. of Down 2
B of Newtown 2 B. of Newry 2 Ballkillaleagh 2 B. of Bangor 2 B. of Hilsburough
2 County of Donnegal 2 Bur. of Lisford 2 B. of Ballishannon 2 B. of Kilbegs 2
B. of Donnigall 2 Bur. of St. John's Town 2 County of Farmanaugh 2 Bur. of
Inniskilling 2 County of Londonderry 2 City of Londonderry. 2 Bur. of Colerain
2 B. of Lanmevaddy 2 County of Monaghan 2 Bur. of Monaghan 2 County of Tyrone 2
^ur. of Donnegall 2 ^own of Clogher 2 (...) of Agber 2 ^^^. of Strabaine 2
Connaught.
^^ounty of Galloway 2 ^ur. of Galloway 2 ^^ of Athenry 2 ^. of Tuam 2 ^ounty
of Leitrim 2 ^^r. of James-Town 2 Bur. of Carickdrumrusk 2 County of Mayo 2
Bur. of Castle-Bar 2 County of Roscomon 2 Bur. of Roscomon 2 B. of Tulsk 2
County of Sligo 2 Bur. of Sligo 2 The whole Number. 285.
VERBUM SAPIENTI.

THE INTRODUCTION.
1 WHEREAS many are forced to pay 1/10 of their whole Estates toward the
raising of but 70000 l. per Mensem, besides what they pay more insensibly and
directly, as Customs, Excise, Chimny-Money, etc. ( viz. in London, they pay 2
d. per Mensem per Pound Rent, that is 2 s. per Annum, or 1/10 of the whole.) It
must come to pass, that the same Persons must from Christmas, 1665. pay of
their whole Estates, if the War with Holland continue two years longer^ at the
value of the last years Expense, provided His Majesty be kept out of Debt.

2. But if the Public Charge were laid proportionably, no Man need pay above
1/10 of his whole Effects, even in case the Tax should rise to 250 000 l. per
Mensem, which God forbid.

3. That is to say, according to the present ways, some pay four times as much
more as they ought, or needed; which disproportion is the true and proper
Grievance of Taxes, and which must be felt when the Tax happens to be great and
extraordinary: Whereas by mere Method and Proportion, the same may be corrected
as aforesaid; and withal, just Accounts might be kept of the People, with the
respective Increases and Decreases of them, their Wealth, and Foreign Trade.

CHAP. I. Containing several Computations of the Wealth of the Kingdom.
1. THERE are of Men, Women, and Children, in England and Wales, about six
Millions, whose Expense at 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. per Annum, or near 4 d. per Diem,
for Food, Housing, Clothes, and all other necessaries, amount to 40 Millions,
per Annum.

2. There are in England and Wales, of Acres of Land (worth 6 l. 1 s. 8 d. per
Acre, and 18 years purchase) 24 Millions, that is, which yields 8 Millions per
Annum Rent, and which are worth 144 Millions to be sold.

3. There be 28000 Houses within the Liberties of the City of London, worth 15
l. per Annum, and twelve years purchase ( viz. which yield 420,000 l. per
Annum, and are worth 5,040000 l.

There are without the Liberties, but within the Bills of ^ortality more in
number, perhaps not of greater value, viz. 5,040000 l.

4. There is in all England and Wales near ten times as many Chimneys as
within the Liberties of London, as appears by the Returns; Whereof those within
the Bills are of the whole.

5. It Is probable, that the Housing of all the Cities and Market Towns, are
double in number to those of all London, though of no more worth.

6. It Is also probable, that the Housing without the Cities and Towns, are more
in number than those within ( London excepted) but of no more value.

7. So as the Housing of England may be estimated worth 30 millions; and that
if their values be estimated by Chimneys, those of London are worth 12 d. per
Chimney; those in the Suburbs 10 d. other Cities and Market Towns 6 d. and
those without both, about 4 d.

8. The Shipping of England, etc. is about 500 000 Tuns, which at 6 d. per Tun,
including their Ordnance, Apparel, etc. is worth three millions.

9. The Stock of Cattle on the aforementioned 24 millions of Land, and the
Waste thereunto belonging, is worth of the said Land, viz. 36 millions
comprehending Horses, Oxen, Sheep, Swine, Deer, Fisheries, Parks and Warrens.

10. The Coined Gold and Silver of the Kingdom, is scarce worth six millions

11. The Wares, Merchandises, and Utensils of Plate, and Furnitures, may be
estimated at 31 millions to make the Ships and Money 40. and the whole 250
millions.

12. The most uncertain part of this Estimate, seems to be rating personal
Estates at above 30 Millions, which I make probable thus.

(1) First it is not unlikely that what is contained in all the Shops,
Warehouses, Cellars, Barns, and Graineries, together with Household Furniture,
Clothes, Ornaments, etc. should be less worth than Housing it self that
contains them. (2) If the value of all the Cattle, viz. 36 millions, were added
to the 31 personal Estates, making 67 together; both will not make up 1 years
Provision for the whole Nation, whose Expense we estimated at 40 millions per
annum; and poorer than so, we hope it is not. (3.) I find by the particular
estimate of the values of all the Plate, Lead, Iron, Copper and Tin, and of all
the Timber, Planks, and Woods, and of all Silks, Linen, and Callicoes; of all
Clothes, Stuffs, and Leathers; of all Grains, and Salts, and of all Wines,
Oils, and other Liquids; of all Grocery and Spicery, and Drugs; of Jewels, and
Hangings, Beds, and other Ornaments, (too troublesome to particularize) that
this general Account may stand. (4.) The City of London being commonly esteemed
and rated at the 15 th part of the whole, which we reckon at 250 Millions, that
is 16. I think the sum may be well made up by reckoning 5 Millions for the
Housing as aforesaid, and 1 for the Shipping (half the Shipping of the Nation
belonging to London) and about the double of the value of the Housing for what
is contained in them. The which upon considering many several Houses, I find
not unreasonable. (Lastly,) supposing that in the Houses within the Liberties
of London (worth 5 Millions) there be 10 Millions worth of Goods; I conceive
that to allow about as much more, viz. 21 Millions) to all the rest of the
Houses in the Kingdom, which are ten times as many as aforesaid, will not
overcharge them.
13. Now if the Land worth 144 Millions, yield 8 Millions per annum, the other
Estate converted into the like Species must yield 5 8/9 more; but because Money
and other personal Estates yield more per annum than Land; (that is) doubles it
self under 17 years purchase at 6 l. per centum, then instead of 5 8/9, suppose
it to yield 7, making the whole Annual Proceed 15.

CHAP. II. Of the Value of the PEOPLE.
NOW if the Annual proceed of the Stock, or Wealth of the Nation, yields but 15
millions, and the expense be 40. Then the labor of the People must furnish the
other 25; which may be done, if but half of them, viz. 3 millions earned but 8
l. 6 s. 8 d. per annum, which is done at 7 d. per diem, abating the 52 Sundays,
and half as many other days for accidents as Holy days, sickness, recreations,
etc.

2. If of these 3 millions earned but 2 d. per diem; another 4 d. another 8 d.
per diem, another 10 d. and another 12 d. The medium will be this, 7 d. per
diem.

3. Whereas the Stock of the Kingdom, yielding but 15 Millions of proceed, is
worth 250 Millions; then the People who yield 25, are worth 416 Millions. For
although the Individiums of Mankind be reckoned at about 8 years purchase; the
Species of them is worth as many as Land, being in its nature as perpetual, for
ought we know.

4. If 6 Millions of People be worth 417 millions of pounds Sterling, then each
head is worth 69 l. or each of the 3 millions of Workers is worth 138 l. which
is 7 years purchase, at about 12 d. per diem; nor is superlucration above his
subsistence to be reckoned in this Case.

5. From whence it follows, that 100,000, persons dying of the Plague, above
the ordinary number, is near 7 Millions loss to the Kingdom; and consequently
how well might 70,000 l. have been bestowed in preventing this Centuple loss?

6. We said, that the late mortality by the Pest, is a great loss to the
Kingdom; whereas some think it but a seasonable discharge of its Pestilent
humors: to clear which difficulty, I say,

7. If the Plague discerned well, between the well and the ill-affected to
Peace and Obedience, or between the Bees and the Drones, the Fact would
determine the Question: But if it destroy promiscuously, the Loss is
proportionable to the Benefit we have by them that survive; for it is they that
make England worth above 600 millions, as aforesaid: It being certain, That if
one person only had escaped: the whole Territory, and all that is in it, had
been worth but a livelihood for that one; and he subject to be a prey to the
next two that should invade him.

8. It seems reasonable, that what we call the Wealth, Stock, or Provision of
the Nation, being the effect of the former or past labor, should not be
conceived to differ from efficiencies in being, but should be rated alike, and
contribute alike to the common necessities: And then of all and every sum to
be raised, the Land and Stock must pay 3 parts; and the People considered
without any Estate at all, 5 more; the whole into 8 divided.

9. If the expense of the Nation be 40 Millions; it seems but the same hardship
to set apart 4. viz. 1/10 of the whole for the public use, as what now lies
upon many already: But 4 Millions would afford one for the ordinary Expense,
and three for the extraordinary Wars, that is 250 000 l. per mensem; that is 3
as much as 70. For the raising whereof, many now pay above a 1/10 of their
whole Estates, for want of Method and Proportion.

10. Laboring men work 10 hours per diem, and make 20 meals per week, viz. 3 a
day for working-days, and two on Sundays; whereby it is plain, that if they
could fast on Friday nights, and Dine in one hour and an half, whereas they
take two, from eleven to one; thereby this working 1/20 more, and spending 1/20
less, the 1/10 abovementioned might be raised, at least with more ease, than to
take up Arms, and resist it.

CHAP. III. Of the several Expenses of the Kingdom, and its Revenues.
1. THE ordinary Expense of the Kingdom for the Navy, Ordnance, Garrisons,
Landforces, Tangier, Iamaica, Bombay, Ambassadors, Pensions, Intelligence,
Kings and Royal Families Expense, consisting of the Household, of the King,
Queen, Duke, etc. Privy-Purse, Wardrobe, Robes, Angel-Gold, Master of the
Horse, Mews, Armory, Tents, Parks, Lodges, Goldsmiths, Jewels, etc. has been
computed to be about one Million; Reckoning 200 000 l. for the Navy, 60 for the
Ordnance and Powder, 290 for Landforces, Garrisons, etc. and 450 000 for other
things.

2. Toward this, there is in Crown Lands 70 000, Post Office 20, Coynage and
Pre-emption of Tinn 12, Forest of Deer 4, Courts of Justice 6, First Fruits 18;
in all 1,30 000. Customs at 2 per Centum 170. in all 300 000. without the
Duties of Wares, Wine-Licence, Aulnage or Butlerage, Excise, Chimney-money,
Land Tax, Pole and Assesments, being regulated and proportionated as follows:
viz.

CHAP. IV. Of the Method of apportioning Taxes.
1. IF a Million is to be raised above the 300 000 l. last mentioned, then
375000 l. is to be levied on the Stock, and 625000 l. on the People.

Of the 375,000. on the Stock, 216 on the Lands, 54 on the Cattle, etc. 60 on
the Personal Estates, 45 on the Housing. in all 375

2. To raise 216,000 l. out of 8,000,000 M. Rent, requires 1/37 of the Rent,
and 1/27 of 1/37; but allowing the charge of Collecting, we may express it to a
1/3^ part.

3. To raise 5 1000 l. per annum, out of 36,000000 M. requires the annual
payment of a 666th part of the whole value; but in regard of Charges, let it be
reduced to a 600th part.

4. The like for the 60000 l. of Personal Estates.

5. To raise 45000 l. per annum, from all the Housing worth 30 Millions, or
7500 for the Housing in London-Liberties, worth about 5 Millions, and whose
Rent is 4,20 000 l. per annum, requires but 1/33 of the annual Rent, which
cannot be above 12 d. a Chimney per Annum, reckoning 5 to each House. Without
the Liberties, about 10 d. the Chimney will effect the same; 6 d. in the Cities
and Market Towns, and 4 d. elsewhere.

6. As for the 625,000 l. to be raised by the People, it requires but 2 s. 1 d.
per Pole per Annum, which let rather be divided into a Pole of 6 d. a Head, and
an Excise of 19 d. which is not the full 1/84 part of the mean expense, 6 l. 13
s. 4 d. so as the 11/84 of the value of Consumptions, will with the said 6 d*
Pole, raise 625,000 l. per Annum.

CHAP. V. Of Money; and how much is necessary to drive the Trade of the Nation.
1. IT may be asked, If there were occasion to raise 4 Millions per Annum,
whether the same 6 Millions (which we hope we have) would suffice for such
revolutions and circulations thereof as Trade requires? I answer yes; for the
Expense being 40 Millions, if the revolutions were in such short Circles, viz.
weekly, as happens among poor Artizans and Laborers, who receive and pay every
Saturday, then 40/52 parts of 1 Million of Money would answer those ends: But
if the Circles be quarterly, according to our Custom of paying rent, and
gathering Taxes, then 10 Millions were requisite. Wherefore supposing payments
in general to be of a mixed Circle between One week and 13. then add 10 Millions
to 40/52, the half of the which will be 5 1, so as if we have 5 Millions, we
have enough.

2. And thus I have showed, That if one half of the Subjects of England
(playing 78 days in the year) will earn 7 d. per diem all the rest of the days
one with another; And if they would work 1/20 more, and spend 1/20 less, they
might enable their King to maintain double the Forces he now does, without
suffering in the general more than many well affected persons do now through
negligence, or mistakes in their Particulars. Nor is Money wanting to answer
all the Ends of a well Policed State, notwithstanding the great decreases
thereof, which have happened within these Twenty Years.

Nor were it hard to substitute in the place of Money (were a competency of it
wanting) what should be equivalent unto it. For Money is but the Fat of the
Body-Politick, whereof too much does as often hinder its Agility, as too little
makes it sick. It Is true, that as Fat lubricates the motion of the Muscles,
feeds in want of Victuals, fills up uneven Cavities, and beautifies the Body;
so does Money in the State quicken its Action, feeds from abroad in time of
Dearth at home; evens accounts by reason of it is divisibility, and beautifies
the whole, although more especially the particular persons that have it in plenty.

CHAP. VI. The Causes of irregular Taxing.
1. THE Causes of Error in this great Affair of Public Levies, have been
these. First, Laying too great a stress on the matter of Money, which is to the
whole effect of the Kingdom but as 6 to 667. That is, not one to 100. Secondly,
Laying the whole Burden on the past Effects, and neglecting the present
Efficiencies, exceeding the former as 417 does 250. Thirdly, Reckoning all the
personal Estates of the City of London (Shipping included) at scarce the value
of the very Housing, whereas they are double: Which happens because the Housing
of London belongs to the Church, Companies, or Gentlemen, and are taxed by the
Citizens their Tenants. Fourthly, A fallacious tenderness toward the poor,
(who now pay scarce 1 s. per head per ann. toward all manner of charges)
interwoven with the cruelty of not providing them Work, and indulging Laziness
in them, because of our own indisposition to employ them; so some are
overcharged through evil Custom, and others left to sordid Want, and brutish
Irregularity. Fifthly, An Opinion, that certainty of Rules is impossible, and
but an idle Notion; and then having made such as are not so, and training them
to be applied by Affection and Humor; so as of the whole paying needlessly four
times too much, may be thereby so netled, as to do more mischief than the other
unconcerned, and thankless can allay.

CHAP. VII. The Collateral Advantages of these Taxes.
1. BEsides the equality of Taxes, we make this further use of trying it by way
of Customs, Poles, Excises, Chimney-money, Land Tax, and Assesments upon the
personal Estates, viz.

(1.) Of the Customs, which we reduce from 1/40 to 1/50, to keep an account of
Foreign* Trade, and of its Balance; for by Levying, a Duty, and increasing the
Penalty, these Accounts will be less obscured. (2.) The simple and universal
Pole keeps an account of the great Wealth and Strength of the Kingdom, the
People. (3.) Rating the Houses per Chimney, gives a good account of
Improvements and Dilapidations. (4.) Excize gives an account of Domestic
Expenses, and publishes Exorbitances. (5.) Land-taxes keep the Payments to the
proportion of entire value, not of Annual Rent: So as an Estate in Housing pays
no more than if it were in Lands, nor considerable less than Goods, and may
bring Mortgages to their just contribution; many Lenders not being so
formidable for their Money, as some have thought them. (6.) Assessments upon
personal Estates (if given in as elsewhere upon Oath) would bring that Branch
which of it self is most dark, to a sufficient clearness.
2. There is also a Pole upon Titles and Dignities worth consideration, tho we
now omit it; which as it may check men's forwardness to undeserved Pre-eminence,
so it may be employed in the encouragement of true worth.

3. We have hitherto computed the old immutable Revenue at but 130,000 l. per
annum, nor supposed above 170,000 l. (viz. less than what it is at present) to
be raised by Customs (wholly neglecting Wards, Butlerage, Aulnage, and other
obsolete Imposts.) We have also designed the several Proportions toward the
raising of a Million more per Ann. to be raised by the Pole, Excise, Land Tax,
Assessments and Chimneys.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Expense of the Navy, Army, and Garrisons.
WE come next to show, That if 3 Millions per ann. or 250,000 l. per mensem (to
make up the whole 3,300,000 l. per ann.) were raised, what might be performed
thereby for the safety, establishment, and Honor both of the King and Subject.

Unto which, I say, considering the present condition of the Navy, two Millions
will maintain 50,000 men, in Ships of War for eight Months of the Year, and
30000 for the other four Months: Which I take to be near double the best Fleet
we ever have seen in Europe, computing the Ordnance, and Harbor-Charges of the
Navy: Nor will the Maintenance of 12,000 Foot, and 3000, Horse, allowing
100,000 l. for Inland Garrisons, and 60,000 l. for Tangier, etc. put all
together, exceed 600,000 l. so as there remains 700,000 l. for other Matters,
whereof His Majesty's Royal Family, by all the Accounts I have seen, does not
spend 500,000 l. per ann. Nor need the Charge of all those Levies be above 1 of
the 33, ( viz. (...) part for the 500 Officers, without ever going five Miles
from the Center of their abode) who might perform this Work; nor would more
than 200 l. per an. for each of them, and their under Instruments be necessary
for their respective Sallaries: For there are 450 Areots of 10 Miles square in
England and Wales.

CHAP. IX. Motives to the quiet bearing of extraordinary TAXES.
HAving showed how great and glorious things may be done with no less
difficulty than what of the King's Subjects do already endure; I offer these
further Reasons to quiet men's Minds, in case this utmost 250,000 l. per mensem
should be ever demanded upon this Holland-War.

1. That of all Naval Expense, not 1/20 is ^or Foreign Commodities, nor need
it be ^f, if the people would do their part, and the Governors direct them the
nearest ways.

2. That stoppage of Trade is considerable, but as one to eight; for we
exchange not above five Millions worth per ann. for our 40.

3. That the Expense of the King, etc. being about 400,000 l. per ann. is but
1/100 part of the Expense of the Nation, who all have the Pleasure and Honor
of it.

4. That the Money of the Nation being but about 5 Millions and, and the
earning of the same 25; It is not difficult for them to increase their Money a
Million per ann. by an easy advance of their Industry, applied to such
Manufactures as will fetch Money from abroad.

5. The Wealth of England lies in Land and People, so as they make five parts
of six of the whole: But the Wealth of Holland lies more in Money, Housing,
Shipping and Wares. Now supposing England threetimes as rich as Holland in
Land, and People (as it is) and Holland twice as rich as we in other
Particulars (as it scarce is); We are still upon the Balance of the whole near
twice as rich as they: Of which I wish those that understand Holland, would
consider and calculate.

6. There are in England above four Acres of Arrable, Meadow and Pasture-Land,
for every Soul in it; and those so fertile, as that the labor of one man in
tilling them, is sufficient to get a bare Livelihood for above 10: So as it is
for want of Discipline that any Poverty appears in England, and that any are
hanged or starved upon that account.

CHAP. X. How to employ the People, and the End thereof.
WE said, That half the People by a very gentle labor, might much enrich the
Kingdom, and advance its Honor, by setting apart largely for public uses; But
the difficulty is, upon what shall they employ themselves.

To which I answer in general, Upon producing Food and Necessaries for the
whole People of the Land, by few hands; whether by laboring harder, or by the
introducing the Compendium, and Facilitations of Art, which is equivalent to
what men vainly hoped from Polygamy. For as much as he that can do the Work of
five men by one, effects the same as the begetting four adult Workmen. Nor is
such advantage worth fewer years purchase than that of Lands, or what we esteem
likest to perpetual. Now the making Necessaries cheap, by the means aforesaid,
and not by raising more of them than can be spent whilst they are good, will
necessitate others to buy them with much labor of other kinds. For if one man
could raise Corn enough for the whole, better than any one man; then that man
would have the natural Monopoly of Corn, and could exact more labor for it in
exchange, than if ten others raised ten times as much Corn as is necessary;
which would make other labor so much the dearer, as men were less under the
need of engaging upon it.

2. By this way we might recover our lost Cloth-trade, which by the same the
Dutch got from us. By this way the EastIndians furnish us from the other end of
the world with Linen cheaper than our selves can make them, with what grows at
our own Doors. By this means we might fetch Flax from France, and yet furnish
them with Linen (that is) if we make no more than we can vend, but so much
with the fewest hands, and cheapest food, which will be when Food also is
raised, by fewer hands than elsewhere.

3. I answer generally we should employ our selves by raising such Commodities,
as would yield and fetch in money from abroad: For that would supply any wants
of ours from the same, or any other place at all times. Which Stores of
Domestic Commodities could not effect, whose value is to call a Temporary ( i.
e.) which are of value but pro hic and nunc.

4. But when should we rest from this great Industry? I answer, When we have
certainly more Money than any of our Neighbor States, (though never so little)
both in Arithmetrical and Geometrical proportion ( i. e.) when we have more
years provision aforehand, and more present effects.

5. What then should we busy our selves about? I answer, in Ratiocinations
upon the Works and Will of God, to be supported not only by the indolency, but
also by the pleasure of the Body; and not only by the tranquillity, but serenity
of the mind; and this Exercise is the natural end of man in this world, and
that which best disposes him for his Spiritual happiness in that other which
is to come. The motions of the mind being the quickest of all others, afford
most variety, wherein is the very form and being of pleasure; and by how much
the more we have of this pleasure, by so much the more we are capable of it
even ad Infinitum.

FINIS.

