The PRETENDED PERSPECTIVE-GLASS; Or some REASONS OF Many more which might be
Offered, Against the pretended REGISTRING REFORMATION.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXIX

Some Reasons of many more which might be offered against the pretended
Registring Reformation.
IT cannot be denied by any who have conversed with the right Reason of Laws,
and Rules of Government, That Innovations are more than a little dangerous,
because there cannot possibly or probably be at once a certain and clear
prospect made of all the evils, contingencies, and unevitable consequences
which either will or may happen by it: And therefore have adjudged it to be
more conducing to the Weal-publick, rather to suffer some few or seldom
mischiefs not fatal, than many Inconveniences. Which will not be escaped in
such a Renverse or Plowing up of all or the greatest part of the Estates and
Credit of the Kingdom, and the product of so many sad effects as will attend
it; And may not be thought to be either a Problem or Paradox in a Nation
harrowed and torn by War and Confusions: If it shall be considered,

That at the end thereof all the Coin which wore the Harp and Cross, being a
moiety if not more than the legitimate money of King Philip, Queen Mary, Queen
Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles the Martyr amounted unto, did not with
much of it which was counterfeited, when it was called into the Mint by his now
Majesty, exceed Two Millions Sterling and an half; and that too much of that
money, and other afterward Coined, has been transported, melted down into
Plate, or fooled away by the Consumption of our Gold and Silver, to adorn those
that should not wear it; and that the people of England for above 18. years
Civil Wars, Plunderings, Sequestrations, and Free Quarter of Armies and
Soldiers, and above 20. years very great and various Taxes, are so universally
indebted, as it may rationally be believed that the most part of them live more
upon Credit, than any certain or real Estate or Subsistence of their own; that
much of the Lands of England if it should be sold, will scarcely pay the Debts
which might be charged upon the Owners thereof; and that a great part of the
City of London now so stately Rebuilt, has been brought to that perfection by
Credit and Money borrowed, which would not otherwise have been effected.

That our Nobility and Gentry, the most of which made their Loyalty to their
King, and their love to the Religion, Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, to be
their ruin and impoverishment, will now by such a Registration be turned out
of that Credit which was left to support their feeble and languishing Estates.

That our Merchants, whose Trades have brought Riches and Plenty into their
Habitations, and to be Inmates and dwell with them, are for the most part three
parts in four in Credit, and an opinion of a greater Estate than they can
justly call their own.

And the Retailers, and now more than formerly lofty Shopkeepers, who have
owed their low beginings to a small Stock, and a great deal of Credit, and gain
so well by it as to afford to give 15 per Cent. to any that will adventure a
joint Trade with them, will when they shall be exposed to the jealous eyes of
the nice, over-timerous and suspicious Usurers or Money-lenders, be turned out
of all their expectations, and made to submit to the devouring and unmercifull
Fangs of a Statute of Bankrupt, or give over their Trade and be better
acquainted with humility.

The Country Farmers when Corn or Cattle shall in their rates or prices fall
short of their hopes to pay their Landlords Rents, shall not now be able to
borrow money to pay them, if their small Stock or Estates shall not be
sufficient to endure the severity of a Telltale Registration.

All Trust and Credit, and the Faith, Charity and Love of Mankind one to
another, whereby so many Families have had their rise and foundation, and more
have gained good employments, will be so enervated and weakened, as men shall be
afraid of that which they needed not to have troubled themselves withal, and
make them to be like crafty Banyans, and hard hearted Jews each to other.

The Merchants whose care of keeping their Credits, returning Moneys, and
answeriug Bills of Exchange, makes them dread a protest of Non-payment like
some Plague or mortal sickness, and whose punctual performances makes every day
but Sundays in every year many a score if not hundreds of Bargains, for great
sums of money and concernments, without any Writing, Escript or Scrole, as the
vulgar call it, will now have such an Anatomy-Lecture read upon their growing
more than certain Estates, as all men will not easily or without much search
have any thing to do with them.

All Foreign Merchants will be by such a Registration affrighted and deterred
from trafficking with our Merchants without ready money, the want whereof has
already by the cunning of the Banks beyond the Sea, who are made to rise and
fall according to the scarcity or plenty of money, put them under great
disadvantages in the buying or selling of their Commodities.

The Dutch and other Nations whose low Interest heretofore brought into England
some Millions of Sterling money, to put to a more gainful Usury, will by such
a Registration not adventure to bring over any more.

Foreign Princes which are or may be in Hostility with us, may by such a means
or direction discover the weakness of the Nation, in their want of money
either to offend others or defend themselves.

Such a Contrivance will lay open and discover the beggary and wents of the
People, be inconsistent with the humanity and mercy of the God of mercy and
Justice, who commanded us not to afflict, bite or devour one another, nor to go
into any man's house to fetch a Pledge (whereby to disgrace him) and will as
little agree with our Magna Charta, and the Salvo Contenemento of the
Gentleman, Waynagio of the Countryman, or Mercandisa of the Merchant, or the
mercy and pity of our Laws in extending but a moiety of Lands upon a Judgment,
and sparing as long as possible the Oxen and Horses of the plow.

That the Romans when their people mutined, and refused to go to War in regard
of the oppression of Usury, did not offer them such an ill compounded remedy as
the intended Registration, to publish and lay open their poverty and thereby
add to their misery, but did order that no Creditor should take any Interest
for certain years then to come.

Nor did the Scotch after their wars mingled with their own and our factions
had greatly impoverished them, deem it to be any good for their people to have
the fury of their Registrate Bonds, and Horning, and Caption let loose upon
them, but locked up those severities and disgraces, by ordaining that no Annual
Rent or Interest, as they there call it, should for certain Years after be
demanded or taken.

That such a device as the Registration will not only undermine and overthrow a
great part of our Laws, and the excellent form and beauty of the fabric and
structure thereof, in which the Liberties and safety of the peoples Estates do
reside, and lead into Captivity their Laws and Liberties, but hinder and take
away from the King his post Fines, and profit of Alienations, Green Wax, Fines
upon Original Writs, and Seals in his Courts of Justice and Chancery, amounting
to about Forty or Fifty Thousand pounds per Annum.

Lay open and expose every man's Estate to Taxes and Assessements, when as the
Registring of all Mortgages and Alienations of Lands, can make no perfect
discovery of Encumbrances, without the Registring of Judgments, Statutes and
Recognisances, as well for the time past as to come.

Destroy or weaken the Trade of the City of London, and divert the profit of
above 15. or 16. adjacent Counties, who have exceedingly improved their Rents
and Estates by it.

That the Registrate moveable Bonds in Scotland, had their original from the
Caursini the Popes Brokers in England, and from the miscalled Camera
Apostolica, in the Reign of our King Henry the third, banished from hence by
the cries of the oppressed people; and that to take as they do Registrate Bonds
for Debts, and keep them dormant for 6. or 12. months, or a greater time after,
and afterward Register them, may so conceal Debts and Engagements, and
weaknesses of Estate, as may rather increase the hazard and damage of the
lenders of money, than prevent it.

That the Office of General Remembrancer of all Encumbrances, has several
Parliaments in the Reign of King James troubled and attended them for a
confirmation, and could never obteyn it, was refused and certified by Sr.
Edward Coke, and the Judges to whom it was referred, to be against the
Weal-publique, missed of its purpose in the Parliaments of King Charles the
Martyr, was entertained by Oliver, and his ignorant and mechanic party as a
ready means to Level and overturn our Laws, and make his Saints some seats or
business of Judicature in the several Counties, but went do further than its
Embrio, because his so called Parliament could not agree in 6 Months time,
what should be called Encumbrances, and has been rejected in a late Session of
this Parliament.

And besides its ushering in of these and many other mischiefs and
inconveniences, will be needless when every man which does but know any thing
in our Laws, or has ever bought or sold Land, or sought to recover any which
has been aliened from him, or had Intailes which his careful Ancestors
thought to have been an unalienable provision for him and his posterity,
docqued and cut off, cannot but confess that our Laws have from time to time
been exceeding careful, and made it to have been a great part of their
business to secure and protect Purchasors Bona Fide, who are already as well
(if not more) provided for in their Conveyances and Assurances, as any Nation
under Heaven; and as far also as the care or wit of man could hitherto conceive
it to be necessary, by Feoffments with livery and seisin, Fines and Recoveries,
Leases and Releases, Demise and Redemise, Warranties, Bars and Non-claims,
Prescriptions, Estoppels, Entries tolled, Judgments, Statutes and
Recognisances, with Collateral security to perform Covenants, discovery of
Encumbrances upon Oath; the Statute of the 27th. of King Henry the 8. for
transferring of uses into possession; the Act of Parliament for Inrolling of
Deeds of Bargain and Sale; an Act to preserve the Estate of Tenants for years,
in a Recovery suffered by one in Reversion; An Act of Parliament in the 2. and
3. year of King Edward the 6. for saving and allowing of Leases and other kind
of Estates, not found in any Inquisition, or Office, to entitle the King; three
or four Statutes or Acts of Parliament against Fraudulent Assurances, or such
as go about to deceive men of their Debts: and another in the 27th. year of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, ordaining a forfeiture of a years value of the Land
by such as are parties or privies in or unto such deceipts; the Statute made in
the 23th. year of her Reign for inrolling of Fines and Recoveries, to avoid
Errors in them; three or four Statutes or Acts of Parliament concerning
Bankrupts.

The Statute against forging of Deeds, the Statute made in the one and
twentieth year of the Reign of King James, for Limitations of Writs of
Formedon, unto twenty years after the Title accrewed; and another to quiet the
Titles of all men against the King, certain Cases only excepted, which had been
in sixty years quiet possession; another that the Lands and Estates of men
dying in Execution should be chargable with their Debts; and another to make it
Felony against such as should leavy Fines, suffer Recoveries, or acknowledge
Judgments, Statutes or Recognisances in other men's names, with the Rule of
expounding Grants, strictly against the Grantors; Debts to be paid before
Legacies, and Trusts to be void as against Creditors, and many other ayds and
assistances not here enumerated, which the Laws have been at all times ready to
contribute to such as shall timely or seasonably require or make use of them.

And the pretenses of making Lands to sell at greater Rates, for that as is
alleged the Titles are so fraudulent, and Lands so doubly and trebly
Mortgaged, as men are supposed to be afraid to purchase or lend any money upon
them, and that Trade is greatly hindered by it, when all the Securities which
men can take for their debts are so deficient, and that thereby many suites and
contentions have arisen which otherwise would not have been, may vanish and no
more disturb their Fancies.

When the Fines and Recoveries of 20. 30. or 40. years last past, will
Demonstrate plenty of purchases and a great deal of Land sold, or aliened in
every of those Counties.

And the Records and Decrees of Chancery, being the Pool of Bethesda, whither
all men deceived by Mortgages or fraudulent Conveyances do come for relief, can
if compared with the number of Fines and Recoveries, and Bargains and Sales
that do pass in every year, testify that there is not much above one in every
thousand that falls into such a misfortune; that in these late times the rich
and gaining party, by the sufferings and miseries of the loyal party, have not
been afraid to have Joyntures settled upon their daughters given in marriage
with great Portions, to take Rent charges and annuities for moneys lent by
Chevisance, and for more then the legal interest, or have bought indebted
Gentlemen's estates, and gained well by moneys left in their hands to clear
encumbrances, and many times according to the latitude of their consciences,
compounded them to their own no small advantage; and there is commonly as much
difference between Trade and lending of money, as betwixt a Trades man borrowing
of money, and one that is no trades man lending it.

When so many Commissions of Bankrupt issuing out every year, and the crafty
Trades men soddering up themselves again by a composition, or three or four
shillings in the pound, can tell on which side the loss and hazards do lie.

And the grand increase of Trade appearing by the Custom house books, and the
overstocking of Trade, by so great numbers applying themselves unto it, may
declare that there is no defect in our Laws which may deserve such a scandal or
needless reformation, which will bring upon the people greater mischiefs or
inconveniences then it pretends to prevent or avoid; when the loss of money,
by reason of the failings of securities, or the insufficiency of Debtors, by
the pride and luxury of the times, so greatly gone beyond that of former years
or ages, will appear to be more the cause of it then any the defects in our
Laws, and that the cry and clamor not unlikely to be designedly raised
concerning the loss of debts and increase of suits and actions at Law is more
than needs; when if it shall as it may be evidenced upon search and enquiry,
that of some thousands of writs and actions made out by our Courts of Justice
amongst such a multitude of people, and their variety of affairs, that there
are more then one half of them ended in one Term or two, and a very few of the
remainder, unless for difficulty, or by reason of the peevishness of some of
the parties, do seldom last to the years end; and that if all the Commissions
of Bankrupts taken out for seven years last past, and the number of prisoners
for debt which have layne a year undischarged in the Prisons of the Kings
Bench, and the Fleet, Marshalsea, the two Compiers in London, and all the
County and other prisons in England, were taken, it may give all unbyassed men
cause and reason enough to believe that there is no such danger or loss in
lending of money or getting it in again, or that it is the cause of many suits
or actions, when if there could be any such fear of frauds, they may without
such mischiefs and inconveniences better be secured by a short Act of
Parliament, to ordain all intails, deeds of uses and Mortgages to be enrolled
in His Majesty's high Court of Chancery; and that whosoever shall fraudulently*
Mortgage any land, or wittingly conceal any former Mortgage thereof, shall
incurr the pains and penalties ordained in case of Praemunire, or a forfeiture
of the double value to the party grieved.

That Extremities will drive and necessitate men* to seek releif and
difficulties of Justice, or obtaining it make a temptation of giving or taking
bribes, now put into a new disguise or Periwigg and called gratifications.

That the bringing down of money to 6 per Cent. has as frequent Experiences
may inform those whose Estates have been sucked into a Consumption by it, made
too many refuse to lend money without as much brocage as has amounted unto 8
or 10 per Cent. and taught them to prey and work upon men's necessities, by
denying to lend money without Rent charges or Annuities, which may bring them
12 or 14 per Cent. and has brought into a kind of trade and improvement of
money that horrid usury and brocage now practiced by taking of pawns and loan of
money at 60, 40, 30, or 25 per Cent. which like Locusts and Caterpillars
devouring every green thing, have almost covered this impoverished Nation. And
that the hardening of men's hearts by such an inspection into all men's Estates,
and creating them by that means as many advantages as they please, will when
people cannot borrow moneys as formerly upon reasonable securities cause an
increase of the Trade of Tally men, who do now gain a great deal more than
Cent. per Cent. by furnishing the Market-women and Heglers, and the Cryers in
the Streets and other necessitous people, with Clothes, Household Stuff, or
other necessaries, and lending them money at 12 d. a week for every 20 s.

That the nature of the Scots, much differing from that of the English, and the
general poverty of that Nation, causing the stricter ties in their Bonds and
Obligations, and the grand severities used in them, may be more agreeable to
the Laws and Constitution of that people, than the more rich and tender hearted
English.

That the Laws and Customs of Holland, and the United Provinces, where they
have few Gentry, little Land, many Burgers, Towns and Corporations, and where
the Husband, Wife, Children and Servants do continually busy themselves in
Trade and Merchandise, may better endure the Notarial Acts (not much used
amongst them) conveyed unto them by the Civil Law, and the Registrings which
the 200th. penny paid to their States upon the sale of Houses does in a manner
necessitate, but cannot amongst a people whose Trade and Stocks are ever busily
employed in their Herring-Busses, or are ever sending out or taking in their
personal Estates in Money or Goods, to or from all the parts of the habitable
World, admit or give them so clear a Perspective as our men of the Registring
Reformation dream of; and yet when they are best of all pleased with it, they
as well as the Spaniards and other transmarine Nations, are to confess that
they have more Appeals and Stairs of Contention to climb in many of their
Suits and Actions, than we have in England, and are not without as many Actions
and Suits proportionably to the small extent of their Dominions, and their many
little Judicatories.

That those who allege that our Laws are undervalued and slighted in the parts
beyond the Seas, and believed to be defective, may well allow us to think well
of our own, and blame such opinions of Foreigners, who censure our Laws when
they do not understand the Language they are written in; and when our learned
Fortescue, Fortescue de landibus legum Angliae.
whose Exile in France in the latter end of the Reign of our King Henry the
6th. gave him the opportunity of comparing the excellency of our Laws, very
much since adorned with an addition of many good Statutes and Acts of
Parliament, and the defects of the French, did write his Book in the praise of
ours, and the dispraise of theirs.

That the Decrets of France, and ringing out of a Bell in some parts of the
United Provinces, for a confirmation of Titles and quieting of future Claims,
do not operate so much or strongly as our Recoveries and Fines, with Bars
upon Non-claims, do with less noise and disparagement.

And that if it were fit or could be reasonable for the people of England to
experiment all those mischiefs and inconveniences which may as certainly as
sadly happen to us, as it did to the well-wishing Daughters of the aged Pelias,
who destroyed him against their will, by letting out his old blood in their
hopes of new; yet the Registring Reformers can never arrive to any other end of
their Proposals, than that of getting Offices and Employments to ruin or
perplex the people.

When as that which they would undertake will prove to be impossible and
unpracticable, unless they can foretell and ascertain the Lenders, that men who
are now indebted and behind hand, will never be before hand or rich, or that
those that are rich will never be poor, or have any misfortunes; or can assure
any Moneylender that such a Lord of a Manor will have no Estates or Lands fall
unto him; or such or any other person, Merchant, Trader, or Borrower, will have
no Legacy given him, no Executorship or Heirship happen unto him, or what
losses or gains may happen by Trade or Adventure by Sea or Land, what will be
the profit or loss of the next ensuing Harvest, how much or how little a man
that appears to be a Lender of Money in their Registry; has in trust for
Orphans or others, how much a Foreigner has of his own Bank or Money in
England, when he puts out Money to Interest for his Countrymen, what Leases of
Lands have been made upon great Fines taken and little Rent reserved, what
Leases or Estates have or will be forfeited by Treason, Rebellion, or
otherwise; what Dower those women may resort unto, whose Joyntures were made
during Marriage or Coverture; or what Elopements they are guilty of; what
Moneys are Insured by Policies of Exchange, or what Bills of Exchange have been
accepted; what disherison of Heirs apparent, Illegitimacies, intrusions and
wrongful Entries, what Actions of Battery and Scandal, and other Actions or
Suits in Law or Equity, which may lessen or prejudice any man's Estate, may
happen; what Assumpsits, Promises or Engagements have been made by word of
mouth, (which may make as many Obligations, Troubles and Ties upon men's
Estates, as Bonds or Bills can do or did before such kind of Writings were
invented:) what Embargoes, or what ruins by high-flying, gaming or gadding
Wives, prodigal Children, losses by Fire, War, Factors, or bad Servants,
Suretiship, or too much trusting, incurring of Penal Laws and Praemunires,
death of those for whose lives they held Lands or Estate, or had any dependence
upon, sickness, decay of Trade, deceits or wrongs done by others, vain and
unnecessary expenses, or follies, may happen; when as many men's Actions past or
to come in facto, or fieri esse, or posse, which are not visible before hand,
or to be found in any Registry, may prove to be no small Encumbrances to
Money-lenders, with many other dangers, contingencies and particulars, of which
the Registring Reformers will not be able to find such a certainty as a Table
of Tides will give us of the Tides or High Water at London Bridge, but leave
those that will trust to their discoveries to as great a hazard to be deceived,
as those that trust to Mr. Wing Almanac for Weather and Eclipses, sold in this
year and some years before by the Stationers as this years or a present
Calculation, when he has been dead long before; or meet with as good a
Directory as Mr. William Lillies hit or miss guessing Almanacks, made out of
wild and random conjectures, which in a Multiplying-glass of fears and
jealousies, bestowed upon the people by the proposed Registry, making a Mouse
to seem as big as an Elephant, or a Pigmee as formidable as a Goliath, will be
sure to unhinge, dislocate and disturb most of the affairs of the Nation.

And that therefore in a business of so many dangers, and concernements of so
many men's Estates, there being more need to erect Mont Pietes in every County,
now successfully practiced in many parts beyond the Seas, to relieve the people
in their debts and oppression, increased by an Unchristian-like Usury and
Brocage, then to encourage such a design of Registring; it may rationally be
hoped that the Parliament of England will do as the Nobility and Peers of
England did in a Parliament in the 20th. year of the Reign of King Henry the
third, when it was but proposed that Children born out of Wedlock might be
declared to be Legitimate by the after marriage of the parents, stoutly to
resolve, Nolumus mutare Leges Angliae.

FINIS.

