AN HISTORICAL DISCOURSE OF The FIRST INVENTION OF NAVIGATION AND The
Additional Improvements of it. WITH The probable Causes of the Variation of the
COMPASS: And the Variation of the Variation. LIKEWISE, Some Reflections upon
the Name and Office OF ADMIRAL. To which is added a Catalogue of those Persons
that have been from the first Institution Dignified with that Office. By THOMAS
PHILIPOTT, M. A. formerly of Clare-Hall in Cambridge.

London, Printed by W. Godbid, and are to be sold by W. Fisher at the
Postern-gate near Tower Hill, 1661.

To his Noblest Friend Sr FRANCIS PRUJEAN Doctor of PHYSIC.
SIR,
THe Censures and Suffrages of the world, are like Rocks and Shelves, against
which, Books like Vessels, oftentimes dashing, find their own Fate and
Shipwreck: Sir, your Acceptance will dispense a nobler, and more auspicious
Gale, then any which can be breathed from the looser or vainer Air of popular
Applause, to transport this discourse to the public; And it will be the
happiness of this Treatise, that in future Times it shall entitle its safety to
so successful a Steerage. For indeed the Tempest with Reason, is frequently
more destructive and ruinous, then the Storm without it, my own Fear and
Caution can secure or rescue me from the danger of the last; but only your
Candor and Approbation can redeem from the prejudices of the first,

SIR, Your most devoted Servant, Thomas Philipott.

The First INVENTION, AND ADDITIONAL IMPROVEMENTS OF NAVIGATION.
There having been much written concerning this Subject, which lies dispersed
in the pages of several Authors, and finding that none have as yet attempted to
compile and amass those scattered Notions into one heap, I did believe it a
task not unworthy the expense of Time, or my Labor, to contract those divided
Discourses into some few sheets: And having brought them into shape and order,
to offer them up to Public View; which is the subject matter of this ensuing
Treatise.

FIrst, it is indisputably true from the Authority of the Sacred Records, the
structure of the Arc owed, and entitled its original contexture to the
industrious precaution of Noah, who by the immediate designation of God
himself, brought that wooden Island into shape and order, to rescue some part
of Mankind, from the angry Baptism of a public Deluge.

And it is probable, that the posterity of Noah, having plantations which were
contiguous to Mount Ararat, where the Arc rested; and there viewing its
skeleton, might according to that original, form and build such Ships and
others Vessels, (the Art of Navigation being not yet arrived to its Solstice)
as might make Rivers and more spacious waters obvious to a passage, and
maintain such a necessary intercourse, as might improve a commerce between
Nation and Nation.

The Heathen Records, and Monuments of Pagan Antiquity, which were ignorant of
the structure of the Arc, according to the variety of Tradition, assign the
Invention of Navigation to several persons. Diodorus Siculus attributes it to
Neptune, who from thence contracted the Appellation of God of the Sea. Strabo,
to Minos King of Crete. And lastly, Tibullus consecrates it to the Fame and
Memory of the City of Tire.

Thucid. p. 4, 5, 6.
Minos indeed expelled Malefactors out of the Islands, and in most of them
planted Colonies of his own, by which means, they who inhabited the Seacoasts,
becoming more addicted to riches, grew more constant to their dwellings; of
whom, some grown now rich, circumscribed and encompassed their Cities with
Walls, and others by the influence of Minos built a Navy, and by an active and
noble diligence so secured commerce, that they rendered Navigation free.

But it is most probable, that Tire being in elder times, a City as eminent for
its Wealth and Traffic, as it was for its strength, and magnificence, and
enjoying with its bordering neighbors the Phaenicians, a large extensive Sea
coast, and many capacious Havens, which had an aspect on the Mediterranean-sea,
found out at first the institution of Shipping. From the Phaenicians and
Tyrians, it was conducted down to the Egyptians, by whose industry and
ingenuity much was annexed to the advantage and perfection of it: For whereas
the first Vessels were framed out of the trunk of some large Tree, made hollow
by Art, or else of diverse Boards, compacted into the fashion of a Boat, and
covered with the skins of Beasts, the Phaenicians molded them into a more
elegant and convenient form, and secured them with greater additions of
strength, whilst the Egyptians added to the former structure the supplement of
Decks. From the Egyptians this Art was transported to the Graecians; for when
Danaus King of Egypt, to decline the fury of his Brother Rameses, made his
approaches to Greece, he first instructed its Inhabitants to sail in covered
Vessels, called Naves, who before perfected their Voyages over those narrow
Seas, on Beams and Rafters fast'ned together, to whom they gave the Appellation
of Rates. Amongst the Graecians, those of Crete had the highest repute for the
manage of Navigation, which causes Strabo to ascribe the Invention of Ships to
Minos. In times subsequent to these, the Carthaginians extracted from Tire,
grew most considerable in Shiping, by the supply of which, they often
disordered and distressed the affairs of the Romans: But the fury of a Tempest
having separated a Quinqueremis, or Gally of five Banks of Oars, from the
residue of the Carthaginian Navy, cast it on the Coast of Italy; by a curious
inspection into which, the Romans obtained the Art of Shiping, and not long
after, achieved the Dominion of the Sea. That the Phaenicians and Greeks,
transmitted the knowledge of Navigation to Spain and France, is without
controversy, since Gades in the first was a Colony of the Phaenicians, and
Marsilles in the last a plantation of the Phoceans. As for Belgium and Britain,
they were in Ages of an elder inscription very barren and indigent in Shiping;
for Caesar, when he made his eruption on the last, found the Circumambient Seas
so ill furnished, that he was forced with the industrious assistance of his
soldiery to build and equip a Navy of six hundred and two and thirty Vessels to
transport his Army into Albion.

The Phaenicians having, as is above recited, invented open Vessels, and the
Egyptians Ships with Decks, the last of these enforced the Art of Navigation,
by adding to it the invention of Galleys, with two Banks of Oars upon a side;
which sort of Vessels in procedure of time, did swell into that voluminous
bulk, that Ptolomy Philopater is said to have framed a Gally of 50. Banks.
Ships of burden styled Ciraera, entitle their invention to the Cypriots Cock
boats or Skiffs, (Scaphae) owe their first structure to the Illirians or
Liburnians, Brigantines (Celoces) confess theirs to have been the artifice of
the Rhodians; Frigots or light Barks (Lembi) acknowledge their original unto
the industry of the Cyrenians; the Phaselus and Pamphyli, ships instructed for
war, were the invention of the Pamphilians, and the inhabitants of Phaselis a
Town of Lycia in Asia minor. Vessels for transporting of Horse styled
Hippagines, are indebted for their first institution to the Salaminians.
Grapling-hooks, for theirs to Anacharsis. Anchors, confess their first
knowledge to have been from the Tuscans. The Rudder-helme, and Art of Steering,
is ascribed to Typhis, principal Pilot in Jason's eminent Ship, called the
Argoe, who having observed that a Kite when she divided the Air, steered her
whole body and flight with her tail, perfected that in the designs of Art,
which he had discovered to have been effected by instinct in the works of
Nature. If we please to trace out the first Inventors of Tackle, we shall
discover that the primitive institution of the Oar is attributed to the
Boeotians, and the original discovery and use of Masts and Sails ennoble the
memory of Daedalus, and his Son Icarus; the last of which confiding too much in
the dexterity of this invention, giving too large and spreading a Sail to the
Bark he was engaged in, over-set the Vessel, and perished, and adopted the Sea,
in which he miscarried, into his own Name.

But though the supplement and addition of Decks of Ships, intitles it self to
the original Artifice of the Egyptians, as is before recited; yet had they
other of a more narrow dimension, both for use and transportation; for the
Egyptians anciently, (says Pliny, Lib. 13. Not. Hist.) used to make Boats of
Reeds and Bulrushes; which assertion he again justifies in another place, Pap'r
aceis navibus (says he) armam^ntisque Nili navigamus; and to these Vessels
Lucan alludes, Lib. 4. Phars. -- Sic cum tenet omnia Niliu,
Conseritur bibula memphitica Cymba Papyro.
Which fashion of Boat Moses was engaged in, when Pharaoh's Daughter rescued
him from the danger of the river. The Prophet Esaias records such utensils in
that periphrasis of Egypt, Woe to the land shadowing with wings, that sends
Ambassadors by Sea in Bulrushes. Strabo sailed to Egypt in a small Vessel made
of Wicker, as his own relation discovers to us in the 17. of his Geography.
Juvenal also makes mention of earthen Boats in Egypt used and employed also
there to sail with, for recording the deadly feud and superstitious conflicts,
commenced between Ombos and Tentyra, in relation to their gods, he speaks thus,
Stat. 15. Hac saevit Rabie imbelle, and inutile vulgus
Parvula fictilibus solitum dare vela phaselis,
Et brevibus pictae remis incumbere testae.
The Britains had anciently their Naves vitiles in Pliny's style, the Natives
of Ireland call them Corraghs, and some Corracles, they were little Vessels
covered with Leather, in their dimension scarce exceeding the bulk of a Basket;
and these kind of Boats or Baskets were used by Julius Caesar to transport his
Army over the river Sicoris against Petreius, and other rivers elsewhere; and
he had learned the making of them it seems from the Britains, when he was in
this Island, as himself attests in his first Book De Bello Civili. Cujus
generis (says he) cum superioribus usus Britanniae docuerat: and in a
subsequent discourse he discribes them thus; Carinae primem ac statumina ex
levi materia fiebantur, reliquum corpus Navium, viminibus contextum
integebatur. They have the like Vessels on the river Euphrates, to transport
Commodities to Babylon, and their proportion so conformable to these British
ones, (according to the pattern discovered to us by Herodotus) that a man would
judge, that either the Britains extracted the description of these Vessels from
the Babylonians, or the Babylonians from them. For Herodotus in Clio, that is,
the first Book of his History, affirms, that they had Boats made of Osier or
Willows, of an orbicular form, and in the fashion of a Buckler, without Prow or
Poop, and covered over on the outside with the Hide of a Bullock tanned. In
these, besides their Native Commodities, they used to convey Palm-wines in
Tons, to be sold or vended at Babylon, two men with an Oar a piece in their
Hands conducting and managing the Vessel.

These Vessels were so portable, that the Owners were accustomed to transport
them on their Backs to and from the Water; the Master would carry his Boat by
Land, and the Boat would waft the Master on the Water: As the Arabian Fisherman
uses to do with his Tortoiseshell, which is his Shallop by Sea, and his House
on the Land, under which he sleeps, and in which he sails.

Proportionate in their Dimension to these, are those which the Egyptians use
at this day upon the Nile, which they take upon their Backs, when they approach
the Cataracts and steeper falls of that river.

Boterius calls them Naves plicatiles, and which they employ in some places of
the West Indies. For in the year 1509. we read that there were brought to Roan
Seven Indians confined to one small Vessel or Boat, which was so portable that
one man could raise it up with his Hand; as the same Boterus in his Relations
seems to intimate.

In some places of the West Indies they Fish with Fagots composed of Bulrushes,
in their Dialect styled Balsas, having sustained them upon their Shoulders to
the Sea, they there cast them in, then leap upon them, and after Row into the
Main with small Reeds on either side, themselves standing upright like Tritons
or Neptunes; and on these Balsa's they are accustomed to carry those Cords and
Nets they employ in Fishing. The Indians likewise have long Boats called
Canoa's, made hollow, and artificially framed out of one Tree. In Greenland the
Fisher men's Boats are composed into the Shape of Weavers Shuttles, covered
outwardly with Skins of Seals, and inwardly fashioned and fortified with the
Bones of the same Fishes; which being sewed together with many doubles and
Sutures, are so secure, that in foul and stormy Weather, they will shut
themselves up in the same, being rescued by the Aid of these, from the Fury and
imminent prejudices of Rocks, Winds, and Tempests; These are about Twenty Foot
in length, and two Foot and an half in their Breadth, and so swift that no Ship
is able to outvie them in speed; and so light of Portage, that one Man may
support many; and they are furnished but with one Oar.

Before I wind up this Discourse I shall winnowe and discuss that Question,
whether or not Antiquity had any discovery or Notice of the Compass which in
this Latter Age has contributed so much to the Improvement of Navigation,
those who do assert that it had some imperfect Glimmering, or rather some
gloomy Cognizance of it, do establish their opinion on the Authority of
Plautus, where they find mention of the Versoria; and secondly, because the
Loadstone, which sways and manages the compass, was anciently by the Greeks
styled, Magnes, and Lapis Heraclius, both which Names remain instated upon it
until this day. But to the first it is answered, that the Versoria of Plautus,
is no other, then that piece of Tackle, which in the Modern Dialect of our
Mariners, falls under the appellation of a Bolin, by which they used to turn
their Sails, and porportion them to the changable vicissitude of every wind.
And so much is manifest from Plantus himself, in the Comedy which he styles
Mercator, saying, Hinc ventus nunc s^cundus est, cape modo versoriam. So called
from verso to turn often, or else it may borrow its extraction and Nativity
from versum, the first supine of verto; whence velum vertere, is a customary
term amongst the Latins, used to express the shifting of the Sail as the wind
does vary. As for the Loadstone, it was indeed by the Greeks called Lapis
Heraclius, not because Hercules Tyrius, to whom the seafaring Phaenicians in
Storms and Tempests offered up their Orizons for protection, first traced out
the virtue and energetical efflu^iums of it, as some contend, but because it
was discovered near Heraclea a City of Lydia, called for the same reason, and
upon the same account Lapis Lydius also, and by the Ancients known only under
the notion of a Touchstone: Nor does the Name of Magnes, used under that
Appellation promiscuously both by the Greeks and Latins, owe its Original
Etymology to any other Root or Cradle, then that it was found near Magnesia a
City of Lydia, of which Heraclea above mentioned, was likewise a part from
whence it has ever since purchased the constant Denomination of Lapis Magnes;
so Suidas asserts for the Greeks, and old Lucretius affirms the same for the
Latins. Having evinced from these demonstrations the ignorance of Antiquity,
both in the notional knowledge and practical application of the Compass; It now
remains my Task to unwind to whom in times of a more recent inscription, this
excellent Instrument entitled its first discovery. And if we will traverse and
peruse records of a Modern aspect, we shall find that the invention of the
Pixis Nautica or Compass, is generally ascribed to John Goia, or Flavio Goia,
as others style him, of Amalphi in Campania in the Kingdom of Naples; But all
rare and curious Artifices are in their first productions like the designs of
Chemistry, much in projection, but little in perfection; for his discovery
reached but to eight Winds only, which made up his Compass, that is, the four
principal, and four collateral, and left the improvement of this invention to
be attempted by posterity, which indeed did add shape and just perfection to
this ingenuous design: For in some few Ages subsequent to this, the people of
Antwerpe and Bruges completed this invention, by annexing to the Compass 24.
other subordinate Winds or Points. Before this invention, Pilots were directed
in their right Voiages, by certain Stars they took notice of, especially the
Pleiades or Charles his Wain and the two Stars in the Tail of the Bear, called
Helice and Cynosura, which are therefore called Load-stars, or Leading Stars;
as Travailers in the Deserts of Arabia, and those of Tartary were always guided
by some fixed Stars in the Night Time, to Steer their courses in those
pathless, disordered, and inhospitable ways; so Seamen were directed by the
like heavenly guides, in the untractable wilderness of waters, before this
excellent Artifice was found out: But if the Sky happened to be sullied with
Mists, and the Stars to be muffel'd with Clouds, then the most experienced
Pilot was at a loss, and was obliged by dropping an Anchor, presently to take
up his rest.

But the ingenious Amalphitan, has secured posterity by a noble remedy,
against this grand inconvenience, and discovered a method, by which men might
Steer a certain and infallible course, in the most gloomy Nights, and most
tumultuous Seas, and this by the guide and conduct of a little stone, styled
from its use and influence, the Lodestone. This Lodestone, is now our
Load-star, and the Mariners directory.

This Stone treasures up two strange properties in its dusky entrails, the one
of Attraction, the other of Direction; this property of Direction (which
chiefly has an aspect on our present business) is, that being set in a Dish,
and left to float freely upon the Water, it will with one end point directly to
the North, and with the other to the South, and will dispense this faculty or
property, to a Needle that is rubbed or touched with it.

The Pixis Nautica, or Mariners Card, which carries a Needle touched with the
Lodestone in the middle of it, with two and thirty Rumbs or Lines drawn round
about it, according to the Number of the Cardinal and Collateral Winds, is no
less useful by Land, then it is by Sea, so that they who are engaged to travail
through Deserts, as the Caravans do to Mecha and Medina, and other places do
now make good use of this Artifice, whereas in former Ages, a Star was their
best Pilot by Night.

Lud. Bartema relates, that they who travail over the Syrian and Arabian
Deserts, which are faced and covered with a filme of light and shifting sand,
so that no track can ever be discovered, do frame certain Boxes of wood, which
they place on Camels backs, and shutting themselves up in the said Boxes, to
rescue themselves from the Sand, by the help of the Lodestone, like the
Mariners Compass, they Steer their course over the vast, uncouth, and
untractable Deserts. Some do entitle the Invention of the Compass, to the
people of China. Doctor Gilbert in his Book de Magnete, asserts that Paulus
Venetus transported it first into Italy, in the year 1260. having learned it
from the Chinese, and Lud. Vertomannus affirms, that when he was in the
East Indies, about the years 1500. (above an Hundred and Sixty years since) he
saw the Pilot of his Ship direct his course by a Compass, fashioned and framed
according to the Figure and proportion of those we use at this instant, when he
was sailing toward Java. If you will consult Pliny, he will tell you, that the
Inhabitants of Taprobana, (now called Sumatra) because they could not behold
the Polestar to sail by, carried with them certain Birds to Sea, which they did
often let fly; and as these Birds by natural instinct applied their flight
always to the Land, so the Mariners directed their course after them. The
Mariners Compass is not arrived yet to that perfection, but that it requires
some improvement and amendment; for the Magnetique Needle does not exactly
point to the North in all Meridians, but varies and distorts it self (in some
places more, in some less) from the direct posture, configuration, and aspect
of the North and South, which multiplies and inforces the Sea-mans
distractions, and enwraps him oftentimes in difficult and dangerous errors. Van
Helmont, an eminent Paracelsian of Flanders, professes an expedite way to
regulate this grand inconvenience, namely, how to make a Needle that should
never vary or alter from the right point, which may be performed by a vigorous
imagination, as he affirms thus; If a man in framing the Needle, shall stand
with his Back placed to the North, and place one point of the Needle (which he
intends for the North) directly toward himself, the Needle so made, shall
always point regularly and infallibly toward the North without variation. I
wish that some person of an exalted imagination, would compose some Needles for
experiment after Helmont's direction, since it is an affair of noble and active
concernment, to the public interest of every Nation, to have this invention
of the Compass, either improved or rectified.

But this Artifice of Helmont is infirm and crazy in the whole frame and
contexture of it, if the variation of the Needle, from its Meridional Polarity,
proceed from the attractive vigor and magnetical alliciency of the Earth,
which by irrefragable demonstrations may be evinced to be one continued Magnet.
Now a magnetical body is styled, not only that which has a power attractive,
but that which being situated in a convenient medium, by an intrinsique natural
propension, disposes it self to one invariable and fixed residence, so that if
it were violently removed, yet would it not abandon its primitive points, nor
fix in the East and West, but return unto its polary situation again. And such
a magnetical virtue is diffused through the whole Body of the Earth, whereby as
unto its natural Points, and proper Terms, it still makes its addresses unto
the Poles, being so constituted in its whole frame, order and aspect, unto
these Points, that those parts which are now at the Poles, would not naturally
reside under the Equator, nor Nova Zemla continue in the place of Java or
Borne^. Nor is the attractive vigor of this great Body the Earth, cloistered
up within its own inward cells and recesses, or circumscribed within the
circumference of its own surface, but shed at indeterminate distances, through
the Air, Water, and all other circumjacent Bodies; exciting and transplanting
its magnetical virtue into all bodies, either within its surface, or without
it; and effecting that in an abstruse and indiscernable way, what we visibly
behold performed by the Loadstone. For these effluviums penetrate all Bodies,
and being ever ready in the medium, attaque all objects proportionate, or
capable of their vigorous and active excitation: And this is manifest from
steel wires thrust thorough little Spheres, or Globes of Cork floating on the
Water, or in naked Needles gently dropped thereon; for so disposed they will not
rest, until they have traced out the Meridian, and as near as possibly they
may, lie parallel to the Axis of the Earth. Now this Direction does not
originally result from themselves, but is derivative and contracted from the
magnetical efflux of the Earth. And these demonstrations may be improved by the
observation of some subsequent experiments; as first, from a Needled Sphere of
Cork, equally contiguous unto the surface of the Water; for if the Needle be
not seated in an exact equilibration, that end which is too light, if touched,
becomes even; that Needle also, which will but just swim under Water, if
forcibly touched, will sink deeper, and sometimes unto the bottom, which
proceeds from an union of those magnetical effluxions which estreat from the
Earth, with those magnetique Atoms which flow from the Body of the Loadstone,
and make an impression on the Needle.

Now those, first being of a congenerous nature with the last, but more
numerous and powerful, by this their mutual entwining and complication, drag
away the Needle as their Captive, and sink it into the above recited position.

Secondly, from a Wire or Needle which being denuded and divested of that
meridionall projection the magnetique impression of the Loadstone had formerly
enstated and imprinted upon it, by its great adversary the Fire, by being
sometime entered in the Earth, becomes new impregnated with the virtue of that
great and vigorous Magnet, and again contracts such a polarity, or meridional
situation, as though it had never suffered under the persecution of its flaming
enemy. Now whether these above mentioned effluviums of the Earth, do fly by
estreated Atoms, or winding particles, as some assert, or glide by streams
attracted from either Pole or Hemisphere of the Earth, unto the Equator, as
others affirm; it signifies nothing to the Diminution of the Magnetique virtue
of the Earth, but rather more distinctly sets down the gests and progressive
motion of its attractive alliciency, and excitation.

Thirdly, if a Loadstone be made red hot, it loses the Magnetical Vigor it
had before in it self, and acquires another from the Earth in its
Refrigeration; for that part which cools toward the Earth, will obtain the
Respect of the North, and attract the Southern point or Cuspis of the Needle:
And the reason hereof is, that though the attractive virtue of the Loadstone,
be in this fiery Agony much empair'd, exhausted and diminished, yet is it not
totally extinguished, so that when its sickly and impoverished vigor is
re-inforc'd and recruited, by a supply or accession of Effluviums from the
Earth, by an union or combination with this newstock of Magnetical Atoms, it
does not only revive, but is improved to its former Attraction and Verticity.

Fourthly, it is observed, that both Bricks and Irons, contract a verticity, by
long and continued position; that is, not only being placed from North and
South, and lying in the Meridian, but respecting the Zenith and Perpendicular,
unto the Center of the Earth; as is evident in Bars of Windows, Casements,
Hinges, and the like. The same condition also do Bricks contract, by being long
time placed in one continued situation in a Wall; for if the Needle be
presented unto their lower extremes, it wheeleth about, and turns its Southern
point unto them. And the Reason of this is, that that Film or Scurse, in which
they lay originally wrapped up, and which did obstruct the Magnetical
Impressions of the Earth, being worn off by Decursion of Time, and the
perpetual Assaults of the Elements, the Magnetical Atoms of the Earth do with
more vigor invade them, and by frequent onsets having implanted their virtue
in them, engage them to that verticity.

Fifthly, Iron in a particular sympathy moves to the Loadstone, but yet, if it
exceed a certain quantity, it abandons and quits those affections and
interests; and like an affectionate Citizen, or faithful Patriot, moves to the
Earth, which is the Region and Country of its Connaturals.

From what has thus been remarkably discovered, it is easy to unfold, from a
foundation not only of probability, but almost of necessity, whence proceeds
the cause of the variation of the Compass, that is, an Arch of the Horizon,
intercepted between the true and Magnetical Meridian. The true Meridian is a
greater Circle, passing through the Poles of the World, and the Zenith or
Vertex of any place, exactly dividing the East from the West. Now on this Line,
the Needle exactly lies not, but diverts and varies its point, that is, the
North point on this side the Equator, the South on the other, sometimes unto
the East, sometimes unto the West, and in some places varies not at all. Now
the cause of this variation, may be the inequality of the Earth, variously
disposed, and differently mixed with the Sea; with all the different emission
of its strength and Magnetical vigor, from the more eminent and Gibbous or
Knobby parts thereof; for the Needle naturally endeavors to conform unto the
Meridian, but being distracted, is driven and distorted that way, where the
greater and more powerful parts of the Earth are situated.

Now whereas on this side the Meridian, or the Isles of Azores, where the first
Meridian is placed, the Needle varies Eastward, it may be occasioned by that
vast Track of Earth, that is, of Europe, Asia, and Africa, seated toward the
East, and disposing the Needle that way; on the other side, some parts of the
Azores, or Islands of Saint Michael, which have a middle situation between
these Continents, and that vast Tract of America, almost proportionate and
answerable to these in its spacious Bulk and Dimension, it seems equally
distracted by both, and diverting unto neither, does parallel and place it self
upon the true Meridian. But sailing farther, it veers its Lilly toward the
West, and regards that Quarter wherein the Land is nearer or greater; and in
the same Latitude, as it approaches its Shore, augments its variation. Now
because where the greater Continents are United and Combined, the action and
efflux of Magneticall Atoms is also greater, therefore those Needles do suffer
the greatest variation, which are in Countries which do most feel that
Magnetique Impression. And therefore has Rome far less variation then London.
For on the West Side of Rome, are seated the great Continents of France, Spain,
and Germany, which seem to retrench the exuberant effluvium's, and poise the
vigor of the Eastern parts. But unto England there is almost no Earth West,
for the whole extent of Asia and Europe lies Eastward, and therefore at London
it varies eleven Degrees, that is, almost one Rhomb. Thus also by reason of the
great Continent of Brasile, Peru, and Chili, the Needle declines toward the
Land twelve Degrees: But at the Straights of Magellan, where the Land is
contracted into a narrow Volume, and the Sea on the other side of a vast
diffusion and extent, it varies but five or six. And so likewise because the
Cape de las Agullas has Sea on both sides near it, and other Land remote, and
as it were of an equal distance from it, therefore at that point the Needle
conforms unto the true Meridian, being not distracted with the attraction
resulting from the Vicinity of an adjacent Continent. To this may be added,
that this variation proceeds not only from some eminent terrestrial knobs or
excrescencies, which appear like so many wens upon the Face of the World; as
also many Magnetical Veins of the Earth, collaterally respecting the Needle,
but the different Accumulation of the Earth, disposed unto the Poles, lying
under the Sea and Waters; which affect the Needle with greater or lesser
variation, according to the vigor or impotency of these subterraneous Lines,
or the entire or broken Body of the Magnetical Fabric under it. As it is
observable, from several Loadstones, placed at the bottom of any Water; for a
Loadstone or Needle, upon the surface, will variously conform it self,
according to the vigor or imbecility of the Loadstones under it.

Lastly, from what has been premised, a Reason may be alleged for the
Variation of the Variation, and why according to observation, the variation of
the Needle has after some years been found to vary, either more, where it was
discovered to vary but little before, or but little, where formerly it had a
greater deflection or variation. For this may proceed from the Mutation of the
Earth, as it is dislocated or supplanted by Earthquakes, wasted and empair'd by
sulphurous, or other subterraneous fires; or else, as its Magnetique virtue is
arrested in its emanation, by being astonished and stupefied by Mineral
Spirits, or those Fumes and Exhalations that have any Mercurial or Arsenical
Atoms implanted in them; all which by a reiterated impression may so alter the
constitution of the Magnetical parts of the Earth, either by Substraction or
Addition, that in decursion of time, they may vary the Variation over the place.

Having thus discovered those, to whom not only Ships, but likewise the Art of
managing them did entitle its original invention, I shall add something by way
of supplement, touching the derivation of the Name of that eminent Officer, to
whom both in elderand more modern Times, the care of public Navies has been
committed, vulgarly styled the Admiral; and if we shall disjoynt or dissect the
Name, we shall find it confess it self to be both of Arabian and Greek.
Extraction, for Emir or Amir in Arabian imports as much as Lord, and (...) in
Greek is of the Sea; so that both these words being cimented together into the
Appellation of Admiral, signify a Lord of the Sea. Now the word Emir or Amir,
for they are co-incident, was a denomination anciently used by the Arabian
Caliphs, as a term of dignity and eminence, so many of them had the additional
appellation of Amir Elmumunin, and Emir Omimelin; the first may be rendered Rex
Orthodoxorum, or the King of Persons Orthodox; and the last may be translated
Rex Credentium, Prince or King of Believers; and at this day, he that in
Turkey, by the Command and Designation of the Grand Signior, delivers the
Banners to the Sanzacks and Beglerbegs, by which they receive their
Investiture, is styled Emir Halem, Lord of the Banner; or if you will receive
it in a more pompous Epithet, the Turks chief Standard Bearer; and this
accords with what Leunclavius delivers in his Turkish Pandects. Emir Halem
(says he) significat Dominum Vexillorum and Flammeolorum, qui scilicet supremus
est sultani Vexillifer, ac omnibus Beglerbegis ac Sauzacbegis, quum creantur
vexilla sua porrigit. And hence we read in the History of the Holy War, that
Robert Duke of Normandy slew an eminent Saracenical Amir, whose Standard had in
summitate Argenteae Hastae Pomum Aureum, which he offered at the Sepulcher of
our Savior, having purchased it at 20. Marks, of one who had taken it by Right
of War. Now this word Amir or Emir, is deduced from the Arabic, Verb Amara,
which rendered into Latin, is Dixit or Edixit, or else extracted from the
Hebrew Verb, Amar, which melted into Latin, signifies praecepit seu
imperavit, and it is possible the Spanish word Almirante, is contracted from El
Amirante; and that again, by Moorish and Arabic Channels from Alamir, which
imports as much as the Chief Captain. Now although vulgar use and custom, by
apposition of this word (...), have restrained this great Officer only to the
Command of the Sea, yet in Times of an elder aspect, it was of a more confused,
or promiscuous signification; and was not alone confined to Maritime Authority,
but was likewise attributed to those eminent Saracenical Soldiers and
Governors, who were engaged in a Command by Land, which was proportionate, and
answerab^e in its Latitude and Extent, to that which was exercised by the
ancient Tribunes of the Roman Militia; and this I can easily collect from the
Authority and Testimony of very ancient Authors. And first, Sigebert the Monk,
in his Chronicle relates, that Mahomet or Muhammad, so he calls him, about the
year 630. constituted four Governors in the Saracenical Kingdom, which were
called Admirals. And Theophanes, in his Chronicle cited by Meursius, tells us,
that Muhamed being about to die, designed four Admirals, who were to subdue
those who being of Arabic extraction, did yet assert the Christian Religion.
And a nameless Author, quoted by Bedwell, seconds this Relation, by informing
us, that a certain Caliph constituted four Tribunes of his Soldiery, vulgarly
called Admirals, ( Admirantes they are called in his style, though in the
phrase of Theophanes above cited, they are styled Amiraei) to every one of
which, he gave the Command of many subordinate Officers and Captains, and which
Commanders he called the sharp Swords of God. And Junius out of the Notes of
Cedrenus upon Curopalates, discovers to us, that Mahomet upon his Decease,
appointed four Admirals, whom he enjoined to crush and extirpate, all those
Arabians who had embraced the Christian Religion. And farther relates, that
they to perfect his Commands, advanced against Theodorus, Chamberlain and
General to the Greek Emperor, between whom and themselves, a fatal Field was
commenced; in which, three of these Admirals, and a numerous heap of other
Soldiers perished.

The Tirant of Babylon, in the style of Henry of Huntington, is named the
Admiral of Babylon; and the same Author in his Chronicle, asserts twelve
Admirals of the Pagans, to have been slain at the Siege of Antioch. And Rupert
the Monck, in the fourth Book of his Saracenical History, affirms, that the Son
of Cassian, the Great King of Antioch, and twelve Admirals, which the Caliph of
Babylon (King he calls him) had employed with succors to the King above
mentioned, all perished at the Seige of Antioch; and these twelve which had the
Appellation of Admirals annexed to them, he makes to be Rulers of twelve
distinct Territories or Provinces: And the same Author, in the beginning of his
fifth Book, relates, that the Ambassadors of the Caliph of Babylon, in their
Addresses to the French Chieftains, style that Monarch, the Admiral of Babylon.
Dominus noster Admiraldus Babyloniae, mandat vobis Francorum Principibus
salutem; so in his phrase runs their Application. Monstrelet, an Anthour of
good estimate, mentions Arcubalistarum Admirallum, an Admiral of the
Arcubalists, or of those persons who were armed with Crosse-bows; and lastly,
Matthew Paris, in his life of William Rufus, tell us, of one Corbaran, who
after he had Marshalled his Army, and brought his squadrons into Form and
Order, put those Troops under the Command of 29. Kings and Admirals.

But as this eminent Maritime Officer in these latter Times, has by
prescription constantly assumed the Name of Admiral; so in the Times of an
elder Inscription, he was not always styled Admirallus, but very frequently
Magnus Drungarius Classis, or the great Drungar of the Navy, an Office of
eminency and high estimate under the Greek Emperors; yet this Title was not so
confined to the Sea, but that it was attributed likewise to those noble
persons, who managed the Command of the Land Militia; and therefore the learned
Meursius notes, that there was Magnus Drungarius Biglae, that is, Vigiliae seu
Excubiarum Praefectus, the chief Commander or Prefect, to whose inspection,
the care of the Watch was solely entrusted; the Ensign or Monument of whose
Authority, as the same Meursius intimates, was a Scepter, or Truncheon of a
Purple Color, richly gilded and adorned at the bottom. Now the Etymology of
this word Drungarius, as Leunclevius asserts, is derived from the Modern Greek
(...), and signifies the same with them, as Agla does with the Turks, and may
be interpreted to be that Scepter or Truncheon, which is the symbol of their
Office and Authority; hence the Drungarii amongst the Greeks, and the Aglarii
amongst the Turks, are equivolent to our Colonels in Christendom. But the more
proper and genuine Etymology of the word, as it is used by Vop'scus and
Vegetius, is extracted from Drungus or Druncus, which in their sense imports as
much as Globus Militum, and may without distorting the Phrase, be interpre^ed a
Squadron of Soldiers. Vegetius in his discourse de Re Militari, Lib. 3. Cap.
16. observes, that scire Dux debet contrae quos Drungos, hoc est Globos Hostium
quos equites oporteat poni; and Vopiscus, in the year 280. relating the
Victories of Probus the Emperor, over the Blemii and the Germans, tells us,
that he to enhanse the Pomp and Magnificence of his Conquests, Omnium Gentium
Drungos duxit, he carried Squadrons or Heaps, of all those Nations he had
subdued before his triumphant Chariot.

I should now wind up this Discourse, but finding so many eminent persons of
the English Nation, to have been invested and dignified with the Title of
Admiral, I thought it a labor not unworthy consideration, to represent to the
public view a just Scale or Series of those worthy Heroes, who have been in
their several Generations, by the Favor of the Prince advanced to this Office,
whose Catalogue is exactly Registered in the learned and elaborate Pages of Sir
Henry Spelman's Glossary.

Marthusius the Arch-pirate in old Latin Records, styled Archi-Pirata, and
Nautarum Princeps, was Admiral under King Edgar, and had several subordinate
Commanders under his jurisdiction, ( Praefecti they are called in the Record)
who had the Command under this Marthusius of almost a Thousand Ships; a Report,
if we consider the Bulk and Dimension of those Maritime Vessels which were
employed in those Times not altogether improbable, where Note, that although in
these Modern Ages, the Name of Pirate is still applied to one who supports
himself by Pillage and Depredation at Sea, yet in Times of an elder
inscription, the word Pirata or Pirate, was sometimes attributed to those
persons to whose care the Mole or Peer of any Haven (called in Latin Pyra) was
entrusted, and by whose Inspection it was provided, that those places should
receive no prejudice, which were the occasion of so much advantage to the
public interest.

After the mention of Mathusius, there is a Gap or Interval in the Register of
the Admirals, and none recorded until the 8th. year of Henry the 3d. and then
Richard de Lucy of Newington Lucies in Kent begins the Catalogue, from whom
Ric. Lucy of Charlecot in Warwickshire, Esquire is in a Collateral or younger Line
originally descended. After whom, the ensuing Roll of Admirals is without any
intermission or interruption, in an even clew or series conducted down to our
Times.

Tho. de Moleton had the custody of the norrow Seas ( Custos Maris the Record
styles him) in the 48 th. year of Henry the 3 d.

Will. de Leybourne of Leybourne Castle, was in a convention held at Bruges, in
the 15 th. year of Edward the first styled Admiral. After his Exit, the Office
of Admiral being held of too vast concernment to be managed and weilded by one
person, there were three Admirals created, in the 22 th. of Edw. the 2 d. One
had the care of the parts toward the North, which was committed to John de
Botetort; A second, had the charge of the Seacoast Southward, which was
entrusted to William de Leybourne; And a third, had the custody of the Western
shore, which was delegated to the inspection of an Irish Knight. Afterward
this Office was invested in two; The first whereof, had the custody of the
English shore, from the Thames Mouth Northwards: The second of whom, had the
charge of the Western shore, from the Mouth of the Thames South-west; a
Register of which here follows.

Admirals of the North. Admirals of the West. 34 Edw. 1. Edward Charles Gervase
Allard 3 Edw. 2. Joseph Botetort Nicholas Crioll 10 Edw. 2. 10 Edw. 2. Joseph
Perbrun alias Perburne Sir Rob. Leybourne 15 Edw. 2. John Perbrun John Athey 12
Edw. 2. 16 Edw. 2. John Perbrun Sir Rob. Leybourn 18 Edw. 2. John Sturmie
Robert Battle alias Battle Robert Bendon

But I know not upon what exigency, or emergent occasion, this Office in the
year 1325. that is in the 19 th. year of Edward the second, was again entrusted
to the custody of three, which were, John Otervin, Nicholas Crioll, and John de
Felton, which are styled in the Record Admirals of Yarmouth, Portsmouth, and of
the West. But about the latter part of this very year, this Office was again
reduced to the Care and Charge of, a Catalogue of whom, offers it self up to
our present consideration.

Admirals of the North. Admirals of the West. John Sturmy 19 Edw. 2. John
Sturmy Nicholas Crioll 20 Edw. 2. Joseph de Leybourne Nicholas Crioll

Admirals of the North and West, in the Time of Edward the third.
John Perbrun Waretius de Valoigns 1 Edw. 3. John de Norwich William de Clinton
8 Edw. 3. Thomas Oughtred Robert de Hegham, alias Higham 10 Edw. 3. Jo. de
Norwich Geffrey de Say 10 Edw. 3. Robert de Ufford, and Jo. de Roos William de
Manston, alias Manton 10 Edw. 3. Sir Walter Manney Bartholomew Burgherst 11
Edw. 3. Thom. de Drayton Peter Dard, alias Bard 12 Edw. 3. Robert de Morly,
Baron of Hengham Robert Trussell 13 Edw. 3. Robert Morley Rich. Fitz-Allan,
Earl of Arundell 14 Edw. 3. William Trussell William Clinton, Earl of
Huntington 16 Edw. 3. William Trussell Robert Beaupell 17 Edw. 3. Robert Ufford
John de Montgomery 18 Edw. 3. Robert Ufford Reginald de Cobham 20 Edw. 3. Sir
John Howard Rich. Fitz-Allam, Earl of Arundell 21 Edw. 3. Walter Lord Manney
Rich. Fitz-Allan 22 Edw. 3. Sir Robert de Morley Sir John de Montgomery 22 Edw.
3. Robert de Causton Sir Reginal de Cobham 24 Edw. 3. Robert de Morley John de
Beauchampe, Earl of Warwick 25 Edw. 3. William de Bohun, Earl Northampton Henry
Duke of Lancaster 25 Edw. 3. William de Bohun Tho. de Beauchampe, Earl of
Warwick 26 Edw. 3. Robert de Morley, Baron of Hengham Jo. de Beauchampe 29 Edw.
3. Robert de Morley Guy de Brian 30 Edw. 3. Robert de Morley Guy de Brian 33
and 34 Edw. 3. Guy de Brian John de Beauchampe ^^ Edw. 3. Robert Herle 35 Edw.
3. Ralph Spigurnell 38 Edw. 3.

These three managed the Office of Admiral alone. But in the 43d. year of Edw.
the 3d. the Custody of the Narrow Seas, extending North and West, was again
entrusted to two, whose Names are thus Registered.

Admirals of the North. Admirals of the West. 43 Edw. 3. Nicholas Tamworth
Robert Aston 44 Edw. 3. John Nevill Guy de Brian 45 Edw. 3. Ralph de Ferrars
Robert Aston 46, 47, 48. Ed. 3 William Nevill Sir Philip Courtney 50 Edw. 3.
William de Ufford, Earl of Suffolk William de Montacute 50. and 51. Edw. 3. Sir
Michael De la Pole, Lord of Wingfield Rich. Fitz-Allan, Earl of Arundell

Admirals under Richard the second.
Admirals of the North. Admirals of the West. 1 Rich. 2. Thomas de Beauchampe,
Earl of Warwick Rich. Fitz-Allan, Earl of Arundell 2 Rich. 2. Sir Thomas Percy
Sir Hugh Calveley 3, 4, and 5. Rich. 2. Will. de Elmham Sir Philip Courtney
Walter de Hauley 6 Rich. 2. Walter Fitz-Walter, Baron of Woodham John de Roches
7 Rich. 2. Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland Edward Courtney, Earl of Devon 8
Rich. 2. Thomas Percy his Brother Edw. Radington, Prior of St. John's of
Jerusalem 9 Rich. 2. Philip Lord Darcy Sir Thomas Trivet 10 Rich. 2. Richard
Fitz-Allan, Earl of Arundel and Surrey, was sole Admiral of England, after whom
the Office returned to be managed by two.

Admirals of the North. Admirals of the West. John de Beaumont, Baron de
Folkingham John Holland, Earl of Huntington 12 Rich. 2. Sir John Roches Jo.
Holland 12 Rich. 2. Edward Earl of Rutland John Holland abovesaid again. 14
Rich. 2. Edw. Earl of Rutland and Cork, was sole Admiral both of the Eastern
and Western shore. 15 Rich. 2. Jo. Beauford, Son of John of Gaunt, Marquess
Dorsett, and Earl of Somerset, was sole Admiral of England. 21 Rich. 2. Thomas
Percy Earl of Worcester, was sole Admiral of England. 22 Rich. 2.

Admirals under Henry the fourth.
Admirals of the North. Admirals of the West. Richard Gray Baron of Codnor 2
Henry 4. Thomas Beaufort Brother to the Marquess. Sir Thomas Reniston 5 Henry
4. Thomas Lord Barkley Thomas of Lancaster, Viceroy of Ireland, Lord
High-Steward of England, Duke of Clarence, managed the Office of Admiral alone.
6 Henry 4.

Admirals of the North. Admirals of the West. Nicholas Blackbourn, Esquire Richard
Cliderow, Esquire 7 Henry 4.

After these two were dislodged, I find the Office of Admiral no more assigned
to two, but for the future circumscribed and concentered in one; a Roll of whom
ensues.

Admirals of England.
8 Henry 4. John Beaufort, Marquess Dorsett abovesaid, Brother to Henry the
fourth, was sole Admiral of England. 8 Henry 4. Edmond Holland, Earl of Kent,
was sole Admiral. 9 Henry 4. Tho. Beaufort, Brother to the Marquess aforesaid,
was sole Admiral of England.
Admirals of England under Henry the sixth.
4 Henry 6. John of Lancaster, Duke of Bedford, and Earl of Richmond, was Lord
High Admiral of England. 14 Henry 6. John Holland, Duke of Exeter, and Earl of
Huntington, was constituted Admiral of England, Ireland, and Aquitain, and his
Son Henry had the Grant of this Office in Reversion. 25 Henry 6. William de la
Pole, Marquess and Earl of Suffolk, was constituted Admiral of England,
Ireland, and Aquitain, during the Nonage of Henry Duke of Exeter. 28 Henry 6.
Henry Holland, abovesaid Duke of Exeter, was Admiral of England, Ireland, and
Aquitain.
Admirals under Edward the fourth.
1 Edward 4. Richard Nevill, Earl of Warwick and Salisbury, was Admiral of
England. 2 Edward 4. William Nevill, Earl of Kent, and Baron Falconbridge. ^^
Edward 4. Richard Duke of Gloucester. 49 Henry 6. Richard Nevill, Earl of
Warwick. 11 Edward 4. Richard Duke of Gloucester Admiral again.
Admirals under Richard the third.
1 Richard 3. John Howard Duke of Norfolk.
Admirals of England under Henry the seventh.
1 Henry 7. John Vere, Earl of Oxford, Lord high Chamberlain of England.
Admirals under Henry the eighth.
4 Henry 8. Sir Edward Howard Knight. 5 Henry 8. Thomas Howard, Lord High
Admiral of England, Ireland, Aquitain. 17 Henry 8. Henry Fitz-Roy, Duke of
Richmond and Somerset. 28 Henry 8. William Fitz-William, Earl of South Hampton.
32 Henry 8. John Lord Russell Knight. 34 Henry 8. John Dudley Knight, Viscount
Lisle, and Baron Malpas.
Admirals under Edward the sixth.
1 Edward 6. Thomas Seymour Knight, Baron Sudeley, Lord High Admiral of
England, Ireland, Wales, Calais, and Boloigne. 3 Edward 6. John Dudley, Knight
of the Garter, Earl of Warwick, Viscount Lisle, Master of the Kings Household,
Admiral of England, Ireland, Wales, Calais, Boloigne, and their Marches, as
also of Normandy, Gascoign, and Aquitain. 4 Edward 6. Edward Clinton Knight,
Baron Say and Seal.
Admirals created under Queen Mary.
1 Mariae William Howard Knight, Baron of Effingham. 3 Mariae Edward Clinton
Knight, Baron Say and Seal.
Admirals created under Queen Elizabeth.
27 Elizabeth. Charles Howard, Baron of Effingham, after created Earl of
Nottingham, and Knight of the Garter, Lord High Admiral of England, Ireland,
Wales, Calais, and the adjacent Marches, as likewise of Normandy, Gascoign, and
Aquitain.
Admirals created under King James.
16 Jacob. George Villiers, then only Marquess of Buckingham, Viscount
Villers, and Baron of Whaddon, was constituted Lord High Admiral of England.
Admirals created under King Charles the first.
4 Carol. 1. Robert Bartue, Earl of Lindsey, Lord High Chamberlain of England.
Algernon Percy, Earl of Northumberland, Knight of the Garter.
Admirals under King Charles the second.
James Duke of York, and Albany, at this instant, Lord High Admiral of England.
FINIS.

