A DISCOURSE OF TAXES and CONTRIBUTIONS: Showing the Nature and Measures of

Crown Lands, Assesments, Customs, Poll-Moneys, Lotteries, Benevolence,
Penalties, Monopolies, Offices, Tithes, Hearth, Excise, etc.
With several intersperst Discourses and Digressions concerning

Wars, The Church, Universities, Rents and Purchases, Usury and Exchange, Banks
and Lombards, Registries for Conveyances, Beggars, Ensurance, Exportation of
Money, Exportation of Wool, Free Ports, Coins, Housing, Liberty of
Conscience, etc.
The same being frequently applied to the State and Affairs of IRELAND, and is
now thought seasonable for the present Affairs of ENGLAND; humbly recommended
to the present PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Poole, at the Ship, over against the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill, 1689.

The PREFACE.
YOung and vain persons, though perhaps they marry not primarily and only on
purpose to get Children, much less to get such as may be fit for some one
particular vocation; yet having Children, they dispose of them as well as they
can according to their respective inclinations: Even so, although I wrote these
sheets but to rid my head of so many troublesome conceits, and not to apply
them to the use of any one particular People or Concernment; yet now they are
born, and that their Birth happened to be about the time of the Duke of
Ormond's going Lord Lieutenant into Ireland, I thought they might be as proper
for the consideration of that place, as of any other, though perhaps of effect
little enough in any.

Ireland is a place which must have so great an Army kept up in it, as may make
the Irish desist from doing themselves or the English harm by their future
Rebellions, And this great Army most occasion great and heavy Leavies upon a
poor people and wasted Country; it is therefore not amiss that Ireland should
understand the nature and measure of Taxes and Contributions.

2. The Parishes of Ireland do much want Regulation, by uniting and dividing
them; so as to make them fit Enclosures wherein to plant the Gospel: wherefore
what I have said as to the danger of supernumerary Ministers, may also be
seasonable there, when the new Geography we expect of that Island shall have
afforded means for the Regulation abovementioned.

3. The great plenty of Ireland will but undo it, unless a way be found for
advantageous Exportations, the which will depend upon the due measure of Custom
and Excise here treated on.

4. Since Ireland is under-peopled in the whole, and since the Government there
can never be safe without chargeable Armies, until the major part of the
Inhabitants be English, whether by carrying over these, or withdrawing the
other; I think there can be no better encouragement to draw English men
thither, than to let them know, that the Kings Revenue being about a tenth part
of the whole Wealth, Rent, and proceed of the Nation; that the Public Charge
in the next Age will be no more felt there, than that of Tithes is here; and
that as the Kings Revenue increase, so the causes of his Expense will decrease
proportionably, which is a double advantage.

6. The employing the Beggars in England about mending the Highways, and
making Rivers Navigable, will make the Wool and Cattle of Ireland vend the
better.

7. The full understanding of the nature of Money, the effects of the various
species of Coins, and of their uncertain values, as also of raising or embasing
them, is a learning most proper for Ireland, which has been lately much and
often abused for the want of it.

8. Since Lands are worth but six or seven years purchase, and yet twenty years
just cross the Channel, 'twere good the people of Ireland knew the reasons of
it at a time when there is means of help.

Lastly, If any man has any Notions which probably may be good for Ireland, he
may with most advantage expose them to public examination now, when the Duke
of Ormond is Chief Governor: For, 1. His Grace knows that Country perfectly
well, as well in times and matters of Peace as War, and understands the
Interests as well of particular persons, as of all and every factions and
parties struggling with each other in that Kingdom; understanding withal the
state of England, and also of several Foreign Nations, with reference to
Ireland. 2. His Grace has given fresh demonstration of his care of an English
Interest in Ireland, and of his wisdom in reconciling the several cross
concernments there so far as the same is possible. 3. His Graces Estate in
Lands there is the greatest that ever was in Ireland, and consequently he is
out of the danger incident to those Proreges against whom Cambden says,
Hibernia est semper querula; there being no reason for ones getting more Land,
who has already the most of any. 4. Whereas some Chief Governors who have
gone into Ireland, chiefly to repair or raise fortunes, have withdrawn
themselves again when their work has been done, not abiding the clamors and
complaints of the people afterward: But his Grace has given Hostages to that
Nation for his good Government, and yet has taken away aforeh and all fears of
the contrary. 5. His Grace dares do whatever he understands to be fitting, even
to the doing of a single subject Justice to a Confederate mulcitude; being
above the sinister interpretations of the jealous and querulous; for his known
Liberality and Magnificence shall ever keep him free from the clamor of the
people, and his through-tried fidelity shall frustrate the force of any
subdolous whisperings in the Ears of His Majesty. 6. His good acceptance of all
ingenious endeavors, shall make the Wise men of this Eastern England be led by
his Star into Ireland, and there present him with their choicest advices, who
can most judiciously select and apply them.


Lastly, This great Person takes the great Settlement in hand, when Ireland is
as a white Paper, when there sits a Parliament most affectionate to his person,
and capable of his Counsel, under a King curious as well as careful of
Reformation; and when there is opportunity, to pass into positive Laws
whatsoever is right Reason and the Law of Nature.

Wherefore by applying those Notions unto Ireland, I think I have harped upon
the right string, and have struck whilst the Iron is hot; by publishing them
now, when, if ever at all, they be useful. I would now advertise the world,
that I do not think I can mend it, and that I hold it best for every man's
particular quiet, to let it Vadere sicut vult; I know well, that res nolunt
male administrari, and that (say I what I will or can) things will have their
course, nor will nature be couzened: wherefore what I have writ, (as I said
before) was done but to ease and deliver my self, my head having been
impregnated with these things by the daily talk I hear about advancing and
regulating. Trade, and by the murmurs about Taxes, etc. Now whether what I have
said be contemned or cavilled at, I care not, being of the same mind about
this, as some thriving men are concerning the profuseness of their Children;
for as they take pleasure to get even what they believe will be afterward
pissed against the wall, so do I to write what I suspect will signify nothing:
Wherefore the race being not to the swift, etc. but time and chance happening
to all men, I leave the Judgment of the whole to the Candid, of whose
correction I shall never be impatient.

THE INDEX.
AN Enumeration and Description of the several Branches of the Public Charge.
Page 1 The maintenance of Governors ought to be in greater splendor than
private Callings can reach to. Ibidem The honor of being trusted, and the
pleasure of being feared, is reward enough for some Offices. p. 2. The
Pastorage of Souls ought to be a Public Charge, even upon a Civil Account.
Ibid. The use of Schools and Universities as they are a Public Charge. p. 3
The common and general causes which increase and aggravate the burden of
paying Taxes. Ibid. The causes that excite Foreign and Offensive Wars. p. 4
The causes of Defensive and Civil Wars. p. 5 A cause of unnecessary
Ecclesiastical Charge, is the not sizing of Parishes according to the
alterations which have been in Religion and Trade. p. 6 That five thousand
Parishes are enough for England and Wales, so as to give unto each but a
thousand Parishioners, and so as that none need go two miles to Church. Ibid.
Antiquated Offices, and overgrown Fees, a cause of unnecessary Charge in the
Government and administration of Justice. p. 8 Registers for Conveyances of
Land, and Depositories for moveable Pawns, as also Banks of Money will lessen
the charge of Lawsuits and Writings. p. 9 How the number of such as relate to
the Faculty of Medicine may be adjusted. Ibid. How the number of Students in
the Universities intending to make Learning the way of their livelihood, may be
adjusted. p. 10 An Use propounded for the choice Parish-Children and
Foundlings, to force on an useful Work, which has hitherto been but
perfunctorily pursued. Ibid. That the number of unnecessary Merchants and
Retailers be retrenched. Ibid. The careful Maintenance and Education of exposed
Children, and concealing their Names and Families, is a matter of great
consequence. p. 11 A Proposal of several Employments for Beggars, and such as
have now no Work. Ibid. Great works of labor, though in themselves
unnecessary, are nevertheless of advantage to the Public. p. 12 The mending of
Highways, building Bridges and Causeys, and the making of Rivers Navigable in
England, would make English Horses an exportable Commodity, and help to vend
the Commodities of Ireland. p. 13 The Causes of unquiet bearing of Taxes, viz.
Ibid. First, that the Sovereign exacts too much. p. 14 Secondly, that
Assessments are unequally laid. Ibid. Thirdly, that the Moneys levied are
vainly expended. Ibid. Fourthly, or given to Favorites. p. 15 Fifthly,
Ignorance of the Number, Trade, and Wealth of the people. Ibid. Sixthly,
Obsourity about the right of imposing. p. 16 Seventhly, Fewness of people. Ibid
Eighthly, Scarcity of Money, and confusion of Coyns. Ibid. Ninthly, That scarce
an hundredth part of the Riches of this Nation is Coined Bullion. Ibid.
Tenthly, The non-acceptance of some Commodities in specie in discharge of
Taxes. Ibid. The Consequences of a Tax too heavy if there be too much Money in
a Nation, which may be; or if there be too little, and that either in a State
well or ill governed. p. 17, p. 18, p. 19 The first way of providing for the
Public Charge, is the excinding or setting apart of a proportion of the
Territory, in the nature of Crown Lands. p. 19 The second is taking away the
same proportion of the Rents of all Lands. p. 20 The Nation is happy where
either of the said two ways is practiced ab antiquo, and upon original
agreement, and not exacted as a sudden contingent Surcharge upon the people.
Ibid. The Owners of settled Rents bear the burden of a Land Tax, or
Assessment, others probably gaining thereby. Ibid. A Land Tax upon free Estates
resolves into an Excize upon Consumptions. p. 21 Assessment upon Housing more
uncertain than that of Land, Housing being of a double nature, viz. either an
instrument of gain, or way of expense. Ibid. The heavy Taxing of Housing no
discouragement to new Buildings; nor is the discouragement of new Buildings any
means to prevent the populousness of a City. p. 22 Prohibition to build upon
new Foundations serves only to six the Ground-plot of a City. Ibid. The reason
why the City of London removes its Ground-plot Westward. Ibid. That it is
probable the King of Englands Palace will in process of time be toward
Chelsey. p. 23 That the present Seat of London will be the greatest
Conhabitation of people ever whilst this Island is inhabited. Ibid. The nature
and natural Measures of the Rent of Land, computed in Commodities of the growth
of the said Land. Ibid. The Par between Food or other proceed of Land, and
Bullion or Coin. p. 24 The Par between Gold and Silver. Ibid. Gold and Silver
are not natural Standards of the Values of the (...). p. 25 The prime
Denomination of the (...) are but two, viz. Land and Labor, as the
Denominations of Money in England are Pounds, Shillings, Pence. Ibid. Of the
Par between Land and Labor. Ibid. The reason of the number of years Purchase
that Land is worth in several Countries. p. 26 Why Land in Ireland is worth
fewer years Purchase than in England. Ibid. 27 The Description and Ratio
formalis of Usury. p. 28 The same of Exchange. Ibid. The Measures of both.
Ibid. Why Usury has been limited more than Exchange. p. 29 A parallel between
the Charges of the price of Money, and that of Land. Ibid. How to compute and
compare the Rents of Lands, in order to a just Land Tax or Assessment. p. 30
The intrinsic value of Land is found by Surveys of the Quantity, Figure and
Situation. Ibid. And by the Survey of the Quality, viz. its aptitude to bear;
first, precious Commodities; secondly, the best of the kind; thirdly, most in
quantity. Ibid. The extrinsick or accidental value depends upon the plenty of
Money, luxurious or frugal living; the Opinions Civil, Natural, and Religious
of the People. It is necessary to these Enquiries to know how to tell the Gold
and Silver Coyns of this present Age, and compare the same with that of former
times. Ibid. How to compare not only the Money of this present Age with that of
the former, but the entire riches of the present with the former People. Ibid.
By the numbers of People, and the proportion of Money amongst them, the
accidental values of Lands are to be computed. p. 32 How to proportion the
Rates of a Commodity in one place, unto the Rates of the same in another place.
Ibid. That the Day-wages of Laborers, and several other of the most vulgar
Tradesmen, ought to be ascertained and well adapted to the changes of time.
Ibid. That though the difficulty of computing the contingent values of Land be
great, yet there be greater reasons for undergoing it. p. 33 The nature of
Credit, as the said word is commonly used among Tradesmen, and otherwise.
Ibid. That the Sovereigns exact knowledge of the Subjects Estates would do them
no harm. Ibid. A Description of the Duty of Customs. p. 34 A Conjecture that
Customs at first were a kind of Praemium for ensurance against Pirates. Ibid.
The measure of the said Duty upon exported Goods. p. 35 The inconvenience of
too heavy Customs. Ibid. What Commodities may be forced to pay Customs. Ibid.
The measures of Customs upon imported Goods. Ibid. The inconveniences of
raising Money by the way of Customs. p. 36 A Proposal, that instead of Tunnage
and Poundage upon shipped Goods, a Tunnage were paid out of the Ships Freight.
p. 37 Or that the Customs were taken as an Ensurance Praemium. Ibid. Of
prohibited Commodities in general. Ibid. Of prohibiting the exportation of
Money and Bullion. Ibid. The said prohibition of Money serves as a Sumptuary
Law. p. 38 About the exportation of Wool. Ibid. The lessening of our
Sheep-trade, and increase of Corn-tillage, is an expedient in this case for
many reasons. p. 39 Other considerations tending to show, that the too vehement
prohibitions of Wool may be ineffectual, or to do more harm than good. Ibid.
Of prohibiting Importations. 40 It were better to make and raise Commodities,
though to burn them, than not to make them, or let the makers lose their
Faculty, and be idle. ibid. Of Free Ports, and in what cases they may do good
or harm. Ibid. Of Poll-money, and the sorts of it. p. 41 The faults of the late
Poll-moneys. Ibid. Of the most simple Poll-money, where all pay alike, its
conveniences and inconveniences. p. 42 Of Poll-money upon Titles, Offices; and
Faculties. Ibid. Hearth-money is of the same nature with simple Poll-money, but
both are rather accumulative Excizes. p. 43 Grants for public Lotteries are
Taxes upon the people. Ibid. Why Lotteries ought not to be allowed but by good
Authority. p. 44 Raising of Money by Benevolence is a real Tax. Ibid. Three
cases where the way of a Benevolence may be made good. Ibid. Several reasons
against it. p. 45 The several species of Penalties. Ibid. A doubt whether the
Penalties set down in Moses Law ought to be inflicted now. p. 46 The proper use
and reason of every sort of Penalty. Ibid. Perpetual Imprisonment is a kind of
slow death. p. 47 In what case Death, Mutilation, Imprisonment, Disgrace, etc.
ought to be commuted for Pecuniary Mulcts. Ibid. The meaning of the double and
multiple Restitutions mentioned in the Law of Moses. p. 48 Of the ways for
punishing or permitting Heterodox Believers in Religion. p. 49 That the
Sovereign may do either. Ibid. That all Pseudodoxies whatsoever may be safely
muzled from doing harm by Pecumary Mulcts. Ibid. 50 That the Sovereign by
punishing them with Death, Mutilations, or Imprisonments, does therein punish
himself, and that too re insecta, very often. Ibid. That the Pastors ought in
some measure to be punished for the errors and defections of their Flocks.
Ibid. The true use of the Clergy is rather to be patterns of Holiness than to
teach men variety of Opinions de rebus divinis. p. 51, The substance of all
that has been said in this whole Discourse about the Church. Ibid. The abuse
of Penal Laws. p. 52 Of Monopolies. Ibid. The use and reason of instituting
Monopolies. p. 53 A Digression about new Inventions, and the vexations incident
to the Projectors of new practices. Ibid. Offices instituted by the State, with
Fees of their own appointment, are of a parallel nature to Monopolies. p. 54
Why the Fees of Offices were great heretofore, Ibid. How Offices are become as
a saleable Commodity. p. 55 Why many superfluous Offices are not abolished.
Ibid. A Description of Tithes in several particulars. Ibid. The causes why
Tithes increase. p. 56 The Rent of the Lands of England is but a quarter of the
expense of the people. The Tithes in England are six times as much as they were
four hundred years ago. p. 57 The Clergy are far richer now than they were in
ancient times, and yet have less work to do. Ibid. The danger of too many
Churchmen. Ibid. How to adjust the number of Church men and Students in
Divinity. p. 58 Tithes is now no Tax or burden upon the people. Ibid. The way
of Tithes is a good pattern for a Tax. Ibid. The way of paying Tithes in the
City and Country is very disproportionable. p. 59 The inconveniences of
contributing to the Public Charge after the manner of Tithes. Ibid. A reason
why the ways of taxing the people are often shifted. Ibid. The State gains in
several Countries by being common Cashier, Usurer, Ensurer, Monopolist, etc. p.
60 The case of the Jews (every where subject to great Taxes) briefly stated. p.
61 The way of levying an Aliquot, part of men's Estates, very dangerous. Ibid.
Alterations in the values of Coyns is a Tax upon such as live by determined
Rents, Pensions, Fees, etc. p. 62 What is embasing of Moneys, and what is not.
Ibid. Of Tyn and Copper Money, as well curiously as coursly wrought. Ibid. Of
the Tokens coined by retailing Shopkeepers. p. 63 What is Gold and Silver
embased. Ibid. The reasons for embasing of Money. Ibid. Reasons against the
same. Ibid. What is properly raising of Money. p. 64 The effect of raising both
Domestic and Foreign Coyns. Ibid. Raising of Money changes the species of
Moneys, but lessens the Bullion. p. 65 Why many wise States have raised their
Moneys. Ibid. Raising of Foreign Money to a double value, or abating the price
of our Native Commodities to half, is all one, but the former is better. p. 66
The way of computing and comparing the prices of Commodities upon natural
grounds. Ibid. 67 Men are really and actually rich according to what they spend
and enjoy in their own persons. p. 68 Excize being a Tax upon such riches, is a
just way by which to defray the Public Charge. Ibid. That a proportion ought
to be pitched between the Expense or Consimption of the whole Nation, and the
Public Charge thereof. p. 69 Commodities ought not to be taxed until they be
just ripe for Consumption. Ibid. Commodities of equal value may be unequally
excized with Justice. Ibid. Of accumulating the Excize of many things upon some
one thing. p. 70 Whether Native Commodities exported ought to pay Excize. Ibid.
The Explication of Accumulative Excize. Ibid. Reasons for accumulating the
Excize of all things upon some one thing. Ibid. Why Beer ought not to be that
one thing. Ibid. Hearth or Smoak-money is an Accumulative Excize, with the
reasons for and against it. p. 71 Reasons in behalf of the Excize. p. 72 Of
framing persons to be sit for great Trusts, as to be Cashiers, Store-keepers,
Checques, etc. Ibid.
CHAP. 1. Of the several sorts of Public Charges.
THE Public Charges of a State, are, That of its Defense by Land and Sea, of
its Peace at home and abroad, as also of its honorable vindication from the
injuries of other States; all which we may call the Charge of the Militia,
which commonly is in ordinary as great as any other Branch of the whole; but
extraordinary, (that is, in time of War, or fear of War) is much the greatest.

2. Another branch of the Public Charge is, the Maintenance of the Governors,
Chief and Subordinate, I mean, such not only as spend their whole time in the
Execution of their respective Offices, but also who spend much in fitting
themselves as well with abilities to that end, as in begetting an opinion in
their Superiors of such their ability and trustworthiness.

3. Which Maintenance of the Governors is to be in such a degree of plenty and
splendor; as private Endeavors and Callings seldom reach unto: To the end,
that such Governors may have the natural as well as the artificial Causes of
Power to act with.

4. For if a great multitude of men should call one of their number King,
unless this instituted Prince appear in greater visible splendor than others,
can reward those that obey and please him, and do the contrary to others; his
Institution signfies little, even although he chance to have greater corporal
or mental faculties, than any other of the number.

5. There be Offices which are but (...), as Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace,
Constables, Churchwardens, etc. which men may attend without much prejudice to
their ordinary ways of livelihood, and for which the hononr of being trusted,
and the pleasure of being feared, has been thought a competent Reward.

6. Unto this head, the Charge of the administering Justice may be referred, as
well between man and man, as between the whole State or Commonalty and
particular members of it; as well that of righting and punishing past injuries
and crimes, as of preventing the same in time to come.

7. A third branch of the Puplick Charge is that of the Pastorage of men's
Souls, and the guidance of their Consciences; which, one would think (because
it respects another world, and but the particular interest of each man there)
should not be a public Charge in this: Nevertheless, if we consider how easy
it is to elude the Laws of man, to commit unproveable crimes, to corrupt and
divert Testimonies, to wrest the sense and meaning of the Laws, etc. there
follows a necessity of contributing toward a public Charge, where with to
have men instructed in the Laws of God, that take notice of evil thoughts and
designs, and much more of secret deeds, and that punishes eternally in another
world, what man can but slightly chastise in this.

8. Now those who labor in this public Service, must also be maintained in a
proportionable splendour; and must withal have the means to allure men with
some kind of reward, even in this life; forasmuch as many heretofore followed,
even Christ himself but for the Loaves he gave them.

9. Another Branch is, the Charge of Schools and Universities, especially for
so much as they teach above Reading, Writing and Arithmetic; these being of
particular use to every man, as being helps and substitutes of Memory and
Reason, Reckoning being of the later, as Writing and Reading are of the former;
for whether Divinity, etc. ought to be made a private Trade, is to me a
question.

10. It Is true, that Schools and Colleges are now for the most part but the
Donations of particular men, or places where particular men spend their money
and time upon their own private accounts; but no doubt it were non amiss, if
the end of them were to furnish all imaginable helps unto the highest and
finest Natural Wits, toward the discovery of Nature in all its operations; in
which sense they ought to be a public Charge: The which Wits should not be
selected for that work, according to the fond conceits of their own Parents and
Friends, (Crows that think their own Birds ever fairest) but rather by the
approbation of others more impartial; such as they are, who pick from out of
the Christians Children the ablest Instruments and Support of the Turkish
Government. Of which Selections more hereafter.

11. Another Branch is, that of the Maintenance of Orphans; found and exposed
Children, which also are Orphans; as also of Impotents of all sorts, and
moreover such as want employment.

12. For the permitting of any to beg is a more chargeable way of maintaining
them whom the law of Nature will not suffer to starve, where food may possibly
be had: Besides, it is unjust to let any starve, when we think it is just to
limit the wages of the poor, so as they can lay up nothing against the time of
their impotency and want of work.

13. A last Branch may be, the Charge of Highways, Navigable Rivers
Aquaeducts, Bridges, Havens, and other things of universal good and concernment.

14. Other Branches may be thought on, which let other men either refer unto
these, or add over and above. For it suffices for my purpose to have for the
present set down these the chief and most obvious of all the rest.

CHAP. II. Of the Causes which encrcase and aggravate the several sorts of
Public Charges.
HAving thus spoken of the several sorts of Public Charges, we shall next
consider the Causes which increase them both in general and in particular.

Among the general Causes is, First, the unwillingness of the people to pay
them, arising from an opinion, that, by delay and reluctance they may wholly
avoid them, with a suspicion that what is imposed is too much, or that what is
collected is embezelled or ill expended, or that it is unequally leavied and
assessed. All these resolving into an unnecessary Charge to collect them, and
of forcing their Prince to hardships toward the people.

2. Another Cause which aggravates Taxes, is the force of paying them in money
at a certan time, and not in commodities at the most convenient seasons.

3. Thirdly, Obscurities and doubts concerning the right of imposing.

4. Fourthy, Scarcity of Money, and Confusion of Coins.

5. Fifthly, Fewness of people, especially of Laborers and Artificers.

6. Sixthly Ignorance of the Numbers, Wealth and Trade of the people, causing a
needless repetition of the charge and trouble of new additional Levies, in
order to amend mistakes.

7. As to particulars. The Causes of encrasing the Military Charge are the same
with those that increase Wars, or fear of Wars, which are Foreign or Civil.

8. An Offensive Foreign War is caused by many, and those very variours,
fecret, personal distastes colored with public pretenses; of which we can say
nothing, but that the common encouragement unto them particularly here in
England is a false opinion, that our Country is full peopled, or that if we
wanted more Territory, we could take it with less charge from our neighbors,
than purchase it from the Americans; and a mistake, that the greatness and
glory of a Prince lies rather in the extent of his Territory, than in the
number, art and industry of his people well united and governed. And moreover,
that it is more glorious to take from others by fraud or rapine, than to gain
ones self out of the bowels of the Earth and Sea.

9. Now those States are free from Foreign Offensive Wars (arising as
abovesaid out of personal and private Causes) where the chief Governors
Revenue is but small, and not sufficient to carry on such Wars, the which if
they happen to be begun, and so far carried on as to Want general
Contributions, then those who have the power to impose them, do commonly
enquire what private persons and Ends occasioned the War, and so fall upon the
Authors, rather than contribute to the Effect; otherwise than to quench it.

10. Defensive Wars are caused from unpreparedness of the offended State for
war, as when defective Stores are served into the Magazines by corrupt Officers
at the rate of good; when Armies are falsely Mustred; when Soldiers are either
Tenants or Servants to their Commanders, or else persons, who for their Crimes
or Debts, want protection from Justice; when the Officers are ignorant of their
business, and absent from their Commands; and withal afraid to punish, because
unwilling to pay. Wherefore to be always in a posture of War at home, is the
cheapest way to keep off War from abroad.

11. The causes of Civil Wars here in Europe proceed very much from Religion,
viz. the punishing of Believers heterodox from the Authorized way, in public
and open places, before great multitudes of ignorant people, with loss of life,
liberty, and limbs, rather than by well proportioned tolerable pecuniary
mulcts, such as every conscientions Nonconformist would gladly pay, and
Hypocrites by refusing, discover themselves to be such.

12. Civil Wars are likewise caused by peoples fansying, that their own uneasy
condition may be best remedied by an universal confusion; although indeed upon
the upshot of such discorders they shall probably be in a worse, even although
they survive and succeed, but more probably perish in the contest.

13. Morover, the peoples believing that forms of Government shall in a few
years produce any considerable alteration as to the wealth of the subject; that
the form which is most ancient and present is not the best for the place; that
any established family or person is not better than any new pretender, or even
than the best Election that can be made; that Sovereignty is invisible, and
that it is not certainly annexed unto some certain person or persons.

14. Causes of Civil War are also, that the Wealth of the Nation is in too few
men's hands, and that no certain means are provided to keep all men from a
necessity either to beg, or steal, or be Soldiers. Moreover, the allowing
Luxury in some, whilst others needlessly starve.

The dispensing of benefits upon casual and uncertain Motives; the giving vast
Emoluments to persons and parties of no certain visible merit. These are the
things which cause animosities among the totter-headed multitude, who are the
tinder that the sparks of a few Designers may easily inflame.

15. One Cause of Public Charge in matters of Religion, is the not having
changed the limits of Parishes and Cures with the Change of Religion from
Popery, and with the Changes in Plantation and Trade. For now when the
Ministers of the Gospel preach unto multitudes assembled in one place, may not
Parishes be bigger; that is, may not Flocks be more numerous, than when every
particular sheep was, as heretofore, dressed and shorn three or four times per
annum by Shrift. If there be in England and Wales but about five millions of
people, what needs be more than 5000 Parishes; that is, 1000 Sheep under every
Shepherd. Whereas in the midling Parishes of London there are about 5000 souls
in each. Upon which account there needs be in England and Wales but 1000
Parishes, whereas there are near 10000.

16. Now the saving of half the Parishes would (reckoning the Benefices one
with another, but at 100 l. per Annum a piece) save 500000 l. Besides, when the
number of Parochial Parsons were halved, then there would need but half the
present number of Bishops, Deans and Chapters, Colleges and Cathedrals, which
perhaps would amount to two or three hundred thousand pounds more: And yet the
Church of God would be more regularly served than now, and that without
prejudice to that sacred, ancient Order of Episcopacy, and the way of their
Maintenance by Tithes; and all this in a method of greater Reformation and
suitableness thereunto.

17. But suppose it be said, that in some wild Countries, a thousand people do
not live in a less scope of ground than of eight miles square. To which I
answer, that there are few or no such places, the largest Parishes I know,
being not more capacious than of three or four miles square, in which is no
difficulty, for the people to meet once a week at some central place within
that scope.

18. Moreover I say, that a Curate of small Learning, if of good life, and duly
Ordained, may officiate in four Chapels of Ease every Sunday, and the
Preacher, who indeed should be a person of Learning and Eloquence, may preach
every other Sunday in every of the said Chapels, by preaching in two of them
one day, and in the other two the other day: And this with Catechizing, and
Extra-Lectures upon the Weekdays, would perform as much as now is performed,
and as much as by the blessing of God is necessary to salvation; for the yoke
of Christ is easy, and his burden light.

19. But to put an end to this doubt, I affirm, that if England and Wales were
cut out in parcels of three miles square, there would be found few above four
thousand such, of which to make Parishes.

20. Now if it be said, that the Alienation of these Tithes is Sacrilege; I
answer, that if the same be employed to defend the Church of God against the
Turk and Pope, and the Nations who adhere to them, it is not at all, or less,
than to give three fourths of the same to the Wives and Children of the Priests
which were not in being when those allowances were set forth?

21. If I had not an abhorrence from Propounding the lessening of the
Church-Means, I could say, that the retrenching part of each ramaining Parsons
Tithes and Emoluments, and leaving them for Part, to the free Contributions of
their Flocks, were a way to promote the Gospel, and to give less offense to
such as think that their whole maintenance should be made in that manner.

22. I might also say, that forasmuch as there be more Males than Females in
England, (the said disproportion pro tanto, hindering procreation) that it were
good for the Ministers to return to their Caelibat; or that none should be
Ministers, whilst they were married, it being easy among five millions of
people to find out 5000 that could and would live single, that is one in a
thousand. And then our unmarried Parson might live as well with half, as now
with the whole of his Benefice.

23. Always provided, that though the number of Parishes, and the measure of
Benefices were lessened, yet that the same ought to be done without damage to
the present Incumbents.

24. As for lessening the Charge of Offices relating to the Government and the
Law, the same will consist in abolishing the superfluous, supernumerary, and
antiquated; and withal, in retrenching the Fees of others, to what the labor,
art, and trust of their respective employments do require. For there be many
Offices wholly executed by Deputies for small wages, whereas the Masters of
them have ten times as much, although they know nothing either of what is done
or ought to be done in the business.

25. Now such Surplusages as these should be either restored unto the people
who gave them unto the King, at a time when those Fees made up but a Just
reward for the Officer; or else the King keeping them still might take them for
so much toward the Public Charge, but not give them away to stop the
importunate suits of any particular person, in whom and in all his dependants,
such benefits do but cause a laziness as to the true original gain of the
Nation, and themselves in particular, together with a total negligence and
ignorance of the public good.

26. Many are the particulars that might be instanced of this kind; but my aim
not being to prejudice any man in particular, I descend no lower, wishing only
that there might be an universal Reformation of what length of time has wraped
awry, in which case no particular men are to be troubled; for if all suffer,
none suffers, and all men would be no poorer than now they are if they should
lose half their Estates; nor would they be a whit the richer if the same were
doubled, the Ratio formalis of Riches lying rather in proportion than quantity.

27. To lessen the charge of Universities, unto which I add the Inns of Court,
which is not much, were to lessen the number of the Students in Divinity, Law,
and Medicine, by lessening the use of those Professions.

Now having spoken already of Divinity, I come next to the Law, and say, that
if Registers were kept of all men's Estates in Lands, and of all the Conveyances
of, and Engagements upon them; and withal, if public Loan-banks, Lombards, or
Banks of Credit upon deposited Money, Plate, Jewels, Cloth, Wool, Silk,
Leather, Linen, Metals, and other durable Commodities were erected, I cannot
apprehend how there could be above one tenth part of the Lawsuits and
Writings, as now there are.

28. And moreover, if by account of the people, of their Land and other Wealth,
the number of Lawyers and Scriveners were adjusted, I cannot conceive how there
should remain above one hundredth part of what now are; forasmuch as I have
heard some affirm, that there be now ten times as many as are even now
necessary; and that there are now ten times as many Law suits, as upon the
abovementioned Reformation, there would be. It follows therefore, that upon
the whole there would not need one in a hundred of the present number of
Retainers to the Law, and Offices of Justice, the occasions as well of crimes
as injuries being so much retrenched.

29. As for Physicians, it is not hard by the help of the observations which
have been lately made upon the Bills of Mortality, to know how many are sick in
London by the number of them that die, and by the proportions of the City to
find out the same of the Country; and by both, by the advice of the Learned
College of that Faculty to calculate how many Physicians were requisite for
the whole Nation; and consequently, how many Students in that Art to permit and
encourage; and lastly, having calculated these numbers, to adoptate a
proportion of Chyrurgeons, Apothecaries, and Nurses to them, and so by the
whole to cut off and extinguish that infinite swarm of vain pretenders unto,
and abusers of that God-like Faculty, which of all Secular Employments our
Savior himself after he began to preach engaged himself upon.

30. Moreover, if it were agreed, what number of Divines, Physicians and
Civilians (that is, of men bred in Universities) were requisite to the public
service? As suppose 13000 in the present way, and perhaps not above 6000 in
that way of Retrenchment which we propound; then supposing that but one in
forty dies per annum, it follows that less than 35 O might suffice to be sent
yearly out of the Universities: Where supposing they stay five years one with
another, it follows also that about 1800 is the number of Students fit to be
allowed in the Universities at a time; I mean, of such as intend to make
Learning their Trade, and way of Livelihood.

31. I might intimate, that if 1800 Students were enough, and that if there
were 40000 Parish-Children and Foundlings in England, it were probable that one
in twenty of them might be of excellent wit and towardness.

Now since the Public may dispose of these Children as they please, and since
there is Maintenance in both Universities for above 1800, what if our
Professors of Art were in this manner selected and educated? But of this but in
transitu.

32. Hereunto may be added, that by reason of Loan Banks aforementioned,
whereby the Credits and Estates of all Dealers may be known, and all the
mysterious dangers of Money prevented, and that by good Accounts of our growth,
Manufacture, Consumption, and Importation, it might be known how many Merchants
were able to manage the Exchange of our superfluous Commodities with the same
of other Countries: And also how many Retailers are needful to make the
subdistributions into every Village of this Nation, and to receive back their
superfluities. Upon these grounds I presume a large proportion of these also
might be retrenched, who properly and originally earn nothing from the Public,
being only a kind of Gamesters, that play with one another for the labors of
the Poor; yielding of themselves no Fruit at all, otherwise than as Veins and
Arteries, to distribute forth and back the blood and nutritive juyces of the
Body Politic, namely, the product of Husbandry and Manufacture.

33. Now if the numerous Offices and Fees relating to the Government, Law, and
Church; and if the number of Divines, Lawyers, Physicians, Merchants, and
Retailers were also lessened, all which do receive great wages for little work
done to the Public, with how much greater ease would common expenses be
defrayed? and with how much more equality would the same be assessed?

34. We enumerated six Branches of the Public Charge, and have slightly spoken
how four of them might be lessened; we come next to the other two Branches,
whereof we shall rather recommend the augmentation.

The first of these two Branches I call, generally speaking, Care of the Poor,
consisting of Receptacles for the aged, blind, lame, etc. in health; Hospitals
for noisome, chronical, curable and uncurable, inward and outward Diseases;
with others for acute and contagious. Others for Orphans, found and exposed
Children; of which later sort none should be refused, let the number be never
so great, provided their Names, Families, and Relations were well concealed:
The choice of which Children being made at their being about eight or ten years
old, might afford the King the fittest Instruments for all kind of his Affairs,
and be as firmly obliged to be his faithful servants as his own Natural
Children.

35. This is no new nor rare thing, only the neglect of it in these Countries,
is rather to be esteemed a rare and new project: Nor is it unknown what
excellent Fruits there have been of this Institution, of which we shall say
much more upon another occasion hereafter.

36. When all helpless and impotent persons were thus provided for, and the
lazy and thievish restrained and punished by the Minister of Justice, it
follows now that we find out certain constant Employments for all other
indigent people, who laboring according to the Rules upon them, may require a
sufficiency of Food and Raiment. Their Children also (if small and impotent) as
aforesaid, being provided for elsewhere.

37. But what shall these Employments be? I answer, such as were reckoned as
the sixth Branch of the Public Expense, viz. making all Highways so broad,
firm, and even, as whereby the charge and tedium of Traveling and Carriages
may be greatly lessened. The cutting and scouring of Rivers into Navigable; the
planting of useful Trees for Timber, delight, and fruit in convenient places.

The making of Bridges and Cawseys.

The working in Mines, Quarries, and Colleries.

The Manufactures of Iron, etc.

38. I pitch upon all these particulars, first, as works wanting in this
Nation; secondly, as works of much labor, and little Art; and thirdly, as
introductive of new Trades into England, to supply that of Cloth, which we have
almost totally lost.

In the next place it will be asked, who shall pay these men? I answer, every
body; for if there be 1000 men in a Territory, and if 100 of these can raise
necessary food and raiment for the whole 1000; if 200 more make as much
Commodities, as other Nations will give either their Commodities or Money for,
and if 400 more be employed in the Ornaments, pleasure, and magnificence of the
whole? if there be 200 Governors, Divines, Lawyers, Physicians, Merchants, and
Retailers, making in all 900, the question is, since there is food enough for
this supernumerary 100 also, how they should come by it? whether by begging, or
by stealing; or whether they shall suffer themselves to starve, finding no
fruit of their begging, or being taken in their stealing, be put to death
another way? Or whether they shall be given away to another Nation that will
take them? I think it is plain, they ought neither to be starved, nor hanged,
nor given away; now if they beg, they may pine for hunger to day, and be gorged
and glutted to morrow, which will occasion Diseases, and evil habits; the same
may be said of stealing: Moreover, perhaps they may get either by begging or
stealing more than will suffice them, which will for ever after indispose them
to labor, even upon the greatest occasions which may suddenly and unexpectedly
happen.

39. For all these Reasons, it will be certainly the safer way to afford them
the superfluity which would otherwise be lost and wasted, or wantonly spent: Or
in case there be no overplus, then it is fit to retrench a little from the
delicacy of others feeding in quantity or quality, few men spending less than
double of what might suffice them as to the bare necessities of Nature.

40. Now as to the work of these supernumeraries, let it be without expense of
Foreign Commodities, and then it is no matter if it be employed to build a
useless Pyramid upon Salisbury Plain, bring the Stones at Stonchenge to
Tower Hill, or the like; for at worst this would keep their minds to discipline
and obedience, and their bodies to a patience of more profitable labors when
need shall require it.

41. In the next place, as an instance of the usefulness of what has been
propounded, I ask what benefit will the mending of Highways, the building of
Bridges and Cawseys, with making of Rivers Navigable produce, besides the
pleasure and beauty of them? To which I also answer, as an instance of the
premises, that the same, together with the numerous Missions of Cattle and
Sheep out of Ireland, shall produce a vast superfluity of English Horses, the
which because they have the many excellent qualities of Beauty, Strength,
Courage, Swiftness, and Patience concentrated in them, beyond the Horses of
other places, would be a very vendible Commodity all over Europe; and such as
depending upon the intrinseck nature of the English Soil could not be
counterfeited, nor taken away by others. Moreover, an Horse is such a Commodity
as will carry both himself and his Merchant to the Market, be the same never so
distant.

CHAP. III. How the Causes of the unquiet bearing of Taxes may be lessened.
WE have slightly gone through all the fix Branches of the Public Charge, and
have (though imperfectly, and in haste) shown what would increase, and what
would abate them.

We come next to take away some of the general Causes of the unquiet bearing of
Taxes, and yielding to Contributions, viz.

2. 1. That the people think the Sovereign asks more than he needs. To which we
answer: 1. That if the Sovereign were sure to have what he wanted in due time,
it were his own great damage to draw away the Money out of his Subjects hands,
who by Trade increase it, and to hoard it up in his own Coffers, where it is of
no use even to himself, but liable to be begged, or vainly expended.

3. 2. Let the Tax be never so great, if it be proportionable unto all, then no
man suffers the loss of any Riches by it. For men (as we said but now) if the
Estates of them all were either halfed or doubled, would in both cases remain
equally rich: For they would each man have his former state, dignity, and
degree; and moreover, the Money leavied not going out of the Nation, the same
also would remain as rich in comparison of any other Nation, only the riches of
the Prince and People would differ for a little while, namely, until the Money
leavied from some, were again refunded upon the same, or other persons that
paid it: In which case every man also should have his chance and opportunity to
be made the better or worse by the new distribution; or if he lost by one, yet
to gain by another.

4. 3. Now that which angers men most, is to be taxed above their Neighbors.
To which I answer, that many times these surmizes are mistakes, many times they
are chances, which in the next Tax may run more favorable; and if they be by
design, yet it cannot be imagined, that it was by design of the Sovereign, but
of some temporary Assessor, whose turn it may be to receive the Talio upon the
next occasion from the very man he has wronged.

5. 4. Men repine much, if they think the Money leavied will be expended on
Entertainments, magnificent Shows, triumphal Arches, etc. To which I answer,
that the same is a refunding the said Moneys to the Tradesmen who work upon
those things; which Trades, though they seem vain and only of Ornament, yet
they refund presently to the most useful; namely, to Brewers, Bakers, Tailors,
Shoemakers, etc. Moreover, the Prince has no more pleasure in these Shows and
Entertainments than 100000 others of his meanest Subjects have, whom, for all
their grumbling, we see to travel many miles to be Spectators of these mistaken
and distasted vanities.

6. 5. The people often complain that the King bestows the Money he raises from
the People upon his Favorites: To which we answer; that what is given to
Favorites, may at the next step or transmigration come into our own hands, or
theirs whom we wish well, and think do deserve it.

7. Secondly, as this man is a Favorite to day, so another, or our selves, may
be hereafter; Favor being of a very slippery and moveable nature, and not such
a thing as we need much to envy; for the same way that -- leads up an Hill,
leads also down the same. Besides, there is nothing in the Laws or Customs of
England, which excludes any the meanest man's Child, from arriving to the
highest Offices in this Kingdom, much less debars him from the Personal
kindness of his Prince.

8. All these imaginations (whereunto the vulgar heads are subject) do cause a
backwardness to pay, and that necessitates the Prince to severity. Now this
lighting upon some poor, though stubborn, stiff-necked Refuser, charged with
Wife and Children, gives the credulous great occasion to complain of
Oppression, and breeds ill blood as to all other matters; feeding the ill
humors already in being.

9. 6. Ignorance of the Number, Trade, and Wealth of the people, is often the
reason why the said people are needlessly troubled, viz. with the double charge
and vegation of two, or many Levies, when one might have served: Examples
whereof have been seen in late Poll-moneys; in which (by reason of not knowing
the state of the people, viz. how many there were of each Taxable sort, and the
want of sensible marks whereby to rate men, and the confounding of Estates with
Titles and Offices) great mistakes were committed.

10. Besides, for not knowing the wealth of the people, the Prince knows not
what they can bear; and for not knowing the Trade, he can make no Judgment of
the proper season when to demand his Exhibitions.

11. 7. Obscurities and doubts, about the right of imposing, has been the
cause of great and ugly Reluctances in the people, and of involuntary
severities in the Prince, an eminent example whereof was the Ship Money, no
small cause of twenty years calamity to the whole Kingdom.

12. 8. Fewness of people, is real poverty; and a Nation wherein are eight
Millions of people, are more than twice as rich as the same scope of Land
wherein are but four; for the same Governors which are the great charge, may
serve near as well for the greater, as the lesser number.

13. Secondly, If the people be so few, as that they can live, Ex sponte
Creatis, or with little labor, such as is grazing, etc. they become wholly
without Art. No man that will not exercise his hands, being able to endure the
tortures of the mind, which much thoughtfulness does occasion.

14. 9. Scarcity of Money, is another cause of the bad payment of Taxes; for if
we consider, that of all the Wealth of this Nation, viz. Lands, Housing,
Shipping, Commodities, Furniture, Plate, and Money, that scarce one part of an
hundred is Coin; and that perhaps there is scarce six millions of Pounds now in
England, that is but twenty shillings a head for every head in the Nation: We
may easily judge, how difficult it is for men of competent Estates, to pay a
sum of Money on a sudden; which if they cannot compass, Severities and Charges
ensue; and that with reason, though unlucky enough, it being more tolerable to
undo one particular Member, than to endanger the whole, notwithstanding indeed
it be more tolerable for one particular Member to be undone with the whole,
than alone.

15. 10. It seems somewhat hard, that all Taxes should be paid in Money, that
is, (when the King has occasion to victual his Ships at Portsmouth) that sat
Oxen and Corn should not be received in kind, but that Farmers must first carry
their Corn perhaps ten Miles to sell, and turn into Money; which being paid to
the King; is again reconverted into Corn, fetched many miles further.

16. Moreover, the Farmer for haste is forced to under-sell his Corn, and the
King for haste likewise is forced to over-buy his Provisions. Whereas the
paying in kind, Pro Hic and Nunc, would lessen a considerable grievance to the
poor people.

17. The next consideration shall be of the consequences, and effects of too
great a Tax, not in respect of particular men, of which we have spoken before,
but to the whole people in general: To which I say, that there is a certain
measure, and proportion of money requisite to drive the Trade of a Nation, more
or less then which would prejudice the same. Just as there is a certain
proportion of Farthings necessary in a small retail Trade, to change silver
money, and to even such reckonings, as cannot be adjusted with the smallest
silver pieces. For money, (made of Gold and silver) is to the (...) (that is to
the matter of our Food and Covering) but as Farthings and other local
extrinsick money, is to the Gold and silver species.

18 Now as the proportion of the number of farthings requisite in commerce is
to be taken from the number of people, the frequency of their Exchanges; as
also, and principally from the value of the smallest silver pieces of money; so
in like manner, the proportion of money requisite to our Trade, is to be
likewise taken from the frequency of commutations, and from the bigness of the
payments that are by Law or Custom usually made otherwise. From whence it
follows, that where there are Registers of Lands whereby the just value of each
man's interest in them may be well known; and where there are Depositories of
the (...), as of Metals, Cloth, Linen, Leather, and other Usefuls; and where
there are Banks of money also, there less money is necessary to drive the
Trade. For if all the greatest payments be made in Lands, and the other perhaps
down to ten pound, or twenty pound be made by credit in Lombars or Money-Banks:
It follows that there needs only money to pay sums less then those
aforementioned; just as fewer Farthings are requisite for change, where there
be plenty of silver two-Pences, then where the least silver piece in six Pence.

19. To apply all this, I say, that if there be too much money in a Nation, it
were good for the Commonalty, as well as the King, and no harm even to
particular men, if the King had in his Coffers: all that is superfluous, no
more than if men were permitted to pay their Taxes in any thing they could best
spare.

23. On the other side, if the largeness of a public Exhibition should leave
less money than is necessary to drive the Nations Trade, then the mischief
thereof would be the doing of less work, which is the same as lessening the
people, or their Art and Industry; for a hundred pound passing a hundred hands
for Wages, causes 1000 l. worth of Commodities to be produced, which hands
would have been idle and useless, had there not been this continual motive to
their employment.

21. Taxes if they be presently expended upon our own Domestic Commodities,
seem to me to do little harm to the whole Body of the people, only they work a
change in the Riches and Fortunes of particular men; and particularly by
transferring the same from the Landed and Lazy, to the Crafty and Industrious.
As for example, if a Gentleman have let his Lands to Farm for a hundred pound
per annum, for several years or Lives, and he be taxed twenty pound per annum,
to maintain a Navy; then the effect hereof will be, that this Gentleman's Twenty
pound per annum, will be distributed amongst Seamen, Ship-Carpenters, and other
Trades relating to Naval matters; but if the Gentleman had the Land in his own
hands, then being taxed a Fifth part, he would raise his Rents near the same
proportion upon his under Tenants, or would sell his Cattle, Corn and Wool a
Fifth part dearer; the like also would all other subdependents on him do; and
thereby recover in some measure, what he paid. Lastly, but if all the money
leavyed were thrown into the Sea, then the ultimate effect would only be, that
every man must work a Fifth part the harder, or retrench a Fifth part of his
Consumptions, viz. the former if foreign Trade be improveable, and the latter,
if it be not.

22. This I conceive, were the worst of Taxes in a well-policyed State; but in
other States where is not a certain prevention of Beggary and The every, that
is a sure livelihood for men wanting employment; there I must confess, an
excessive Tax, causes excessive and insuperable want, even of natural
necessities, and that on a sudden so as ignorant particular persons, cannot
find out what way to subsist by; and this by the law of Nature, must cause
sudden effects to relieve it self, that is, Rapines, Frauds; and this again
must bring Death, Mutilitions, and Imprisonments according to the present Laws
which are Mischiefs, and Punishments, as well unto the State as to the
particular sufferes of them.

CHAP. IV. Of the several ways of Tax,' and first, of setting a part, a
proportion of the whole Territory for Public uses, in the nature of
Crown Lands; and secondly, by way of Assessement, or Land-taxe.
BUt supposing, that the several causes of Public Charge are lessened as much
as may be, and that the people be well satisfied, and contented to pay their
just shares of what is needful for their Govenment and Protection, as also for
the Honor of their Prince and Country: It follows now to propose the several
ways and expedients, how the same may be most easily, speedily, and insensibly
collected. The which I shall do, by exposing the conveniences and
inconveniences of some of the principal ways of Levyings, used of later years
within the several States of Europe: unto which others of smaller and more
rarer use may be referred.

2. Imagine then a, number of people, planted in a Territory, who had upon
Computation concluded that two Millions of pounds per annum, is necessary to
the public charges. Or rather, who going more wisely to work had computed a
twenty fifth part of the proceed of all their Lands and Labors, were to be the
Excisum, or the part to be cut out, and laid aside for public uses. Which
proportions perhaps are fit enough to the affairs of England, but of that
hereafter.

3. Now the question is, how the one or the other shall be raised. The first
way we propose, is, to Excize the very Land it self in kind; that is, to cut
out of the whole twenty five Millions, which are said to be in England and
Wales, as much Land in speiec, as whereof the Rack-rent would be two Millions
viz. about four Millions of Acres, which is about a sixth part of the whole;
making the said four Millions to be Crown Lands, and as the four Counties
intended to be reserved in Ireland upon the forfeitures were. Or else to excize
a sixth part of the Rent of the whole, which is about the proportion, that the
Adventurers and Soldiers in Ireland retribute to the King, as quit Rents. Of
which two ways, the latter is manifestly the better, the King having more
security; and more obligees; provided the trouble and charge of this universal
Collection, exceed not that of the other advantage considerably.

4. This way in a new State would be goods, being agreed upon, as it was in
Ireland, before men had even the possession of any Land at all; wherefore
whosoever buys Land in Ireland hereafter is no more concerned with the Quit
Rents wherewith they are charged, then if the Acres were so much the fewer; or
then men are who buy Land, out of which they know Tithes are to be paid. And
truly that Country is happy in which by Original Accord, such a Rent is
reserved, as whereby the Public charge may be born without contingent, sudden,
superadditions, in which lies the very Ratio of the burden of all
Contributions and Exactions. For in such cases as was said before, it is not
only the Landlord pays, but every man who eats but an Egg, or an Onion of the
growth of his Lands; or who uses the help of any Artisan, which feeds on the
same.

5. But if the same were propounded in England, viz. if an aliquot part of
every Landlords Rent were excinded or retrenched, then those whose Rents were
settled, and determined for long times to come, would chiefly bear the burden
of such an Imposition, and others have a benefit thereby. For suppose A. and B.
have each of them a parcel of Land, of equal goodness and value; suppose also
that A. has let his parcel for twenty one years at twenty pound per annum,
but that B. is free; now there comes out a Tax of a fifth part; hereupon B.
will not let under 25 l. that his remainder may be twenty, whereas A. must be
contented with sixteen neat; nevertheless the Tenants of A. will sell the
proceed of their bargain at the same rate, that the Tenats of B. shall do. The
effect of all this is; First, that the Kings Fifth part of B. his Farm shall be
greater then before. Secondly, that the Farmer to B. shall gain more then
before the Tax. Thirdly, that the Tenant or Farmer of A. shall gain as much as
the King and Tenant to B. both. Fourthly, the Tax does ultimately light upon
the Landlord A. and the Consumptioners. From whence it follows that a Land Tax
resolves into an irregular Excize upon Consumptions, that those bear it most,
who least complain. And lastly, that some Landlords may gain, and only such
whose Rents are predetermined shall lose; and that doubly, viz. one way by the
raising of their Revenues, and the other by Enhaunsing the prices of provisions
upon them.

6. Another way is an Excisium out of the Rent of Houseing, which is much more
uncertain then that of Land. For an House is of a double nature, viz one,
wherein it is a way and means of expense; the other, as it is an Instrument and
Tool of gain: for a Shop in London of less capacity and less charge in building
then a fair Dining Room in the same House unto which both do belong, shall
nevertheless be of the greater value, so also shall a Dungeon, Sellar, then a
pleasant Camber; because the one is expense, the other profit. Now the way of a
Land Tax rates housing, as of the latter nature, but the Excize as of the
former.

7. We might add hereunto, that housing is sometimes disproportionally taxed to
discourage Building, especally upon new Foundations, thereby to prevent the
growth of a City; suppose London, such excessive and overgrown grown Cities
being dangerous to Monarchy, though the more secure when the Supremacy is in
Citizens of such places themselves, as in Venice.

8. But we say, that such checking of new Buildings signifies nothing to this
purpose; forasmuch as Buildings do not increase, until the People already have
increased: but the remedy of the above mentioned dangers is to be sought in the
causes of the increase of People, the which if they can be nipt, the other work
will necessarily be done.

But what then is the true effect of forbidding to build upon new foundations?
I answer, to keep and fasten the City to its old seat and ground-plot, the
which encouragement for new Buildings will remove, as it comes to pass almost
in all great Cities, though insensibly, and not under many years progression.

9. The reason whereof is, because men are unwilling to build new houses at the
charge of pulling down their old, where both the old house it self, and the
ground it stands upon do make a much dearer ground-plot, for a new-house, and
yet far less free and convenient; wherefore men build upon new free
foundations, and cobble up old houses, until they become fundamentally
irreparable at which time they become either the dwelling of the Rascality, or
in process of time return to waste and Gardens again, examples whereof are many
even about London.

Now if great Cities are naturally apt to remove their seats, I ask which way?
I say in the case of London, it must be Westward, because the Winds blowing
near 3 fourths of the year from the West, the dwellings of the West end are so
much the more free from the fumes, steams and stinks of the whole Easterly
Pyle; which where Seacole is burnt is a great matter. Now if it follow from
hence, that the Palaces of the greatest men will remove Westward, it will also
naturally follow, that the dwellings of others who depend upon them will creep
after them. This we see in London, where the Noblemens ancient Houses are now
become Halls for Companies, or turned into Tenements, and all the Palaces are
gotten Westward; Insomuch as I do not doubt but that five humdred years hence,
the Kings Palace will be near Ch^lsy, and the old building of Whitehall
converted to uses more answerable to their quality. For to build a new Royal
Palace upon the same ground will be too great a confinement, in respect of
Gardens and other magnificencies, and withal a disaccommodation in the time of
the work; but it rather seems to me, that the next Palace will be built from
the whole present contignation of houses at such a distance as the whole
Palace of Westminster was from the City of London, when the Archers began to
bend their bows just without Ludgate, and when all the space between the
Thames, Fleet Street, and Hollorn was as Finsburyfields are now.

10. This digression I confess to be both impertinent to the business of Taxes,
and in it self almost needless; for why should we trouble our selves what shall
be five hundred years hence, not knowing what a day may bring forth; and since
it is not unlikely, but that before that time we may be all transplanted from
hence into America, these Countries being overrun with Turks, and made waste,
as the Seats of the famous Eastern Empires at this day are.

11. Only I think it is certain, that while ever there are people in England,
the greatest cohabitation of them will be about the place which is now London,
the Thames being the most commodious River of this Island, and the seat of
London the most commodious part of the Thames; so much does the means of
facilitating Carriage greaten a City, which may put us in mind of employing our
idle hands about mending the Highways, making Bridges, Cawseys and Rivers
navigable: Which considerations brings me back round into my way of Taxes, from
whence I digrest.

12. But before we talk too much of Rents, we should endeavor to explain the
mysterions nature of them, with reference as well to Money, the Rent of which
we call Usury; as to that of Lands and Houses aforementioned.

13. Suppose a man could with his own hands plant a certain scope of Land with
Corn, that is, could Diggor Plough; Harrow, Weed, Reap, Carry home, Thresh, and
Winnow so much as the Husbandry of this Land requires; and had withal Seed
wherewith to sow the same. I say, that when this man has subducted his seed
out of the proceed of his Harvest, and also what himself has both eaten and
given to others in exchange for Clothes, and other Natural necessaries; that
the Remainder of Corn, is the natural and true Rent of the Land for that year;
and the medium of seven years, or rather of so many years as makes up the
Cycle, within which Dearths and Plenties make their revolution, does give the
ordinary Rent of the Land in Corn.

14. But a further, though collateral question may be, how much English money
this Corn or Rent is worth; I answer, so much as the money which another single
man can save within the same time, over and above his expense, if he employed
himself wholly to produce and make it; viz. Let another man go travel into a
Country where is Silver there Dig it, Refine it, bring it to the same place
where the other man planted his Corn; Coin it, etc. the same person, all the
while of his working for Silver, gathering also food for his necessary
livelihood, and procuring himself covering, etc. I say, the Silver of the one
must be esteemed of equal value with the Corn of the other: the one, being
perhaps twenty Ounces and the other twenty Bushels. From whence it follows that
the price of a Bushel of this Corn to be an Ounce of Silver.

15. And forasmuch as possibly there may be more Art and Hazard in working
about the Silver, then about the Corn, yet all comes to the same pass; for let
a hundred men work ten years upon Corn, and the same number of men the same
time, upon Silver; I say, that the neat proceed of the Silver is the price of
the whole neat proceed of the Corn, and like parts of the one, the price of
like parts of the other. Although not so many of those who wrought in Silver,
learned the Art of Refining and Coining, or outlived the dangers and diseases
of working in the Mines. And this also is the way of pitching the true
proportion, between the values of Gold and Silver, which many times is set but
by popular error, sometimes more, sometimes less diffused in the world; which
error (by the way) is the cause of our having been pestred with too much Gold
heretofore, and wanting it now.

16. This, I say to be the Foundation of equalizing and ballancing of values;
yet in the superstructures and practices hereupon, I confess there is much
variety and intricacy; of which hereafter.

17. The World measures things by Gold and Silver, but principally the latter;
for there may not be two measures, and consequently the better of many must be
the only of all; that is, by fine Silver of a certain weight: but now if it be
hard to measure the weight and fineness of Silver, as by the different reports
of the ablest Say-masters I have known it to be; and if Silver granted to be of
the same fineness and weight, rise and fall in its price, and be more worth at
one place than another, not only for being farther from the Mines, but for
other accidents, and may be more worth at present, than a Month or other small
time hence; and if it differ in its proportion unto the several things valued
by it, in several Ages upon the increase and diminution thereof, we shall
endeavor to examine some other natural Standards and Measures, without
derogating from the excellent use of these.

18. Our Silver and Gold we call by several names, as in England by Pounds,
Shillings, and Pence; all which may be called and understood by either of the
three. But that which I would say upon this matter is, that all things ought to
be valued by two natural Denominations, which is Land and Labor; that is, we
ought to say, a Ship or Garment is worth such a measure of Land, with such
another measure of Labor; forasmuch as both Ships and Garments were the
Creatures of Lands and men's Labors thereupon: This being true, we should be
glad to find out a natural Par between Land and Labor, so as we might express
the value by either of them alone, as well or better than by both, and reduce
one into the other, as easily and certainly, as we reduce Pence into Pounds.
Wherefore we would be glad to find the natural values of the Fee-simple of
Land, though but no better than we have done that of the usus fructus
abovementioned, which we attempt as follows.

19. Having found the Rent or value of the usus fructus per annum, the question
is, how many years purchase (as we usually say) is the Fee-simple naturally
worth? If we say an infinite number, then an acre of Land would be equal in
value to a thousand acres of the same Land; which is absurd, an infinity of
Unites being equal to an infinity of Thousands: wherefore we must pitch upon
some limited number, and that I apprehend to be the number of years, which I
conceive one man of fifty years old, another of twenty eight, and another of
seven years old, all being alive together may be thought to live; that is to
say, of a Grandfather, Father, and Child; few men having reason to take care of
more remote Posterity: for if a man be a great Grandfather, he himself is so
much the nearer his end, so as there are but three in a continual line of
descent usually co-existing together; and as some are Grandfathers at forty
years, yet as many are not till above sixty, and sic de caeteris.

20. Wherefore I pitch the number of years purchase, that any Land is naturally
worth, to be the ordinary extent of three such persons their lives. Now in
England we esteem three lives equal to one and twenty years, and consequently
the value of Land, to be about the same number of years purchase. Possibly if
they thought themselves mistaken in the one, (as the Observator of the Bills of
Mortality thinks they are) they would alter in the other, unless the
consideration of the force of popular error and dependence of things already
concatenated, did hinder them.

21. This I esteem to be the number of years purchase where Titles are good,
and where there is a moral certainty of enjoying the purchase. But in other
Countries Lands are worth nearer thirty years purchase, by reason of the better
Titles, more people, and perhaps truer opinion of the value and duration of
three lives.

22. And in some places, Lands are worth yet more years purchase, by reason of
some special Honor, Pleasures, Privilege or Jurisdiction annexed unto them.

23. On the other hand, Lands are worth fewer years purchase (as in Ireland)
for the following reasons, which I have here set down, as unto the like whereof
the cause of the like cheapness in any other place may be imputed. First, In
Ireland, by reason of the frequent Rebellions, (in which if you are conquered,
all is lost; or if you conquer, yet you are subject to swarms of Thieves and
Robbers) and the envy which precedent Missions of English have against the
subsequent, Perpetuity it self is but forty years long, as within which time
some ugly disturbance has hitherto happened almost ever since the first coming
of the English thither.

24. 2. The Claims upon Claims which each has to the others Estates, and the
facility of making good any pretense whatsoever by the favor of some one or
other of the many Governors and Ministers which within forty years shall be in
power there; as also by the frequency of false testimonies, and abuse of solemn
Oaths.

25. 3. The paucity of Inhabitants, there being not above the fifth part so
many as the Territory would maintain, and of those but a small part do work at
all, and yet a smaller work so much as in other Countries.

26. 4. That a great part of the Estates, both real and personal in Ireland,
are owned by Absentees, and such as draw over the profits raised out of
Ireland, refunding nothing; so as Ireland exporting more than it imports, does
yet grow poorer to a paradox.

27. 5. The difficulty of executing Justice, so many of those in power being
themselves protected by Offices, and protecting others. Moreover, the number of
criminous and indebted persons being great, they favor their like in Juries,
Offices, and wheresoever they can: Besides, the Country is seldom rich enough
to give due encouragement to profound Judges and Lawyers, which makes Judgments
very casual, ignorant men being more bold to be apt and arbitrary, than such as
understand the dangers of it. But all this, a little care in due season might
remedy, so as to bring Ireland in a few years to the same level of value with
other places; but of this also elsewhere more at large, for in the next place
we shall come to Usury.

CHAP. V. Of Usury.
WHat reason there is for taking or giving Interest or Usury for any thing
which we may certainly have again whenever we call for it, I see not; nor why
Usury should be scrupled, where Money or other necessaries valued by it, is
lent to be paid at such a time and place as the Borrower chooses, so as the
Lender cannot have his Money paid him back where and when himself pleases, I
also see not. Wherefore when a man gives out his Money upon condition that he
may not demand it back until a certain time to come, whatsoever his own
necessities shall be in the mean time, he certainly may take a compensation for
this inconvenience which he admits against himself: And this allowance is that
we commonly call Usury.

2 And when one man furnishes another with Money at some distant place, and
engages under great penalties to pay him there, and at a certain day besides;
the consideration for this, is that we call Exchange, or local Usury.

As for example, if a man wanting Money at Carlisle in the heat of the late
Civil Wars, when the way was full of Soldiers and Robbers, and the passage by
Sea very long, troublesome, and dangerous, and seldom passed; why might not
another take much more than an 100 l. at London for warranting the like sum to
be paid at Carlisle on a certain day?

3. Now the questions arising hence are; what are the natural Standards of
Usury and Exchange? As for Usury, the least that can be, is the Rent of so much
Land as the Money lent will buy, where the Security is undoubted; but where the
Security is casual, then a kind of ensurance must be interwoven with the simple
natural Interest, which may advance the Usury very conscionably unto any height
below the Principal it self. Now if things are so in England, that really there
is no such Security as abovementioned, but that all are more or less
hazardous, troublesome, or chargeable to make, I see no reason for endeavoring
to limit Usury upon time, any more than that upon Place, which the practice of
the World does not, unless it be that those who make such Laws were rather
Borrowers than Lenders: But of the vanity and fruitlesness of making Civil
Positive Laws against the Laws of Nature, I have spoken elsewhere, and
instanced in several particulars.

4. As for the natural measures of Exchange, I say, that in times of Peace, the
greatest Exchange can be bat the labor of carrying the Money in specie; but
where are hazards and emergent uses for Money more in one place than another,
etc. or opinions of these true or false, the Exchange will be governed by them.

5. Parallel unto this, is something which we omitted concerning the price of
Land; for as great need of Money heightens Exchange, so does great need of Corn
raise the price of that likewise, and consequently of the Rent of the Land that
bears Corn, and lastly of the Land it self; as for example, if the Corn which
feeds London, or an Army, be brought forty miles together, then the Corn
growing within a mile of London, or the quarters of such Army, shall have added
unto its natural price, so much as the charge of bringing it thirty nine miles
does amount unto: And unto perishable Commodities, as fresh Fish, Fruits, etc.
the ensurance upon the hazard of corrupting, etc. shall be added also; and
finally, unto him that eats these things, there (suppose in Taverns) shall be
added the charge of all the circumstantial Apparatus of Houserent, Furniture,
Attendance, and the Cooks skill as well as his labor to accompany the same.

6. Hence it comes to pass, that Lands intrinsically alike near populous
places, such as were the Perimeter of the Area that seeds them is great, will
not only yield more Rent for these Reasons, but also more years purchase than
in remote places, by reason of the pleasure and honor extraordinary of having
Lands there; for -- Omne tulit punctum qui mis^uit utile dul^^.

7. Having finished our digression upon the measures of the Rents and Values of
Lands and Moneys, we now return to our second way of leavying Public Charges,
which was the taking of a proportion of the Rent, (commonly called Assessment)
it follows next to speak of the way of computing the said Rents, otherwise than
according to the bargains which a few men make one with another through
ignorance, haste, false suggestion, or else in their passion or drink: Although
I acknowledge, that the medium or common result of all the Bargains made within
three years (or other such Cycle of time, as within which all contingencies of
Land revolve) may be very sufficient to this purpose, being but the sum
synthetically computed by casual opinions, as I would endeavor to cast up
analytically by a distinct particularizing of the Causes.

8. 1. Therefore I propound a Survey of the Figures, Quantities, and
Scituations of all the Lands, both according to the civil bounds of Parishes,
Farms, etc. and the natural distinctions thereof by the Sea, Rivers, ridges of
Rocks, or Mountains, etc.

9. 2. I propound that the quality of each denomination were described by the
Commodities it had usually born, in some Land, some sort of Timber, Grain,
pulse or root growing more happily than in others: Also by the increase of
things sown or planted, which it has yielded communibus annis; and withal, the
comparative goodness of the said Commodities not unto the common Standard
Money, but to one another. As for example; if there be ten Acres of Land, I
would have it judged whether they be better for Hay or Corn; if for Hay,
whether the said ten Acres will bear more or less of Hay than ten other Acres;
and whether an hundred weight of the said Hay will feed or fatten more or less
than the same weight of other Hay, and not as yet comparing it to Money, in
which the value of the said Hay will be more or less, according to the plenty
of Money, which has changed strangely since the discovery of the West Indies,
and according to the multitudes of people living near this Land, together with
the luxurious or frugal living of them; and besides all, according to the
Civil, Natural, and Religious Opinions of the said people: As for example, Eggs
in the forepart of Lent (because their goodness and delicacy decays before
Lent be done) being worth little in some Popish Countries; nor Swines flesh
among the Jews, nor Hedgehogs, Frogs, Snails, Mushrooms, etc. to those that
fear to eat them, as poisonous or unwholesome: nor Currants, and Spanish Wines,
if they were all to be destroyed as the great Thieves of this Nation, by an
Edict of the State.

10. This I call a Survey or Inquisition into the former intrinsic values of
Land, this latter of extrinsick or accidental follows. We said, that the change
of the store of Money would change the rates of Commodities, according to our
reckoning, in names and words, (Pounds, Shillings and Pence being nothing else)
as for example:

If a man can bring to London an ounce of Silver out of the Earth in Peru, in
the same time that he can produce a Bushel of Corn, then one is the natural
price of the other; now if by reason of new and more easy Mines a man can get
two ounces of Silver as easily as formerly he did one, then Corn will be as
cheap at ten shillings the Bushel, as it was before at five shillings caeteris
paribus.

11. It behooves us therefore to have a way, whereby to tell the Money of our
Country (which I think I have, and that in a short time, and that without cost,
and (which is more) without looking into particular men's Pockets; of which
hereafter.) Now if we know what Gold and Silver we had in England two hundred
years ago, and could tell it again now; and though we also knew the difference
of our denominations then, when thirty seven shillings were made out the same
quantity of Silver as sixty two are now; also that of the alloy, labor in
Coynage, remedies for weight and fineness, and duties to the King; nay, if we
also knew the Laborers wages then and now, yet all this would not show the
difference of the Riches of our Nation, even in Money alone.

12. Wherefore we must add to the premises the knowledge of the difference of
the numbers of the people, and conclude, that if all the Money in the Nation
were equally divided amongst all the people both then and now, that that time
wherein each Devisee had wherewith to hire most laborers was the richer. So
that we want the knowledge of the People and Bullion which is now in this Land,
and which was heretofore; all which I think may be found out even for the time
past, but more probably for the time present, and to come.

13. But to proceed; suppose we had them, then we would pitch the accidental
values upon our Lands about London; as thus; viz. We would first at hazard
compute the materials for food and covering, which the Shires of Essex, Kent,
Surrey, Middlesex, and Hertford; next circumjacent to London, did communibus
annis produce, and would withal compute the Consumptioners of them living in
the said five Shires, and London. The which if I found to be more than were the
Consumptioners living upon the like scope of other Land, or rather upon as much
other Land as bore the like quantity of Provisions; then I say, that Provisions
must be dearer in the said five Shires than in the other; and within the said
Shires cheaper or dearer, as the way to London was more or less long, or rather
more or less chargeable.

14. For if the said five Shires did already produce as much Commodity, as by
all endeavor was possible; then what is wanting must be brought from afar, and
that which is near, advanced in price accordingly; or if the said Shires by
greater labor than now is used, (as by Digging instead of Ploughing, Setting
instead of Sowing, picking of choice Seed instead of taking it promiscuously,
steeping it instead of using it wholly unprepared, and manuring the ground with
Salt instead of rotten Straw, etc.) could be fertilized, then will the Rent be
as much more advanced, as the excess of increase exceeds that of the labor.

15. Now the price of labor must be certain, (as we see it made by the
Statutes which limit the Day-wages of several workmen;) the non-observance of
which Laws, and the not adapting them to the change of times, is by the way
very dangerous, and confusive to all endeavors of bettering the Trade of the
Nation.

16. Moreover, the Touchstone to try whether it be better to use those
improvements or not, is to examine whether the labor of setching these things
even from the places where they grow wild, or with less Culture, be not less
than that of the said improvements.

17. Against all this will be objected, that these computations are very hard,
if not impossible to make; to which I answer only this, that they are so,
especially if none will trouble their hands or heads to make them or give
authority for so doing: But withal, I say, that until this be done, Trade will
be too conjectural a work for any man to employ his thoughts about; for it will
be the same wisdom, in order to win with fair Dice, to spend much time in
considering how to hold them, how much to shake them, and how hard to throw
them, and on what Angles they should hit the side of the Tables, as to consider
how to advance the Trade of this Nation; where at present particular men get
from their Neighbors (not from the Earth and Sea) rather by hit than wit, and
by the false opinions of others, rather than their own judgments; Credit every
where, but chiefly in London, being become a mere conceit, that a man is
responsible or not, without any certain knowledge of his Wealth or true Estate.
Whereas I think the nature of Credit should be limited only to an opinion of a
man's faculties to get by his Art and Industry. The way of knowing his Estate
being to be made certain, and the way of making him pay what he owes to the
utmost of his ability, being to be expected from the good execution of our Laws.

18. I should here enlarge upon a Paradox, to prove, that if every man's Estate
could be always read in his forehead, our Trade would much be advanced thereby,
although the poorer ambitious man be commonly the more industrious. But of this
elsewhere.

19. The next objection against this so exact computation of the Rents and
worth of Lands, etc. is that the Sovereign would know too exactly every man's
Estate: To which I answer, that if the Charge of the Nation be brought as low
as it may be, (which depends much upon the people in Parliament to do) and if
the people be willing and ready to pay, and if care be taken, that although
they have not ready Money; the Credit of their Lands and Goods shall be as
good; and lastly, that it would be a great discommodity to the Prince to take
more than he needs, as was proved before; where is the evil of this so exact
knowledge? And as for the proportion of every Contributor, why should any man
hope or expect to ease himself by his craft and interest in a confusion? or why
should he not fear, though he may be advantaged this time, to suffer in the
next.

CHAP. VI. Of Customs and Free Ports.
CUstom is a Contribution or Excisium out of Goods sent out or imported into
the Princes Dominions: In these Countries of a twentieth part not according to
the prices current among Merchants of each respective Commodity, but according
to other standing Rates set by the State, though advised for the most part by
concerned Persons.

2. I cannot well imagine what should be the natural Reasons, why a Prince
should be paid this duty inward and outward both; there seems indeed to be
some, why he should be paid for indulging the Exportation of some such things
as other Countries do really want.

3. Wherefore I think, that Customs at the first were a praemium allowed the
Prince for protecting the carriage of Goods both inward and outward from the
Pirates; and this I should verily believe, if the Prince were bound to make good
losses of that kind. And I thought that the proportion of five pound per cent.
was pitched upon computation, that the Merchants before the said undertaking
and composition, had usually lost more by Pyracy: And finally, that the Customs
had been an ensurance upon losses by enemies, as the ensurance now usual is of
the casualties of Sea, Wind, Weather, and Vessel, or altogether; or like the
ensurance in some Countries of Houses from Fires for a certain small part of
their yearly Rent. But be it what it will, it is anciently established by Law,
and ought to be paid until it shall be abolished. Only I take leave as an idle
Philosopher to discourse upon the Nature and Measures of it.

4. The Measures of Customs outward may be such, as after reasonable profit to
the Exporter will leave such of our own Commodities as are necessary to
Foreigners somewhat cheaper unto them than they can be had from elsewhere.

As for example, Tyn is a Native Commodity, which governs the Market abroad,
that is, there is none so good, and so easy to be had and exported.

Now suppose Tyn might be made in Cornwall for four pence the pound, and that
the same would yield twelve pence at the nearest part in France, I say, that
this extraordinary profit ought to be esteemed as a Mine-Royal, or Tresor
Trove, and the Sovereign ought to have his share in it: which he will have, by
imposing so great a duty upon Tyn Exported, as on one side may leave a
subsistence to the Workmen, (and no more) with a competent profit to the owners
of the ground; and on the other side, may leave the price abroad less than that
for which Tyn may be had from any other place.

5. The same Imposition might also be made on the Tyn spent at home, unless it
be as impossible so to do, as for the King of France to impose the Gabel upon
Salt in the very places where it is made.

6. But it is observed, that such high duties make men endeavor not to enter
any such Goods at all, or pay for them, provided the charge of smuckling and
bribing, with the hazard of being seized, do not communibus vicibus exeed the
Duty.

7. Wherefore the measures of this nature are, that it be more easy, safe, and
profitable for men to keep the Law, than to break it, unless it be in such
cases where the Magistrate can with certainty execute the Law. As for example,
it would be hard to save the Duties upon Horses shipped at a small Port,
without adjacent Creeks, and that but some certain two hours every Tide,
forasmuch as Horses cannot be disguized, put up in Bags or Casks, nor shipped
without noise and the help of many hands.

8. The Measures of Customs upon imported Commodities are; 1. That all things
ready and ripe for Consumption may be made somewhat dearer than the same things
grown or made at home, if the same be feasible caeteris paribus.

2. That all superfluities tending to Luxury and sin, might be loaded with so
much Impost, as to serve instead of a Sumptuary Law to restrain the use of
them. But here also care is to be had, that it be not better to smuckle than to
pay.

9. On the contrary, all things not fully wrought and Manufactured, as raw
Hides, Wool, Beaver, raw Silk, Cotton; as also all Tools and Materials for
Manufacture; as also Dying-stuff, etc. ought to be gently dealt with.

10. If to levy the payment of these Duties could be most exactly performed,
Princes might strangely practice one upon another; wherefore since they cannot,
the people pay no more than they cannot with greater safety upon the whole
matter save, nor observe any more of these Laws, than they cannot elude.

11. The inconveniences of the way of Customs, are, viz.

1. That Duties are laid upon things not yet ripe for use, upon Commodities in
fieri, and but in the way of their full improvements, which seems the same ill
Husbandry, as to make Fuel of young Saplings, instead of Dotards and Pollards.
2. The great number of Officers requisite to collect the said Duties,
especially in a Country where the Harbors are many, and the Tides convenient
for shipping of Goods at any time. 3. The great facility of smuckling by
Briberies, Collusions, hiding and disguizing of Commodities, etc. and all this
notwithstanding Oaths and Penalties, and withal by the several ways of
mitigating and taking off the said Penalties, even after discovery. 4 The
Customs or Duties upon the few Commodities of the growth of England exchanged
with Foreigners, make too small a part of the whole expense of the people of
this Kingdom, which (perhaps is not less than fifty millions of pounds per
annum) out of which to bear the common Charges thereof, so as some other way of
Levy must be practiced together with it; whereas by some one way, if the best,
the whole work may be absolved: wherefore it is an inconvenience in the way of
Customs, that it necessitates other ways than it self
12. Now as a small attempt of a Remedy or Expedient herein, I offer rather,
that instead of the Customs upon Goods shipped, every Ship that goes in or out,
may pay a Tonnage, the same being collectible by a very few hands, as a matter
visible to all the World; and that the said Duty be but such a part of the
Freight, as the like whereof being excinded out of the whole Consumption, would
defray all the Public Charge; which part perhaps is four per cent. or
thereabouts, viz. two Millions per annum out of fifty.

13. The other is, that the Customs be reduced into the nature of an Ensurance
praemium, and that the same be augmented and fitted, as whereby the King may
afford to ensure the Goods as well against the Sea as Enemies; by which means
the whole Nation would be concerned in all such losses, and then the Merchant
for his own sake would more willingly enter and pay for whatsoever he would
have ensured.

14. But it will be here objected, that although the duty of Customs be
abrogated, yet that there must be always the same number of Officers maintained
as now to prevent the bringing in and carrying out of prohibited Commodities.
Wherefore we shall here state the nature of such Prohibitions by two or three
grand instances.

15. To prohibit the Exportation of Money, in that it is a thing almost
impracticable; it is almost nugatory and vain; and the danger of it resolves
either into a kind of Ensurance answerable to the danger of being seized, or
unto a Surcharge of a Composition by bribing the Searchers. As for example, if
but one in fifty Exportations are seized, or if twenty shillings be usually
taken for conniving at fifty pounds, then the Commodities bought with this
Money must be sold two at least per cent. the dearer to the Consumptioner. Now
if the Trade will not bear this Surcharge, then Money will not be exported with
discretion. Now the use of this Prohibition, supposing it practicable, is to
serve as a sumptuary Law, and to bind the Nation in general not to spend more
than they get; for if we could export no Commodity of our own growth or
Manufacture than by prohibiting the going out of Money, it is also ipso facto
commanded that nothing foreign should be brought in. Again supposing, that
ordinarily we export enough to furnish us with all Foreign Commodities, but
upon some extraordinary decay of our Land or hands, we are able to export but
half as much as would procure our ordinary proportion of Foreign Goods, then
the Prohibition of Money performs indeed the part of a sumptuary Law, in
hindering us to bring in any more than half as much Foreign Commodities as we
formerly used, only it leaves it to the discretion of the Merchant, to choose
which he will neglect or forbear to bring in, and which not; whereas in
sumptuary Laws the State takes this care upon themselves. As for example, if
we wanted Exportations to balance our Importations by forty thousand pounds,
and suppose for examples sake, that the Importation of forty thousand pounds
worth of Coffee-Berries, or the like of Spanish Wine must be retrenched; in
this case, the said Prohibition of Money will do one, or some of the one, and
some of the other, as the Merchant himself pleases: But the sumptuary Law
determines, whether we shall encourage and keep fair with the Nation that sends
us Wine, rather than that which sends us Coffee, and whether the expense of
Wine or Coffee be most prejudicial to our people, etc.

16. The benefits alleged for the free Exportation of Money is merely this,
viz. That if a Ship carrying out of England forty thousand pounds worth of
Cloth, might also carry with it forty thousand pounds in Money, then could the
Merchant stand the stiffer upon his terms, and in fine would buy cheaper, and
sell dearer; but by the way, the Merchant buys this power with the Interest and
advantage of the Money he carries, which if it amount to five pound per Cent.
then he had better sold his Goods at four pound per Cent. under rate, than to
have fortified himself with Moneys as aforesaid. But of this more may be said;
we hasten to the great point of Wool.

17. The Hollanders having gotten away our Manufacture of Cloth, by becoming
able to work with more Art, to labor and fare harder, to take less freight,
Duties and Ensurance, has so madded us here in England, that we have been apt
to think of such exorbitantly fierce ways of prohibiting Wool and Earth to be
exported, as perhaps would do us twice as much harm as the loss of our said
Trade. Wherefore to return to our Wits and Trade again, before we can tell what
to do in this case, we must consider;

1. That we are often forced to buy Corn from abroad, and as often complain
that we are pestered with abundance of idle hands at home, and withal that we
cannot vend the Woollen Manufactures even which our few working hands do
produce. In this case were it not better to lessen our Sheep-Trade, and convert
our hands to more Tillage? Because 1. Flesh becoming dearer, there would be
encouragement for Fish, which will never be till then. 2. Our Money would not
run so fast away for Corn. 3. We should have no such gluts of Wool upon our
hands. 4. Our idle hands would be employed in Tillage and Fishing, one man by
the way of grazing tilling as it were many thousand Acres of Land by himself
and his Dog.

2. Suppose we wanted no Corn, nor had any idle hands, and yet that we abounded
with more Wool than we can work up; in this case, certainly Wool might be
exported, because it is supposed, that the hands which work, are already
employed upon a better Trade.

3. Suppose the Hollander outdo us by more Art, were it not better to draw
over a number of their choice Workmen, or send our most ingenious men thither
to learn; which if they succeed, it is most manifest, that this were the more
natural way, than to keep that infinite clutter about resisting of Nature,
stopping up the Winds and Seas, etc.

4. If we can make Victual much cheaper here than in Holland, take away
burdensome, frivilous, and antiquated Impositions and Offices.

I conceive even this were better than to persuade Water to rise of it self
above its natural Spring.

5. We must consider in general, that as wiser Physicians tamper not
excessively with their Patients, rather observing and complying with the
motions of Nature, than contradicting it with vehement Administrations of their
own; so in Politics and Oeconomicks the same must be used; for Naturam
expellas surca licet usque recurrit.

18. Nevertheless, if the Hollanders advantages in making Cloth be but small
and few in comparison of ours, that is, if they have but a little the better of
us, then I conceive that Prohibitions to Export Wool may sufficiently turn the
Scales. But whether this be so or not, I leave to others, being my self neither
Merchant nor Statesman.

19. As for Prohibition of Importations, I say that it needs not be, until they
much exceed our Exportations. For if we should think it hard to give good
necessary Cloth for debauching Wines, yet if we cannot dispose of our Cloth to
others, 'twere better to give it for Wine or worse, than to cease making it;
nay, better to burn a thousand men's labors for a time, than to let those
thousand men by non-imployment lose their faculty of laboring. In brief, what
may be further said hereupon, resolves into the Doctrine and Ingenium of making
Sumptuary Laws, and judicious use of them pro hic and nunc.

20. Unto this Discourse of Customs appertains that of Free Ports, which (in a
Nation that only Trades for it self, viz. vents its own superfluities, and
imports only necessaries for it self) are of no use, but rather harm; for
suppose Wines be brought into a Free Port, be there Housed and privately sold,
but the Cask filled up with stained water, and put on Shipboard again to be
staved as soon as the Ship is out at Sea: In this case, the Duties of those
Wines are defrauded, as it also may be many other ways.

21. Now if it be said, that although we should Trade but for our selves, yet
that our Ports (being more commodious than those of other Nations) would be the
more frequented; for being free, and consequently the more enriched, by the
expense of Seamen and Passengers, hire of Laborers, and Warehouses, etc.
even without any Custom at all upon the Goods. Nevertheless it is reason that a
small Duty should be paid upon the Ship as aforesaid, for such use of our
Ports, and that eo nomine; not expecting all our Benefit from the said hire of
Cellaridge, Porters, and Car-men, which also might be had over and above for
their proper reasons.

22. But if we could attain to be the Merchants between other Nations, there is
then no reason for exacting Duties (as was said before) upon things in fieri,
and which are but in the way of their improvement: And as for the fraud that
may be committed, as in the case of Wines above mentioned, I affirm that our
Excize upon the Consumption, would overcome and elude them.

CHAP. VII. Of Poll-money.
POll-mony is a Tax upon the Persons of men, either upon all simply and
indifferently, or else according to some known Title or mark of distinction
upon each; and that either of bare honor, or else of some Office sought or
imposed, or of some Faculty and Calling without respect to Riches or Poverty,
Incomes or Expense, Gain or Loss accrewing by the said Title, Office or Faculty.

2. The Poll-moneys which have been leavied of late have been wonderfully
confused; as taxing some rich single persons at the lowest rate; some Knights,
though wanting necessaries, at twenty pounds, encouraging some vain fellows to
pay as Esquires, on purpose to have themselves written Esquires in the
Receipts; making some pay ten pounds as Doctors of Physic or Law, who get
nothing by the Faculty, nor mind the practice; making some poor Tradesmen
forced to be of the Liveries of their Companies to pay beyond their strength;
and lastly, some to pay according to their Estates, the same to be valued by
those that know them not; thereby also giving opportunity to some Bankrupts to
make the world credit them as men of such Estates, at which the Assessors did
rate them by Collusion.

3. So as by this Confusion, Arbitraries, Irregularities and hotch pot of
Qualifications, no estimate could be made of the fitness of this Plaster to
the Sore, nor no Check or way to examine whether the respective Receipts were
duly accounted for, etc.

4. Wherefore wholly rejecting the said complicated way of Tax, I shall speak
of Poll money more distinctly, and first of the simple Poll-money upon every
head of all mankind alike; the Parish paying for those that receive Alms,
Parents for their Children under age, and Masters for their Apprentices and
others who receive no wages.

5. The evil of this way is, that it is very unequal; men of unequal abilities,
all paying alike, and those who have greatest charges of Children paying most;
that is, that by how much the poorer they are, by so much the harder are they
taxed.

6. The Conveniences are; first, that it may be suddenly collected, and with
small charge: Secondly, that the number of the people being always known, it
may be sufficiently computed what the same will amount unto. Thirdly, It seems
to be a spur unto all men, to set their Children to some profitable employment
upon their very first capacity, out of the proceed whereof, to pay each child
his own Poll-money.

7. The next Poll-money is upon every head, but distinguished by Titles of mere
Honor, without any kind of Office or Faculty; as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
Viscounts, Barons, Baronets, Knights, and Esquires, viz. the eldest Sons of
Knights in perpetuum, and Gentlemen if they write themselves so. This way is
much more equal than the other; forasmuch as those who are Titled, are for the
most part rich proportionably; or if they were not, yet men so dignified shall
command a pre-eminence and place, even although they do not or cannot buy it of
the vulgar by their Expense: my meaning hereby is, that a Title may possibly
save a man as much as his Poll-money may exceed the Plebian Level by reason of
such title.

8. Moreover, good and multiform Accounts being kept of the People, this Tax
may be also easily, speedily and inexpensively collected; and also being
capable of being computed aforehand, may be fitted and seized according to the
needs of the Prince.

9. As for Offices, they are indeed Dignities for the most part, but paid for
by the trouble of administering them; as for example, to be an Alderman suppose
of London, is indeed an honor, yet many pay five hundred pounds to be excused
from receiving it.

Nevertheless it may not be improper to Tax Offices sought, or such as are
accepted, although they might be refused: And on the other side no Titulado
should be forced to pay Poll-money according to this Title, if he be contented
to lay it down, and never resume it more.

10. The Titles of Faculties and Callings ought to be no Qualification in a
Poll-money, because they do not necessarily nor probably infer ability to pay,
but carry with them vast inequalities. But therefore if a man by his License to
practice get much, it may be presumed he will spend accordingly; in which net
the way of Excize will certainly take him, as it will all the Officers
aforementioned.

11. Hearth-money seems to be a Poll-money, but is not, beng rather a way of
Accumulative Excize; of which hereafter.

CHAP. VIII. Of Lotteries.
MEN that accept Titles may foresee, that they may be Taxed by them as
aforesaid, (although it be unlikely (one House of Parliament being all
Tituladoes, and the greatest part of the other being such also) that any such
way of Leavy should pass) and therefore they do as it were a priori consent
unto the Tax in their own Individuals.

2. Now in the way of Lottery men do also Tax themselves in the general, though
out of hopes of Advantage in particular: A Lottery therefore is properly a Tax
upon unfortunate self-conceited fools; men that have good opinion of their own
luckiness, or that have believed some Fortune Tellers or Astrologer, who had
promised them great success about the time and place of the Lottery, lying
Southwest perhaps from the place where the destiny was read.

3. Now because the World abounds with this kind of fools, it is not fit that
every man that will, my cheat every man that would be cheated, but it is rather
ordained, that the Sovereign should have the Guardianship of these fools, or
that some Favorite should beg the Sovereigns right of taking advantage of such
men's folly, even as in the case of Lunaticks and Idiots.

4. Wherefore a Lottery is not tolerated without authority, assigning the
proportion in which the people shall pay for their errors, and taking care that
they be not so much and so often couzened, as they themselves would be.

5. This way of Lottery is used but for small Levies, and rather upon
privato-publick Accounts, (than for maintaining Armies or Equipping Fleets,)
such as are Aque-Ducts, Bridges, and perhaps Highways, etc. Wherefore we shall
say no more of it upon this occasion.

CHAP. IX. Of Benevolence.
THe raising of Money by Benevolence, seems to be no force upon any man, nor to
take from any man but what himself knows he can spare, nevertheless there is
more in it; for to be but brow-beaten by a Prince or Grandee, proves often as
heavy as to be distrained upon for an Assessment or Subsidy; and the danger of
being misrepresented by linsy Pickthanks and Informers as disaffected to the
Cause for which the Leavy is made, is more frequent than the payment of any sum
in a due proportion with all other men (which I have said is no impoverishment)
can possibly be hurtful.

The benefits of this way are these, viz. That forasmuch as it sometimes falls
out (as in the late Differences with the Scots, annis 1638. and 1639. when the
Church Dignitaries were most concerned) that the cause of the Expense concerns
some men more than others, that then an Imposition should not pass upon all for
the sakes of a part; Sometimes it happens that one sort of men have received
greater and fresher favors than another; as upon the late Restoration of his
Majesty Anno 1660. those who needed an Act of Indemnity did: And sometimes it
is visible, that some men have had better times of gain and advantages than
others, as the Clergy most eminently have had since his Majesty's said
Restoration. In all these Cases, the proposal of a Benevolence may be offered,
although in no Cases it be without its inconveniences; the which are
principally these.

1. The abovementioned Brow-beating and distaste given, if a man have not
contributed as largely as envious observers think he should have done.

2. A Benevolence in many cases may divide a whole Nation into parties, or at
least make the strength of Parties too well known to such as need not know it:
and withal it may (on the contrary and upon design) disguize the same, and
elude the measures which the Governors thought to have taken by such an
exploratory artifice.

3. Some men my have particular reasons to contribute large, viz. complacency
with, and hopes of being repaired by the favor of some Grandee, who favors
the business, and the very same may make to the prejudice of others.

4. Men of sinking Estates, (who nevertheless love to live high, and appear
splendid, and such who make themselves friends, (by their hospitality paid for,
in effect by others) enough to be protected, even from Justice) do often upon
this occasion of Benevolence set extravagant examples unto others, who have
labored hardly for what they have; those not caring what they pay, because it
increases their credit, to borrow the more, so as at length the whole burden
of such Bankrupts Benevolence, lights upon the frugal Patriots, by whom the
Public Weal subsists.

CHAP. X. Of Penalties.
THe usual Penalties are Death, Mutilations, Imprisonment, publibk Disgrace,
Corporal transient pains, and great Tortures, besides the Pecuniary Mulcts. On
which last we shall most insist, speaking of the others but in order to examine
whether they may not be commuted for these.

2. There be some certain Crimes, for which the Law of God appoints death, and
these must be punished with it, unless we say that those were but the Civil
Laws of the Jewish Commonwealth, although given by God himself; of which
opinion certainly most modern States are, in as much as they punish not
Adulteries, etc. with death as among the Jews, and yet punish small Thefts with
Death instead of multiple reparation.

3. Upon this supposition we shall venture to offer; whether the reason of
simple Death be not to punish incorrigible Committers of great faults?

4. Of public Death with Torments, to affright men from Treasons, which cause
the deaths and miseries of many thousand innocent and useful people?

5. Of Death secretly executed, to punish secret and unknown Crimes, such as
public Executions would teach to the World? Or else to suffocate betimes some
dangerous Novelties in Religion; which the patient suffering of the worst man
would much spread and encourage.

6. Mutilations suppose of Ears, Nose, etc. are used for perpetual disgrace, as
standing in the Pillory is for temporary and transient; which and such other
punishments have (by the way) made some corrigible offenders, to become
desperate and incurable.

7. Mutilations of parts as of fingures, are proper to disable such as have
abused their dextrous use of them by Pocketpicking, Counterfeiting of Seals and
Writings, etc. Mutilations of other parts, may serve to punish and prevent
Adulteries, Rapes, Incests, etc. And the smaller corporal pains, serve to
punish those, who can pay no pecuniary mulcts.

8. Imprisonment seems rather to be the punishments of suspected than guilty
persons, and such as by their carriage give the Magistrate occasion to think,
either they have done some smaller particular Crime, as Thefts, etc. or that
they would commit greater, as Treasons and seditions. But where Imprisonment is
not a securing men until their Trials, but a sentence after Trial, it seems to
me proper only to seclude such men from conversation, whose Discourses are
bewitching, and Practices infectious, and in whom nevertheless remains some
hopes of their future Amendments, or usefulness for some service not yet
appearing.

9. As for perpetual Imprisonment by sentence, it seems but the same with death
it self, to be executed by nature it self, quickened with such Diseases, as
close living, sadness, solitude, and reflections upon a past and better
condition, does commonly beget: Nor do men sentenced hereunto live longer,
though they be longer in dying.

10. Here we are to remember in consequence of our opinion, [That labor is the
Father and active principle of Wealth, as Lands are the Mother] that the State
by killing, mutilating, or imprisoning their members, do withal punish
themselves; wherefore such punishments ought (as much as possible) to be
avoided and commuted for pecuniary mulcts, which will increase labor and
public Wealth.

11. Upon which account, why should not a man of Estate, found guilty of
manslaughter rather pay a certain proportion of his whole Estate, than be
burnt in the hand?

12. Why should not insolvent Thieves be rather punished with slavery than
death? so as being slaves they may be forced to as much labor, and as cheap
fare, as nature will endure, and thereby become as two men added to the
Commonwealth; and not as one taken away from it; for if England be
underpeopled, (suppose by half) I say that next to the bringing in of as many
more as now are, is the making these that are, to do double the work which now
they do; that is, to make some slaves; but of this elsewhere.

13. And why should not the solvent Thieves and Cheats be rather punished with
multiple Restitutions than Death, Pillory, Whipping, etc. But it will be asked
with how manifold Restitutions should picking a pocket (for example) be
punished? I say 'twere good in order to the solution hereof, to enquire of some
candid Artists in that Trade, how often they are taken one time with another
practicing in this work? If but once in ten times; then to restore even but
sevenfold would be a fair profit; and to restore but ten-fold, were but an
even lay; wherefore to restore twenty-fold, that is, double to the hazard, is
rather the true ratio and measure of punishment by double reparation.

14. And surely the restoring two, three, four, and sevenfold mentioned in
Moses Law must be thus understood, or else a man might make thieving a very
fair and lawful profession.

15. The next question is, in such multiple Restitutions how many parts should
be given to the sufferer. To which I answer, never above one, and scarce that,
to oblige him to more care, and self-preservation, with three parts to
discoverers, and the rest to public uses.

16. Thirdly, In the case of Fornications, most of the punishments not made by
pecuniary mulcts and commuted, are but shame, and that too but toward some few
persons, which shame for ever after obdurates the Offender, what ever it work
upon such whose fames are yet entire: Of all which men take little
consideration, standing upon the brink of such precipices as makes them giddy;
and when they are in danger of such faults as are rather madnesses, distempers,
and alienations of the mind and reason, as also insurrections of the passions,
than deliberate act of the understanding.

17. Moreover, according to that Axiom of, In quo quis peccat, in codem
puniatur; if the Ratio formalis of the sin of Concubitus Vagi, be the hindering
of procreation, let those who by their miscarrages of this kind are guilty
thereof, repair unto the State the miss of another pair of hands with the
double labor of their own, or which is all one, by a pecuniary mulct; and this
is the practice of some wise States in punishing what they will never be able
to prevent: Nor does the Gospel specify any punishment in this world, only
declaring they shall not be received into the joys of the next.

18. I could instance in more particulars, but if what I have already said be
reasonable, this little is enough; if not, then all the rest would be too
little also: wherefore I shall add but one instance more, as most suitable to
our present times and occasions, which is the way of punishing Heterodox
Professors of Religion.

19. That the Magistrate may punish false Believers, if he believe he shall
offend God in forbearing it, is true; for the same reasons that men give for
Liberty of Conscience, and universal tolleration; and on the other side, that
he may permit false Worships, seems clearly at least by the practice of all
States, who allow Ambassadors their freedom (be their Worship never so
abominable) even when they come to negotiate but upon temporal and small
matters.

20. Wherefore, since the Magistrate may allow or connive at such Worships as
himself thinks fit, and yet may also punish; and since by Death, Mutilations
and imprisonments of the Subjects, the State not only punishes it self, but
spreads the Pseudodoxies; it follows, that pecuniary Mulcts are the fittest
ways of checking the wantonness of men in this particular: forasmuch as that
course favors of no bitterness at all, but rather argues a desire to indulge,
provided such indulgence may consist with the indemnity of the State; for no
Heterodox Believer will desire to be tolerated longer then he keeps the
Public Peace; the which if he meas to do, he cannot take it ill of the
Magistrate, to keep him steady unto that his duty, nor grudge to contribute
toward so much charge for that purpose as himself occasions.

21. Moreover, as there seems a reason for indulging some conscientious
misbelievers, so there is as much for being severe toward Hypocrites,
especially such as abuse holy Religion to cloak and vizzard worldly ends: Now
what more easy and yet effectual way is there to discern between these two,
then well proportioned pecuniary mulcts? for who desiring to serve God without
fear, and laboring ten hours per idem at his Calling, would not labor one
hour more for such a freedom? even as Religious men spend an hour per diem more
then the looser sort at their Devotions; or who wearing Cloth of one and twenty
shillings the yard, would not be contented with that of twenty shillings, for
the same advantage of his liberty in Worship? Those that kick at this being
unwilling either to do or suffer for God, for whose sake they pretend so much.

22. It may be here objected, that although some bad Religions might be
tolerated, yet that all may not, viz. such as consist not with the Civil
Peace. To which I answer.

First, that there is no Schism or Separation, be it never so small, consistent
with that unity and peace as could be wished; nor none so perfectly
conscientious, but may also be civilly most pernicious: For that Venner and his
Accomplices acted upon internal motives, the most free exposing of themselves to
death may evince; and yet their holding the King to be an Usurper upon the
Throne and Right of Jesus Christ was a Civil mischief neither to be pardoned or
paralleled.

28. And yet on the other hand there is no Pseudodoxy so great, but may be
muzled from doing much harm in the State, without either Death, Imprisonment,
or Mutilation: To make short, no opinion can be more dangerous, then to
disbelieve the immortality of the Soul, as rendering man a beast, and without
conscience, or fear of committing any evil, if he can but elude the penalties
of humane Laws made against it, and letting men loose to all evil thoughts and
designs whereof man can take no notice: Now I say, that even this Misbeliever
may be adaequately punished if he be kept as a beast, be proprietor of nothing,
as making no conscience how he gets; be never admitted in Evidence or
Testimony, as under no Obligation to speak truth; be excluded all Honors and
Offices, as caring only for himself, not the protecting of others; and be
withal kept to extreme bodily labor, the profit whereof to the State is the
pecuniary Mulct we speak of, though the greatest.

24. As for opinions less horrible then this, the mulct may be fitted to each
of them respectively, according to the measure of danger which the Magistrate
apprehends from their allowance, and the charge necessary to prevent it.

25. And now we are speaking of the ways how to prevent and correct
Heterodoxies in Religion, which we have hitherto done by designing punishments
for the erring sheep, I think it not amiss to add, That in all these cases the
Shepherds themselves should not wholly escape free: For if in this Nation there
be such abundance of Free-Schools, and of liberal Maintenance provide in our
Universities and elsewhere for instructing more then enough in all such
learning as is fit to defend the established Religion, together with
superabundant Libraries for that purpose. Moreover, if the Church-preferments
be so numerous and ample both for Wealth, Honor, and Power, as scarce any
where more; it seems strange that when by the laziness, formality, ignorance,
and loose lives of our Pastors, the sheep have gone astray, grown scabbed, or
have been devoured by Wolves and Foxes, that the Remedy of all this should be
only sought by frighting those that have strayed from ever returning again, and
by tearing off as well the skins as the wool of those that are scabbed;
whereas Almighty God will rather require the blood even of them that have been
devoured from the Shepherds themselves.

26. Wherefore if the Minister should lose part of the Tithes of those whom he
suffers to defect from the Church, (the defector not saving, but the State
wholly gaining them) and the defector paying some pecuniary Mulct for his
Schism, and withal himself defraying the charge of his new particular Church
and Pastorage, methinks the burden would be thus more equally born.

27. Besides, the judicious world do not believe our Clergy can deserve the
vast preferments they have, only because they preach, give a better account of
Opinions concerning Religion then others, or can express their conceptions in
the words of the Fathers, or the Scriptures, etc. Whereas certainly the great
honor we give them, is for being patterns of Holiness, for showing by their
own self-denials, mortifications, and austerities, that it is possible for us to
imitate them in the precepts of God; for if it were but for their bare
Pulpit-discourses, some men might think there is ten thousand times as much
already printed as can be necessary, and as good as any that ever hereafter may
be expected. And it is much suspected, that the Discipline of the Cloisters
has kept up the Roman Religion, which the Luxury of the Cardinals and Prelates
might have destroyed.

28. The substance therefore of all we have said in this discourse concerning
the Church is, that it would make much for its peace, if the Nursery of
Ministers be not too big, that Austerities in the Priests lives would reconcile
them to the people; and that it is not unreasonable, that when the whole Church
suffers by the defection of her Members, that the Pastors of it by bearing a
small part should be made sensible of the loss; the manner and measures of all
which I leave unto those unto whom it belongs.

29. Concerning Penalties and Penal Laws I shall add but this, that the abuse
of them is, when they are made not to keep men from sin, but to draw them into
punishment; and when the Executors of them keep them hid until a fault be done,
and then show them terrible to the poor immalicious offender: Just like
Sentinels, who never show men the advertisements against pissing near their
Guards, till they have caught them by the coats for the forfeiture they claim.

CHAP. X. Of Monopolies and Offices.
MOnopoly (as the word signifies) is the sole selling power, which whosoever
has, can vend the commodity whereupon he has this power, either qualified as
himself pleases, or at what price he pleases, or both, within the limits of
his Commission.

2. The great example of a Monopoly is the King of France his Gabel upon Salt,
whereby he sells that for sixty which costs him but one; now Salt being a thing
of Universal use to all degrees of men, and scarce more to the poor then the
rich, it seems to be of the same effect with the simple Pollmoney
abovementioned, in case all men spent equally of it, or if men be forced to
take it whether they spend it or not, as in some places they are. But if men
spend or eat Salt unequally, as they commonly do, nor are bound to take or pay
for more then they spend then it is no other then an accumulative Exeize,
especially if the Salt be all of one Uniform goodness; otherwise it is a
distinct species of Leavy, viz. a Monopoly.

3. The use or pretense of instituting a Monopoly is,

First, Right of Invention; forasmuch as the Laws do reward Inventions, by
granting them a Monopoly of them for a certain time; (as here in England for
fourteen years) for thereby the Inventor is rewarded more or less according to
the acceptance which his Invention finds amongst men.

Where note by the way, that few new Inventions were ever rewarded by a
Monopoly; for although the Inventor oftentimes drunk with the opinion of his
own merit, thinks all the world will invade and incroach upon him, yet I have
observed, that the generality of men will scarce be hired to make use of new
practices, which themselves have not thoroughly tried, and which length of time
has not vindicated from latent inconveniences; so as when a new Invention is
first propounded, in the beginning every man objects, and the poor Inventor
runs the Gantloop of all petulent wits; every man finding his several flaw, no
man approving it, unless mended according to his own advice: Now not one of an
hundred out-lives this torture, and those that do, are at length so changed by
the various contrivances of others, that not any one man can pretend to the
Invention of the whole, nor well agree about their respective shares in the
parts. And moreover, this commonly is so long a doing, that the poor Inventor
is either dead, or disabled by the debts contracted to pursue his design; and
withal railed upon as a Projector, or worse, by those who joined their money in
partnership with his wit; so as the said Inventor and his pretenses are wholly
lost and vanished.

Secondly, a Monopoly may be of real use for a time, viz. at the first
introducing of a new Manufacture, wherein is much nicety to make it well, and
which the generality of men cannot judge of as to the performance. As for
example; suppose there were some most approved Medicament which one certain man
could make most exactly well, although several others could also make the same
less perfectly: in this case this same chief Artist may be allowed a Monopoly
for a time, viz. until others have had experience enough under him, how to make
the Medicament as well as himself. First, because the world may not have the
Medicament variously made, when as they can neither discern the difference by
their senses, nor judge of the effects thereof a posteriori, by their reasons.
Secondly, because others may be fully instructed by him that can best do it;
and thirdly, because he may have a reward for such his communications: But
forasmuch as by Monopolies of this kind, great Levies are seldom made, they are
scarce pertinent to our design.

Offices instituted by the State with Fees of their own appointment, are of
parallel nature to Monopolies; the one relating to actions and employments as
the other to things, and have the same to be said for and against them as
Monoplies have.

As a Kingdom increases and flourishes, so does variety of things, of
actions, and even of words increase also; for we see that the language of the
most flourishing Empires was ever the most copious and elegant, and that of
mountainous Cantons the contrary: Now as the actions of this Kingdom increased,
so did the Offices (that is, the power and faculty of solely executing and
performing the said actions) increase likewise; and on the contrary, as the
business of Offices increased, so did the difficulty and danger of discharging
them amiss decrease proportionably: from whence it is come to pass, that the
Offices which at their first erecting were not performed but by the ablest,
most inventive, and versatile Instruments, (such as could wrestle with all
emergent difficulties, and collect Rules and Axioms out of the Series of their
own Observations, (with reference to the various casualties of their
employments) whereby to direct Posterity) are now persormed by the most
ordinary, formal, pack-horse Deputies and Sub-Deputies.

And whereas at first such large Fees were allowed as (considering even the
paucity of them which might then be received) should compensate the Art; Trust,
and Industry of the Administrator; yet the said large Fees are still continued,
although the skill and trust be lessened, and the number of the said Fees so
extremely multiplied: so as now the profits of such Offices (being become
clear, and the work so easy as any man is capable of it, even those that never
saw it,) are bought and sold for Years or Lives, as any other Annuity may be;
and withal, the splendour arising from the easy gains of those places in Courts
of Justice, is called the Flourishing of the Law, which certainly flourishes
best, when the Professors and Ministers of it have least to do. And moreover,
when the burden and uselesness of such an Office is taken notice of, it is
nevertheless spared as a Subjects Freehold in Favor of him that bought it.

Of these Offices are many in this Nation, and such as might be a Revenue to
the King, either by their Annual profits, or the Sale of them for many years
together. And these are the Offices that are properly Saleable, viz. where the
Fees are large, as appointed when the number of them was few, and also
numerous, as multiplying upon the increase of business, and where the business
is only the labor of the meanest men: length of time having made all the work
so easy, and found out security against all the frauds, breaches of trust, and
male-administrations, whereunto the infancies of those places were obnoxious.

These Offices are therefore Taxes upon such as can or will not avoid the
passing through them, and are born as men endure and run themselves into the
mischiefs of Duelling, the which are very great, which side soever prevails;
for certainly men do not always go to Law to obtain right, or prevent wrong
which judicious neighbors might perform as well as a Jury of no abler men; and
men might tell the Judge himself the merits of their Cause; as well as now they
instruct their Council. This therefore of Offices is a voluntary Tax upon
contentious men, as Excize upon Drink is to good Fellows to love it.

CHAP. XII. Of Tithes.
THe word Tithes, being the same with Tenths, signify of it self no more then
the proportion of the Excisium, or part retrenched, as if Customs upon imported
and exported Commodities should be called by the name of Twentieths, as it is
sometimes called Tunnage and Poundage; wherefore it remains to say, that Tithes
in this place, do together with the said proportion, consignifie the use of it,
viz. the maintenance of the Clergy, as also the matter or substance out of
which this Maintenance is cut, viz. the immediate fruit of the Land and Waters,
or the proceed of men's Labor, Art, and Stock laid out upon them. It signifies
also the manner of paying it, viz. in spccie, and not (but upon special and
voluntary causes) in money.

2. We said the matter of Tithes was the immediate fruitsof the Earth, viz. of
Grain as soon as it is ready to be removed from the ground that bare it; and not
of Bread which is Corn thresht, winnowed, ground, tempered with liquor and
baked.

3. It Is also the second choice out of the young of multiparous Cattle taken in
spccie, so soon as the said Yonglings can subsist without their Dams, or else a
Composition in Money for the Uniparons.

4. It Is Wool, so soon as it is shorn; it is Fowl and Fish, where Fowling and
Fishing is rather a Trade then a mere Recreation, and sic de cateris.

5. Moreover, in great Cities, Tithes are a kind of composition in Money for
the labor and profit of the Artisans who work upon the materials which have
paid Tithes before.

6. Tithes therefore increase within any Territory, as the labor of that
Country increases; and labor does or ought to increase as the people do; now
within four hundred years the people of England are about quadrupled, as
doubling every two hundred years, and the proportion of the Rent of all the
Lands in England, is about the fourth part of the Expense of the people in it,
so as the other three parts is labor and stock.

7. Wherefore the Tithes now should be twelve times as good as they were four
hundred years ago; which the rates of Benefices in the Kings books do-pretty
well show, by comparing of times; something of this should be abated because
the proportion between the proceed of Lands and Labor do vary as the hands of
Laborers vary: Wherefore we shall rather say, that the Tithes are but six
times as good now as four hundred years ago, that is, that the Tithes now would
pay six times as many Laborers, or feed six times as many mouths, as the
Tithes four hundred years ago would have done.

8. Now if there were not only as many Parishes then as now, more Priests in
every Parish, and also more Religious Men who were also Priests, and the
Religion of those times being more operose, and fuller of work than now, by
reason of Confessions, Holy Days, Offices, etc. more in those days than now,
(the great work in these days being a compendious teaching of above a thousand
at once without much particular Confession and Catechizing, or trouble about
the dead; it seems clear, that the Clergy now is far richer than heretofore,
and that to be a Clergy man then was a kind of a Mortification, whereas now
(praised by God) it is matter of splendor and magnificence; unless any will
say, that there were golden Priests when the Chalices were wood, and but wooden
Priests when the Chalices were gold; or that Religion best flourishes when the
Priests are most mortified, as was before said of the Law, which best
flourishes when Lawyers have least to do.

9. But what ever the increase of the Churches goods are, I grudge it them not,
only wish that they would take a course to enjoy it with safety and peace to
themselves; whereof one is, not to breed more Churchmen than the Benefices as
they now stand shared out will receive; that is to say, if there be places but
for about twelve thousand in England and Wales, it will not be safe to breed up
24000 Ministers, upon a view or conceit that the Church-Means otherwise
distributed might suffice them all; for then the twelve thousand which are
unprovided for, will seek ways how to get themselves a livelihood; which they
cannot do more easily, than by persuading the people, that the twelve thousand
Incumbents do poison or starve their Souls, and misguide them in their way to
Heaven: which needy men upon a strong temptation will do effectually; we having
observed, that Lecturers being such a sort of Supernumeraries, have preached
more times in a Week, more hours in the Day, and with greater vehemence every
time, than the Incumbents could afford to do; for Graeculus esuriens in Coelum
jusseris, ibit. Now this vehemence, this pain, this zeal, and this living upon
particular Donations, makes the people think, that those who act them are
withal more Orthodox, nay better assisted from God than the others. Now let any
man judge, whether men reputed to be inspired will not get help to lift
themselves into Church livings, etc. But these things are too plain from the
latest experiences.

10. Now you will ask, how shall that be done, or how may we know how to adjust
our Nursery to our Orchard? To which I answer, that if there be twelve thousand
Church Livings in England, Dignitaries included, then that about four hundred
being sent forth per ann. in the Vineyard, may keep it well served, without
luxuriency; for accordiug to the Mortality-Bill-observation, about that number
will die yearly out of twelve thousand Adult-persons, such as Ministers are as
to age, and ought to be as well as to speculative knowledge, as practical
experience, both of themselves and others.

11. But I have digressed, my main scope being to explain the nature of the Tax
of Tithes; nevertheless, since the end of such Explanation is but to persuade
men to bear quietly so much Tax as is necessary, and not to kick against the
pricks; and since the end of that again, and the end of all else we are to do,
is but to preserve the Public Peace, I think I have not been impertinent in
inserting this little Advertisement, making so much for the Peace of Jerusalem.

12. But to return to Tithes as a Tax or Levy, I say, that in England it is
none, whatsoever it might be, or seem to be in the first Age of its
Institution; nor will the Kings Quit-rents in Ireland, as they are properly
none now, seem any in the next Age, when every man will proportion his Expense
to the remainder of his own Rent after the King is paid his; for it is surprise,
and the suddenness of the Charge, which a Tax supervenient to a man's other
expenses and issues makes, that renders it a burden, and that intolerable to
such as will not understand it, making men even to take up Arms to withstand
it; that is, leap out of the Drying Pan upon Earth into the Fire even of Hell,
which is War, and the consequences thereof.

13. Now Tithes being no Tax, I speak of it but as the modus or pattern of a
Tax, affirming it to be next to one, the most equal and indifferent which can
be appointed in order to defray the Public Charge of the whole Nation, as well
as that of the Church; for hereby is collected a proportion of all the Corn,
Cattle, Fish, Fowl, Fruit, Wool, Honey, Wax, Oil, Hemp, and Flax of the
Nation, as a result of the Lands, Art, Labor and Stock which produced them;
only it is scarce regular in respect of Housing, Cloth, Drinks, Leather,
Feathers, and the several Manufactures of them; insomuch, as if the difference
of Tithes which the Country pays in proportion to the City, were now de novo to
be established, I do not see what in likelihood would sooner cause a grand
Sedition about it.

14. The payment of an aliquot part to the King out of the same things as now
pay Tithes, in specie, would have an inconvenience, because the Kings Rents
would be like the Dividend in Colleges, viz. higher or lower according to the
prices of those Commodities, unless the said inequality in Colleges happen by
reason of the fewness of particulars, according to the Market rates whereof,
their Rents are paid in Money; whereas the whole of all the particulars might
well enough balance each other, a dear or plentiful year being but an
appellation secundum quid, viz. with reference as to Corn only, as the chief
food of the multitude; whereas it is likely, that the same causes which makes
Corn scarce, may make other things in plenty of no less use to the King, as
repairing in one thing what he wants in another.

15. Another inconvenience would be that which was observed in Ireland, when
the Ministry were paid by Sallary, and the Tithes in kind paid to the State;
who because they could not actually receive them in specie, let them at farm to
the most bidder; in the Transaction whereof was much juggling, combination and
collusion, which perhaps might have been remedied, had not that course been
used but as a sudden temporary shift, without intention of continuing it.

16. The third inconvenience is that abovementioned, viz. the necessity of
another way of Tax, to take in the Manufactures of those Commodities which pay
the Tax of Tithes whereas possibly there is a way of Tax equal in its own
nature, and which needs not to be pieced up by any other; so as the Officers
about that may have a full employment, and none others wanted, whose wide
intervals of leisure shall make them seem Drones, as they are also the
Caterpillars of any State.

CHAP. XIII. Of several smaller ways of levying Money.
WHen the people are weary of any one sort of Tax, presently some Projector
propounds another, and gets himself Audience, by affirming he can propound a
way how all the Public Charge may be born without the way that is. As for
example, if a Land Tax be the present distasted way, and the people weary of
it, then he offers to do the business without such a Land Tax, and propound
either a Poll-money, Excize, or the institution of some new Office or Monopoly;
and hereby draws some or other to hearken to him; which is readily enough done
by those who are not in the places of profit, relating to the way of Levies in
use, but hope to make themselves Offices in the new Institution.

2. I shall enumerate a few of the smaller ways which I have observed in
several places of Europe, viz.

First, In some places the State is common Cashier for all or most Moneys, as
where Banks are, thereby gaining the interest of as much Money as is deposited
in their hands.

Secondly, Sometimes the State is the common Usurer; as where Loan Banks, and
montes pietatis are in use, and might be more copiously and effectually where
Registers of Lands are kept.

Thirdly, Sometimes the State is or may be Common Ensurer, either upon the
danger only of Enemies at Sea, according to the supposed Primitive End of our
Customs in England, or else of the casualties of the Enemy, Weather, Sea, and
Vessel taken together.

Fourthly, Sometimes the State has the whole Sale and benefit of certain
Commodities, as of Amber in the Duke of Brandenburghs Country, Tobacco formerly
in Ireland, Salt in France, etc.

Fifthly, Sometimes the State is common Beggar, as it is almost in Holland,
where particular Charity seems only to serve for the relief of concealed wants,
and to save these wanting from the shame of discovering their poverty, and not
so much to relieve any wants that are declared, and already publicly known.

Sixthly, In some places the State is the sole Guardian of Minors, Lunaticks,
and Idiots.

Seventhly, In some other Countries the State sets up and maintains
Play Houses, and Public Entertainments, giving Sallaries to the Actors, but
receiving the bulk of the profit to themselves.

Eighthly, In some places, Houses are ensured from fire by the State at a small
Rent per annum upon each.

Ninthly, In some places Tolls are taken upon passage over Bridges, Causeys,
and Ferries built and maintained at the Public Charge.

Tenthly, In some places men that die are obliged to leave a certain pittance
to the Public, the same is practiced in other places upon Marriages, and may
be in others upon Births.

Eleventhly, In some places Strangers, especially Jews, are particularly taxed;
which may be good in over-peopled Countries, though bad in the contrary case.

3. As for Jews, they may well bear somewhat extraordinary, because they seldom
eat and drink with Christians, hold it no disparagement to live frugally, and
even sordidly among themselves, by which way alone they become able to
undersell any other Traders, to elude the Excize, which bears but according to
mean expenses; as also other Duties by dealing so much in Bills of Exchange,
Jewels, and Money, and by practicing of several frands with more impunity than
others; but by their being at home every where, and yet no where they become
responsible almost for nothing.

4. Twelfthly, There have been in our times ways of levying an Aliquot, part of
men's Estates, as a Fifth, and Twentieth, viz. of their Estates real and
personal, yea, of their Offices, Faculties; and imaginary Estates also, in and
about which way may be so much fraud, collusion, oppression, and trouble, some
purposely getting themselves taxed to gain more trust; others bribing to be
taxed low, and it being impossible to check or examine, or trace these
Collections by the print of any footsteps they leave (such as the Hearths of
Chimneys are) that I have not patience to speak more against it; daring rather
conclude without more ado, in the words of our Comic to be naught, yea
exceeding naught, very abominable, and not good.

CHAP. XIV. Of raising, depressing, or embasing of Money.
SOmetimes it has happened that States (I know not by what raw advice) have
raised or embased their Money, hoping thereby, as it were, to multiply it, and
make it pass for more than it did before; that is, to purchase more commodity
or labor with it: All which indeed and in truth, amounts to no more than a Tax
upon such People unto whom the State is indebted, or a defalkation of what is
due; as also the like burden upon all that live upon Pensions, established
Rents, Annuities, Fees, Gratuities, etc.

2. To explain this fully, one might lanch out into the deep Ocean of all the
Mysteries concerning Money, which is done for other ends elsewhere:
nevertheless I shall do it the best I can, by expounding the reasons pro and
contra for embasing and raising of Money: and first of embasing.

3. Copper or Tyn-money made ad valorem in its matter, is no embasing; the same
being only cumbersom and baser than Silver Money, only because less convenient
and portable.

And Copper Money ad valorem in workmanship and matter both together, (such as
on which the Effigies and Scutcheon are so curiously graven and impressed, as
the Moneys seem rather Medals) is not embasing, unless the numbers of such
pieces be excessive, (the measures whereof I shall not set down, until I shall
hereafter propound the fittest Sections of the abstracted pound into which I
would have Money coined, and determine how many pieces of each Section should
be in an hundred pound) for in case of such excess, the workmanship being of no
other use but to look upon, becomes base by its being too common.

4. Nor are such Tokens base as are coined for Exchange in Retailing by
particular men, (if such men be responsible and able to take them back, and
give Silver for them.)

5. But that Gold I count to be embased, which has more allay either of Copper
or Silver in it, than serves to correct its too great natural softness and
flexibility, whereby it wears too fast in Money: And that Silver I reckon also
embafed, wherein is commixed more Copper than will sufficiently toughen it, and
save it from cracking under the Hammer, Press, or Mill that must coin it, or
the like.

6. Base Money is therefore such as Dutch Shillings, Stivers, French Soulz,
Irist Bon-galls, etc. and for the most part consisting of great Pieces, though
of small value. To answer the first reason or pretense of making them, which
is, that the said Pieces might be more bulky, handleable, and the Silver in
them less apt to be lost, or worn away.

7. The other reason (besides that of allay, which we must allow in the
measures abovementioned) is to save it from being melted down by Goldsmiths
and Bullioners, or exported by Strangers; neither of which can happen but to
their loss: for suppose a Stiver of two pence had a penny of pure Silver, if the
Bullioner melts it for the sake of the Silver only, in the separation he shall
lose the Copper and charge of refining the Silver; nor will the strangers
export it into places where the local value of the Piece perishes, the
intrinsic leaving him to loss.

7. Now the reasons against this kind of Money are; first, the greater danger
of falsification, because the color, sound, and weight by which men (without
the test) guess at the goodness of the material of Money is too much
confounded, for the vulgar (whom it concerns) to make use of them for their
marks and guides in the business.

8. Secondly, In case small pieces of this Money, viz. pieces of two pence
should happen to be raised or depressed twelve, fifteen, or sixteen per cent.
then there will be a certain loss by reason of the fractions, which the vulgar
cannot reckon: As for example, if such Money were depressed but ten, eleven, or
twelve per cent. then the two pence piece would be worth but three half pence,
which is twenty five per cent. and so of other proportions.

9. Thirdly, In case the inconvenience of this Money should be so great as to
necessitate a new Coynage of it, then will happen all the losses we mentioned
before in melting it down by Bullioners.

10. Fourthly, If the two pence piece contained but the eighth part of the
silver usually in a shilling, then Dealers would have fifteen pence paid in
this Money for the same Commodity, for which they would take a shilling in
Standard Silver.

11. Raising of Money is either the cutting the pound Troy of Standard Silver
into more pieces than formerly, as into above sixty, whereas heretofore the
same was made but into twenty, and yet both sorts called shillings, or else
calling the Money already made by higher names: The reasons or pretenses given
for such raising are these; viz. That the raising of Money will bring it in,
and the material thereof more plentifully; for trial whereof, suppose one
shilling were proclaimed to be worth two, what other effect could this have,
than the raising of all Commodities unto a double price? Now if it were
proclaimed, that Laborers Wages, etc. should not rise at all upon this raising
of Money, then would this Act be as only a Tax upon the said Laborers, as
forcing them to lose half their Wages, which would not be only unjust, but
impossible, unless they could live with the said half, (which is not to be
supposed) for then the Law that appoints such Wages were ill made, which should
allow the Labourer but just wherewithal to live; for if you allow double, then
he works but half so much as he could have done, and otherwise would; which is
a loss to the Public of the fruit of so much labor.

12. But suppose the Quart d' Escu of France, commonly esteemed worth eighteen
pence, were raised to three shillings, then it is true, that all the Moneys of
England would be indeed Quart d' Escu pieces; but as true, that all the English
Money would be carried away, and that our Quart d' Escu would contain but half
so much Bullion as our own money did; so that raising of money may indeed
change the species, but with so much loss as the Foreign Pieces were raised
unto, above their intrinsic value.

13. But for remedy of this suppose we raised the Quart d' Escu double, and
prohibited the Exportation of our own money in Exchange thereof. I answer, that
such a Prohibition is nugatory, and impossible to be executed; and if it were
not, yet the raising of the said species would but make us sell the Commodities
bought with raised Quart d' Escues, in essect but at half the usual rate, which
unto them that want such commodities will as well yield the full; so that
abating our prices, will as well allure strangers to buy extraordinary
proportions of our Commodities, as raising their money will do: But neither
that, nor abating the price will make strangers use more of our Commodities,
then they want; for although the first year they should carry away an unuseful
and superfluous proportion, yet afterward they would take so much the less.

14. If this be true, as in substance it is, why then have so many wise States
in several ancient, as well as modern times frequently practiced this Artifice
as a means to draw in money into their respective Dominions?

I answer, that something is to be attributed to the stupidity and ignorance of
the people, who cannot of a sudden understand this matter: for I find many men
wise enough, who though they be well informed that raising of money signifies
little, yet cannot suddenly digest it. As for example, an unengaged person who
had money in his purse in England, and should hear that a ^^^ling was made
fourteen pence in Ireland, would more readily run thither to buy Land then
before; not suddenly apprehending, that for the same Land which he might have
bought before for six years Purchase, he shall now pay seven. Nor will Sellers
in Ireland of a sudden apprehend cause to raise their Land proportionally, but
will at least be contented to compound the business, viz. to sell at six and an
half, and if the difference be a more ragged fraction, men under a long time
will not apprehend it, nor ever be able exactly to govern their practice
according to it.

15. Secondly, Although I apprehend little real defference between raising
Foreign Money to double, and abating half in the price of our own Commodities,
yet to sell them on a tacit condition to be paid in Foreign present Money,
shall increase our money; forasmuch as between raising the money, and abasing
the price, is the same difference as between selling for money and in barter,
which latter is the dearer; or between selling for present money, and for time;
barter resolving into the nature of uncertain time.

19. I say, suppose English Cloth were sold at six shillings a Yard, and French
Canvas at eighteen pence the Ell, the question is, whether it were all one in
order to increase Money in England to raise the French Money double, or to
abate half of the price of our Cloth? I think the former better, because that
former way or proposition carries with it a condition having Foreign Money in
specie, and not Canvas in barter, between which two ways the world generally
agrees there is a difference. Wheresore if we can afford to abate half our
price, but will not do it but for our neighbors money, then we gain so much as
the said difference between Money and Barter amounts unto, by such raising of
our Neighbors Money.

17. But the fundamental solution of this Question depends upon a real and not
an imaginary way of computing the prices of Commodities; in order to which real
way I premise these suppositions: First then, suppose there pe in a Territory a
thousand people, let these people be supposed sufficient to Till this whole
Territory as to the Husbandry of Corn, which we will suppose to contain all
necessaries for life, as in the Lords Prayer we suppose the word Bread does;
and let the production of a Bushel of this Corn be supposed of equal labor to
that of producing an ounce of Silver. Suppose again that a tenth part of this
Land and tenth of the people, viz: an hundred of them can produce Corn enough
for the whole; suppose that the Rent of Land (found out as abovementioned) be a
fourth part of the whole product, (about which proportion it really is, as we
may perceive by paying a fourth Sheaf instead of Rent in some places) suppose
also that whereas but an hundred are necessary for this Husbandry, yet that two
hundred have taken up the Trade; and suppose that where a Bushel of Corn would
suffice, yet men out of delicacy will use two, making use of the Flower only of
both. Now the inferences from hence are;

First That the goodness or badness, or the value of Land depends upon the
greater or lesser share of the product given for it in proportion to the simple
labor bestowed to raise the said Product.

Secondly, That the proportions between Corn and Silver signify only an
artificial value, not a natural; because the comparison is between a thing
naturally useful, and a thing in it self unnecessary, which (by the way) is
part of the reason why there are not so great changes and leaps in the prizes
of Silver as of other Commodities.

Thirdly, That natural dearness and cheapness depends upon the few or more
hands requisite to necessaries of Nature: As Corn is cheaper where one man
produces Corn for ten, then where he can do the like but for six; and withal,
according as the Climate disposes men to a necessity of spending more or less.
But Political Cheapness depends upon the paucity of Supernumerary Interlopers
into and Trade over and above all that are necessary viz. Corn will be twice as
dear where are two hundred Husbandmen to do the same work which an hundred
could perform: the proportion thereof being compounded with the proportion of
superfluous Expense, ( viz. if to the cause of dearness above mentioned be
added to the double Expense to what is necessary) then the natural price will
appear quadrubled; and this quadruple Price is the true Political Price
computed upon naturral grounds.

And this again proportioned to the common artificial Standard Silver gives
what was sought; that is, the true price Current.

18. But forasmuch as almost all Commodities have their Substitutes or
Succedanea, and that a most all uses may be answered several ways; and for
that novelty, surprise, example of Superiors, and opinion of unexaminable
effects do add or take away from the price of things, we must add these
contingent Causes to the permanent Causes abovementioned, in the judicious
foresight and computation whereof lies the excellency of a Merchant.

Now to, apply this Digression, I say, that to increase Money, it is as well
necessary to know how to abate as raise, the price of commodities, and that of
Money, which was the scope of the said Digression.

19. To conclude this whole Chapter, we say, that raising or embasing of Moneys
is a very pitiful and unequal way of Taxing the people; and it is a sign that
the State sinketh, which catches hold on such Weeds as are accompanied with
the dishonor of impressing a Princes Effigies to justify Adulterate
Commodities, and the breach of Public Faith, such as is the calling a thing
what it really is not.

CHAP. XV. Of Excize.
IT is generally allowed by all, that men should contribute to the Public
Charge but according to the share and interest they have in the Public Peace;
that is, according to their Estates or Riches: now there are two sorts of
Riches, one actual, and the other potential. A man is actually and truly rich
according to what he eats, drinks, wears, or any other way really and
actually enjoys; others are but potentially or imaginatively rich, who though
they have power over much, make little use of it; these being rather Stewards
and Exchangers for the other sort, then owners for themselves.

2. Concluding therefore that every man ought to contribute according to what
he takes to himself, and actually enjoys. The first thing to be done is, to
compute what the Total of the Expense of this Nation is by particular men upon
themselves, and then what part thereof is necessary for the Public; both which
(no not the former) are so difficult as most men imagine.

3. In the next place we must conceive, that the very perfect Idea of making a
Leavy upon Consumptions, is to rate every paticular Necessary, just when it is
ripe for Consumption; that is to say, not to rate Corn until it be Bread, nor
Wool until it be Cloth, or rather until it be a very Garment; so as the value
of Wool, Clothing, and Tayloring, even to the Thread and Needles might be
comprehended: But this being perhaps too laborious to be performed, we ought to
enumerate a Catalogue of Commodities both native and artificial, such whereof
accounts may be most easily taken, and can bear the Office marks either on
themselves, or on what contains them; being withal such, as are to be as near
Consumption as possible: And then we are to compute what further labor or
charge is to be bestowed on each of them, before consumption, that so an
allowance be given accordingly. As for example, suppose there be an hundred
pounds worth of Stripped Stuff for Hangings, and an hundred pounds worth of Cloth
or Stuff for the best men's Clothes; I conceive, that the Cloth should bear a
greater Excize then the said stripped stuff, the one wanting nothing but tacking
up, to be at its ways end; and the other Tayloring, Thread, Silk, Needles,
Thimbles, Buttons, and several other particulars: The Excize of all which must
be accumulated upon the Excize of the Cloth, unless they be so great (as pe
haps Buttons, Lace, or Ribbons may be) to be taxed apart, and inserted into the
Cattalogue abovementioned.

4. Now the things to be accumulated upon Cloth are, as near as possible, to be
such particulars as are used only to Cloth, or very rarely to any other
particular, as the several sorts of peculiar trimmings; so on Corn should be
accumulated the charge of grinding, bolting, yeast, etc. for the baking of it
into Bread, unless, as was said before, any of these particulars can be better
rated apart.

5. A Question arises hence, whether any Native Commodities exported ought to
pay the Excize, or that what is imported it lieu of it should pay none? I
answer, no, because they are not spent here in specie; but I conceive that the
Goods returned from abroad for them, and spent here should pay, if the exported
have not already, for so shall what we spend pay once, but not oftener. Now if
Bullion be returned, then if it be coined into Money, it ought not to pay,
because Money will beget other commodities which shall pay; but if the said
Bullion be wrought into Plate and Utensils, or disgrost into Wire or Lace, or
beaten into Fueilles, then it also ought to pay, because it is consumed and
absolutely spent, as in Lace and Gilding is too notorious; and this is the
reason why I think the Leavy we commonly call Customs to be unseasonable and
preposterous, the same being a payment before consumption.

6. We have several times spoken of Accumulative Excize, by which we mean
Taxing many things together as one: As for example, suppose the many Drugs used
in Treacle or Mithridate were used only in those Compositions, in such case by
taxing any one of them, the whole number will be taxed as certainly as that
one, because they all bear a certain proportion one to another: In Cloth, the
Workmanship and Tools as well as the Wool may be well enough taxed, etc.

7. But some have strained this Accumulation so, as they would have all things
together taxed upon some one single particular, such as they think to be
nearest the common standard of all Expense, the principal ends of their
proposition being these, viz.

First, To disguise the name of Excize, as odious to them that do neither know
the payment of Taxes to be as indispensible as eating, and as have not
considered the natural justice of this way of Excizing or proportionating.

Secondly, To avoid the trouble and charge of Collecting. Thirdly, To bring the
business ad firmum, and to a certainty of all which we shall speak hereafter,
when we examine the several reasons for and against the way of Excize,
proceeding now to the several species of Accumulative Excizes, propounded in
the world.

8. Some propound Beer to be the only Excizable Commodity, suposing that in the
proportion that men drink, they make all other Expenses; which certainly will
not hold, especially if Strong Beer pay quintuple unto, (as now) or any more
Excize then the small: for poor Carpenters, Smiths, Feltmakers, etc. drinking
twice as much Strong Beer as Gentlemen do of small, must consequently pay ten
times as much Excize. Moreover, upon the Artizans Beer is accumulated, only a
little Bread and Cheese, leathern Clothes, Neck Beef, and Inwards twice a week,
stale Fish, old Pease without Butter, etc. Whereas on the other, beside Drink,
is accumulated as many more things as Nature and Art can produce; besides this
way of Excizing, though it be never so well administered, is neither so equal
nor so easy, nor so examinable as the simple Poll-money before spoken of,
which is also but an Accumulative Excize.

6. What has been propounded for Beer, may be of Salt, Fuel, Bread, etc. and
the Propositions would all labor under the same Inconveniences; for some spent
more, some less of these Commodities; and sometimes Families (each whereof are
propounded to be farmed, without descending to individual heads) are more
numerous at some time then at others according as their Estates or other
Interests shall wax or wane.

10. Of all the Accumulative Excizes, that of Harth-money or Smoak-money seems
the best; and that only because the easiest, andclearest, and fittest to
ground a certain Revenue upon; it being easy to tell the number Harths, which
remove not as heads or Polls do: Moreover, it is more easy to pay a small Tax,
then to alter or abrogate Harths, even though they are useless and
supernumerary; nor is it possible to cover them, because most of the neighbors
know them; nor in new Building will any man who gives forty shillings for
making a Chimney be without it for two.

11. Here is to be noted, that a Harth-money must be but small, or else 'twill
be intolerable; it being more easy for a Gentleman of a thousand pound per
annum to pay for an hundred Chimneys (few of their Mansion Houses having more)
then for Laborers to pay for two. Moreover if the Landlord only pay this Tax,
then is it not and Accumulative Excize for all, but a particular Excize upon
but one only Commodity, namely Housing.

12. Now the Reasons for Excize are these, viz.

First, The Natural Justice that every man should pay according to what he
actually enjoys; upon which account this Tax is scarce forced upon any, and
is very light to these, who please to be content with natural Necessries.

Secondly, This Tax if it be not farmed, but regularly collected, engages to
thrist, the only way to enrich a Nation, as by the Dutch and Jews, and by all
other men, who have come to vaste Estates by Trade, does appear.

Thirdly, No man pays double or twice for the same thing, forasmuch as nothing
can be spent but once; whereas it is frequently seen, that otherwise men pay
both by the Rent of their Lands, by their Smoaks, by their Titles, and by
Customs, (which all men do, though Merchants chiefly talk of it) they also pay
by Benevolence and by Tithes; whereas in this way of Excize no man need pay but
one way, nor but once, properly speaking.

Fifthly, By this way an excellent account may be taken of the Wealth, Growth,
Trade, and strength of the Nation at all times. All which Reasons do make not
for particular compoundings with Families, nor for letting the whole to farm,
but for collecting it by special Officers, who having a full employment, will
not be a fourth of the charge of our present many multiform Levies; for to put
extraordinary trouble and hazard upon the Country Officers, is a sorer Taxing
of them, then to make them pay a small Reward unto practiced Persons to be
their Substitutes. All which are the common Objections against Excize.

13. I should here add the manner of Collecting it, but I refer this to the
practice of Holland; and I might also offer how men may be framed to be fit for
this and other Public Trusts, as to be Cashiers, Store-keepers, Collectors,
etc. but I refer this Enquiry unto a more ample and fit occasion.

FINIS.

