SIR WILLIAM PETTY HIS Quantulumcunque CONCERNING MONEY.

To the Lord Marquess of Halyfax, ANNO 1682.

LONDON:

Printed for A. and J. CHURCHILL, at the Black Swan, in Paternoster Row, 1695.

Sir William Pettys Quantulumcunque concerning Money, 1682.
To the Lord Marquess of Halyfax.
SUPPOSE that 20s. of new milled Money does weigh 4 Ounces Troy, according to
Custom or Statute. Suppose that 20s. of old Eliz. and James's Money, which
ought also to weigh 4 Ounces Troy, does weigh 3 Ounces Troy; and very variously
between 3 and 4 Ounces, viz. none under 3, and none full 4.

Suppose that much of the new milled regular Money is carried into the
East Indies, but none of the old light and unequal Money.

QUESTIONS.
Qu. 1. Whether the old unequal Money ought to be new Coined, and brought to an
equality?

Answ. It ought: Because Money made of Gold and Silver is the best Rule of
Commerce, and must therefore be equal, or else it is no Rule; and consequently
no Money, and but bare Metal which was Money before it was worn and abused into
Inequality.

Qu. 2. At whose Charge?

Answ. At the States Charge, as now it is: Because the Owner was no cause of
its Inequality, but the States neglect in (not) preventing and punishing such
Abuses, which are remedied by new Coinage.

Qu. 3. Of what weight and fineness ought the new Shiling to be?

Answ. Of the same with the other present new Money, and which the old was of,
when it was new: Because all must be like, all according to the Statute; and
all fit to pay ancient Debts, according to what was really lent.

Qu. 4. Suppose 20s. of old Money may make but 18s. of new, who shall bear the
loss of the two shillings?

Answ. Not the States: Because men would clip their own Money: But the owner
himself must bear the loss, because he might have refused light and defective
Money, or put it away in time; it being sufficient that he shall have new
regular beautiful Money for his old unequal Money, at the States Charge, Ounce
for Ounce weight. This is a controverted question, but on the whole we have no
difficulty in dissenting from the opinion of Petty. Coins are to be regarded
rather as the property of the public than of individuals. They pass freely from
hand to hand among all classes; and their weight is diminished by the wear they
undergo, and sometimes also (as was especially the case in 1690) by the
fraudulent practices of clippers and others. But it would be most unjust to
make the present holders of Coins responsible for their wear during the
previous twenty or thirty years, or for the depredations practiced upon them in
the teeth of the law by knaves and swindlers. These are losses which the Coins
have incurred in the public service, and they should consequently be borne by
the public.

It is true that in carrying out this principle considerable difficulties have
sometimes had to be encountered. Previously to the great recoinage of 1696-99,
the practice of clipping the Coin was carried to a great height. And it was
contended that if a Proclamation were issued, calling in the Coins in
circulation by a certain day that they might be exchanged for new Coins of full
weight, a corresponding premium would be offered to the clippers to redouble
their activity in the interval. And as this was the course adopted on the
occasion referred to, the anticipated result was realized to the fullest
extent. It is believed, indeed, that the Coins lost as much by clipping between
the period when it was announced that they would be called in and exchanged for
new Coins, and their exchange for the same, as they had done in the course of
the preceding ten or twelve years. (Leake's English Money, 2nd ed. p. 391, etc.)

But it is very improbable that a loss of this sort will have to be again made
up, inasmuch as milled Coins, which are now exclusively in use, are little
susceptible of being clipped. And it may further be observed, that the loss
experienced in 1696-99, from the circumstances already mentioned, might have
been in great measure obviated had Government taken upon itself the
responsibility of the Coinage, and quietly prepared a supply of Coins at the
Mint sufficient to enable them at once to call down those in circulation.

The recoinage of 1696-99, notwithstanding the great expense and difficulty
with which it was effected, proved on the whole a failure. This, however, was
not a consequence of anything immediately connected with the Coinage, but is
entirely to be ascribed, as will be afterward seen, to the over-valuation of
Gold as compared with Silver.




Qu. 5. After this Reformation of Coin, Will more Silver be carried out of
England, suppose into the East Indies, then before; and to the Damage of
England?

Answ. Somewhat more: But none to the Damage of England, Eo Nomine; but rather
to its Profit: Because the Merchant will be considered for the Manufacture of
the new Money; besides the Metal of it, as he only was when he carried out
Spanish Reals.

Qu. 6. Whereas the Merchant carries Scarlet and Silver to the Indies, will he
not now carry only the new coined Silver?

Answ. The Merchant will buy as much Scarlet as he can for 100 new Shillings,
and then consider whether he shall get more Silk in the Indies for that Scarlet
than for another 100 of the like Shillings: And, according to this Conjecture,
he will carry Scarlet or Shillings in specie, or part one, part the other, if
he be in doubt.

Qu. 7. But will not England be impoverished by Merchants carrying out the said
100 Shillings?

Answ. No, if he brings home for them as much Silk as will yield above 100
Shillings (perhaps 200 Shillings) in Spain, and then bring the same 200 into
England: Or, if he bring home as much Pepper as an English man will give him
200 of the like Shillings for. So the Merchant and England shall both Gain by
Exporting the 100 Shillings.

Qu. 8. But if the new Shilling were but ths of the weight as formerly, then
the Merchant would not meddle with them at all, and so secure this fear of
impoverishment?

Answ. The Merchant would Export then, just as before; Only he will give but so
much Pepper, or other Indian Goods, for the new retrenched Shilling as he did
for the old: And would accept in India as much Pepper as he formerly had for
the old: And consequently there would be no difference, but among a few such
Fools as take Money by its name, and not by its weight and fineness.

Qu. 9. If a Shilling was by new Coinage reduced to of its present weight,
should we not thereby have more of Money then now we have, and consequently be
so much the richer?

Ans. You would indeed have part more of the new christened Shillings; but not
an Ounce more of Silver, nor Money; nor could you get an Ounce more of Foreign
Commodities for all your new multiplied Money than before: Nor even of any
Domestic Commodities; but perhaps a little at first from the few Fools above
mentioned. As for Instance; Suppose you buy a Silver Vessel from a Goldsmith
weighing 20 Ounces, at 6s. per Ounce, making 6 Pounds or 24 Ounces of Coined
Silver; now suppose that the said 6 Pounds were reduced from weighing 24 Ounces
to weigh but 18 Ounces upon the new Coinage; but be still called 6 Pound even
by the King's Proclamation; Can it be imagined that the Goldsmith will give his
Vessel weighing 20 Ounces of wrought for 18 Ounces of unwrought Silver? For the
Workmanship of Money is of little value. Now the Absurdity is the same in all
other Commodities, though not so demonstrable as in a Commodity whose Materials
are the same with Money.

Qu. 10. Cannot Authority Command that men should give as much Commodity for
the new retrencht Money, as for the old which weighed part more?

Answ. Then the effect of such Authority would also be to take away of all men's
Goods, which are Commodities beyond Seas, and give the same to Foreigners, who
would have them for of the usual quantity of Silver: And the same Authority
would take away from the Creditor of the Money which was due before the
Proclamation.

Qu. 11. Whereas you suppose retrenching in the new Coinage; Suppose it was but
1/10, how would the matter be then?

Answ. Just the same: For Magis et minus non mutant speciem: But it were better
you supposed that one Shilling were to be taken for 10 or 20, then the
Absurdity would be it self so visible, as to need no such Demonstration, as is
needful in such small matters as Common Sense cannot discern: For if the wealth
of the Nation could be decupled by a Proclamation, it were strange that such
Proclamations have not long since been made by our Governors.

Qu. 12. Will not some men, having occasions to buy Commodities in Foreign
Parts, carry out all Money, and so not vend or Export our own Commodities at
all?

Answ. If some English Merchants should be so improvident, yet the Foreign
Merchants would buy up such English Commodities as they wanted, with Money
brought into England from their respective Countries, or with such Commodities
as England likes better than Money. For the vending of English Commodities does
not depend upon any other thing, but the use and need which Foreigners have of
them. But were it not a folly for an English man not to carry Lead into Turkey:
but go thither with Money, in his Ballast, and so loose the Freight of the
Lead, which he might sell there; And that a Ship should come from Turkey with
Money, in her Ballast also, to fetch Lead from England which might have been
carried at first by the English Ship? No: The art of a Merchant is to consider
all those Matters, so as no Prince's Proclamation concerning the Weight and
Denominations of Coins, signifies any thing to Foreigners when they know it,
nor to his own Subjects pro futuro, what e're Disturbances it may make amongst
them pro proeterito. We say again: it were better for a Prince owing 20s. to
say he will pay but 15s. than disguishing his own particular purpose, to say
that all Landlords shall henceforth take 15s. Rent for 20s. due to them by
their Tenants Leases; and that he who has lent a 100l. on the Monday, (the
Proclamation of Retrenchment coming out on Tuesday) may be repaid on Wednesday
with or 75l. of the very Money he lent two days before.

Qu. 13. Why is not our old worn unequal Money new Coined and equallized?

Answ. There may be many weak Reasons for it; But the only good one which I
know, is, that bad and unequal Money may prevent hoarding, whereas weighty,
fine and beautiful Money does encourage it in some few timorous Persons, but
not in the Body of Trading Men. Upon the account of Beauty our Britannia
Halfpence were almost all horded as Medals till they grew common; For if but
100 of those pieces had been Coined, they would for their Work and Rarity have
been worth above 5s. each, which for their Matter are not worth that Halfpenny
they pass for: For in them, Materiam superabat Opus.

Qu. 14. Why has Money been raised, or retrencht, or imbased by many wise
States, and so often?

Answ. When any State does these things, they are like Bankrupt Merchants, who
Compound for their Debts by paying 16s. 12s, or 10s. in the pound; Or forcing
their Creditors to take off their Goods at much above the Market rates. And the
same State might as well have paid but of what they owed, as to retrench their
Money in General to of the known weight and fineness. And these practices have
been compassed by Bankers and Cashiers, for oblique Considerations, from the
Favorites of such Princes and States.

Qu. 15. It is then the Honor of England that no such Tricks have been
practiced, though in the greatest Streights that ever that State has been in.

Answ. It has been their Wisdom, and consequently their Honor to keep up a
Rule and Measure of Trade amongst themselves, and with all Nations.

Qu. 16. But is there no Case wherein Money may be justly and honorably raised?

Answ. Yes, in order to Regulation and Equalizing of Species of Coins; As when
two Species of one Weight and Fineness are taken at different Rates, then the
one may be raised or the other depressed: But this must be rated by the
Estimation of the whole World as near as it can be known, and not by any
private Nation; and the like may be done between Gold and Silver.

Qu. 17. What do you think of the rising or falling of the Price of Lands, from
this following Instance, viz. A piece of Land was sold 60 Years ago for 1000l.
that is for a 1000 Jacobusses; and the same Land is now sold for 1000l. or 1000
Guineas, and the Guinea is but the weight of the Jacobus. Is the Land cheaper
now than 60 Years ago?

Answ. It looks like a Demonstration that it is: Yet if Gold be not Money, but
a Commodity next like to Money, and that Silver be only Money; then we must see
whether 1000 Jacobusses would then purchase no more Silver than 1000 Guineas
will do now: For if so, the Land was heretofore and now sold for the same
Quantity of Money, though not of Gold; and is neither risen nor fallen by what
has been instanced.

Qu. 18. What is the difference between retrenching or raising of Money, and
imbasing the Metal of the same, as by mixing Copper with Silver?

Answ. The first is the better of the two, if such Mixture be of no use in
other things: For if 20s. which contains 4 Ounces of Silver, should be reduced
to 3 Ounces of Silver, it is better than to add one Ounce of Copper to the
same, in order to make 4 seeming Ounces as before: For if you come to want the
said 3 Ounces of Silver mixed with Copper, you must lose the Copper, upon the
Test, and the Charge of Refining also, which will amount to above 4 per Cent.

Qu. 19. What do you object against small Silver Money; as against Single
Pence, Two Pences, etc.?

Answ. That the Coinage of small Pieces would be very chargeable, and the
Pieces themselves apt to be lost, and more liable to wearing; for little of our
old small Money is now to be seen, and our Groats are worn away to Three
halfpence (worth) in Metal.

Qu. 20. What do you say of Money made wholly of base Metal, such as Farthings,
etc.?

Answ. That the want of Materials ought to be made up by the fineness of
Coinage, to very near the intrinsic Value; or what is gained by the Want of
either, to be part of the King's Revenue.

Qu. 21. Which is best, Copper or Tin, for this purpose?

Answ. Copper: Because it is capable of the most imitable and durable Coinage:
though the Copper be Foreign, and Tin a Native Commodity. For suppose Copper
and Tin of the same Value in England; yet if 100 Weight of Tin sent to Turkey
will fetch home as much Silk as will fetch above 100 of Copper from Sweden, in
such case the Difference between Native and Foreign is nothing.

Qu. 22. This Doctrine may extend to a free exportation of Money and Bullion,
which is against our Laws: Are our Laws not good?

Answ. Perhaps they are against the Laws of Nature, and also impracticable: For
we see that the Countries which abound with Money and all other Commodities,
have followed no such Laws: And contrariwise, that the Countries which have
forbid these Exportations under the highest Penalties, are very destitute both
of Money and Merchandise.

Qu. 23. Is not a Country the poorer for having less Money?

Answ. Not always: For as the most thriving Men keep little or no Money by
them, but turn and wind it into various Commodities to their great Profit, so
may the whole Nation also; which is but many particular Men united.

Qu. 24. May a Nation, suppose England, have too much Money?

Answ. Yes: As a particular Merchant may have too much Money, I mean coined
Money, by him.

Qu. 25. Is there any way to know how much Money is sufficient for any Nation?

Answ. I think it may pretty well be guessed at; viz. I think that so much
Money as will pay half a Years Rent for all the Lands of England, and a
Quarters Rent of the Houseing, and a Weeks Expense of all the People, and about
a Quarter of the Value of all the exported Commodities, is sufficient for that
purpose. Now when the States will cause these things to be computed, and the
Quantity of their Coins to be known, which the new Coining of their old Money
will best do, then it may also be known whether we have too much or too little
Money.

Qu. 26. What Remedy is there if we have too little Money?

Answ. We must erect a Bank, which well computed, does almost double the Effect
of our coined Money: And we have in England Materials for a Bank which shall
furnish Stock enough to drive the Trade of the whole Commercial World.

Qu. 27. What if we have too much Coin?

Answ. We may melt down the heaviest, and turn it into the Splendour of Plate,
in Vessels or Utensils of Gold and Silver; or send it out, as a Commodity,
where the same is wanting or desired: or let it out at Interest, where Interest
is high.

Qu. 28. What is Interest or Use-Money?

Answ. A Reward for forbearing the use of your own Money for a Term of Time
agreed upon, whatsoever need your self may have of it in the mean while.

Qu. 29. What is Exchange?

Answ. Local Interest, or a Reward given for having your Money at such a Place
where you most need the use of it.

Qu. 30. What is the Trade of a Banker?

Answ. Buying and selling of Interest and Exchange: Who is honest only upon the
Penalty of losing a beneficial Trade, founded upon a good Opinion of the World,
which is called Credit.

Qu. 31. You were speaking of base Money and Farthings, which are generally
below the intrinsic Value, and therefore ought not to be permitted to increase
ad infinitum. Is there any way to know how many were enough?

Answ. I think there is: viz. Allowing about 12d. in Farthings to every Family:
So as if there be a Million of Families in England (as I think there be) then
about 50,000l. in Farthings would suffice for Change; and if such Farthings
were but th below the intrinsic Value, the Nation would pay but 10,000l. for
this Convenience: But if this way of Families be not Limitation enough, you may
help it by considering the smallest Piece of Silver Money current in the
Nation; which how much lesser it is, by so much lesser may the Number of
Farthings be: The use of Farthings being but to make up Payments in Silver, and
to adjust Accounts: To which end of adjusting Accounts let me add, that if your
old defective Farthings were cried down to 5 a Penny, you might keep all
Accounts in a way of Decimal Arithmetic, which has been long desired for the
case and certainty of Accounts.

Qu. 32. What do you think of our Laws for limiting Interest?

Answ. The same as of limiting the Exportation of Money, and there may be as
well Laws for limiting Exchange also: For Interest always carries with it an
Ensurance proemium, which is very casual, besides that of Forbearance: For
Instance, in Ireland there was a time when Land (the highest security) was sold
for 2 Years Purchase: It was then naturally just to take 20, 30, or 40 per
Cent. Interest; whereas there the Law allows but 10. And since that time, Land
being risen to 12 Years Purchase, responsible Men will not give above 8. And
insolvent Men will offer Cent. per Cent. notwithstanding the Law. Again,
suppose a Man has 100l. of Land worth 20 Years Purchase, and another 100l. in
Houses, worth 12 Years Purchase, and an other 100l. in Shipping worth 2 Years
Purchase; and another in Horses, worth 6 Months Purchase; Is it not manifest he
must have a greater Yearly proemium for lending his House than his Land, his
Ship than his House, and his Horse than his Ship? For if his Horse be worth
100l. he cannot hire him out for less than 10s. per diem, whereas the Land will
not yield a Groat for the same time; and these Hires are the same with Interest.

FINIS.

