A CAVEAT Against Drunkenness, Especially in EVIL TIMES. BEING A Consideration
of Ephesians. 5. 18.

By C. P.

The Crown of Pride, the Drunkards of Ephraim shall be trodden under feet: And
the glorious beauty which is on the head of the fat valley, shall be a fading
flower, and as the hasty fruit before the Summer, which when he that looks
upon it sees it, while it is yet in his hand he eats it up. In that day shall
the Lord of hosts be for a crown of Glory, and for a Diadem of beauty unto the
residue of his people,

Isa. 28. 3-5. They that be drunken, are drunken in the night: But let us who
are of the day, be sober,

1 These. 5. 7, 8. LONDON, Printed and are to be Sold by Tho. Parkhurst at the
Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel, 1676.

To my Brethren and Companions in the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord
of Glory; Grace and Peace be multiplied.
Beloved,
THe Grace of God that brings Salvation to all men, has appeared: Teaching
us, that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world: looking for that blessed hope,
and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; that
we may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things, Tit. 2 10-13. How
this Doctrine according to Godliness is blasphemed and evilspoken of by many
persons, we cannot be ignorant; As if it were a Doctrine of Looseness, and
Licentiousness; a Doctrine of Libertinism, and Profaness; as if it opened a Gap
to all wickedness and impiety whatsoever: And though men herein be-ly it, yet
certainly we shall give occasion to them that are of no judgment concerning the
Faith, thus to speak reproachfully of it, if while we seek to be justified by
Christ, we our selves are found sinners, and walk not uprightly according to
the truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2. 14-18. And, Woe to the world because of
offenses: But woe especially to that man by whom the offense comes: Wherefore
says our Savior, If thy hand, or thy foot offend thee, or, cause thee to
offend, cut them off, and cast them from thee: it is better for thee to enter
into life halt, or maimed, rather than having two hands, or two feet, to be
cast into everlasting fire, Matthew. 18. 7, 8. You know in your hearts, and in
your souls, that he that died for all, therefore died for them, that they which
live should not henceforth live to themselves or the luses of men, but unto the
will of God: even to him that died for them, and rose again, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15.
with 1 Pet. 4. 1-3, You know, that the good creatures men abuse in their
intemperance, are the Lord's; And that by Grace we are made partakers of them;
and have a comfortable enjoyment of them through the Sufferings, Sacrifice, and
Mediation of Christ: And that these things are not given us to consume upon our
Lusts, or prepare for Baal: Shall ye then continue in sin because grace has
abounded, or that it may abound? God forbid. He that knows his Masters will,
and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes, Luke 12. 47, 48. You know
there is an eternal judgment, in which we shall all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, That every one of us may receive according to the
things done in his body -- whether good or bad. For God shall bring every work
into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be
evil. Oh therefore! knowing the terror of the Lord, abstain and flee from all
intemperance whatsoever. While Paul in declaring the faith in Christ, reasoned
of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, Foelix trembled, perceiving
it would go hardly with intemperate and incontinent ones hereafter, Act. 24.
24, 25. And can we hear and think thereof, and not tremble, so as to depart
from iniquity? Surely then Felix hereafter shall rise up in the judgment with
us, and condemn us, when Drunkards shall be excluded and shut out of the
Kingdom of Christ and of God: Nay, by your own personal sinning, you not only
expose your selves to the Wrath of God, both present and eternal: But you cause
many to stumble at the Law and Doctrine of Christ, and teach, and strengthen
the wicked ones in their evil ways; and are guilty of the Blood of the Souls
of others: And what will you do in the end thereof? How shall we escape if we
neglect so great Salvation! If you were entertainers of such ungodly Doctrines
as are too generally received amongst zealous ones now in our days; That the
greatest part of men were reprobated before they were born, and must
necessarily perish for ever hereafter; then your evil would not be so great
concerning them: for you would but help to destroy them that God would not have
saved. But for you to be instruments of evil and perdition to others, who
profess to believe, that Christ died for all, and rose again; and that God
would have all men to be saved: How unsutably and contrary to your principles
do you act, while you lay stumbling blocks in their way, to cause them to fall
and perish, for whom you know Christ died? Oh! As your hearts are purified in
obeying the truth through the Spirit, unto the unfeigned love of the Brethren,
and of all men; see to it that ye love them with such a love as you are taught
and principled unto of God.

Object. 1. If any one should say, we have such a trade, employment, or way of
livelihood to walk in, and follow, as that thereby we are necessitated
sometimes to keep company, and to drink more than otherwise we would do, or
else we had as good wholly leave off all; and then we shall presently fail into
poverty.

To such an one I would say,

1. There is nothing said, or however intended in any expression made use of,
to take men off from any lawful, or laudable employment, or way of living: or
from having fellowship with the men of the world in and about the affairs of
this life, in a lawful way: For then, as the Apostle says, ye must needs go
out of the world, 1 Cor. 5. 9, 10.

2. But though we must have company with evil persons, while we are here in
this world at some times, and may trade with evil workers: yet by no means
should we have fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather
reprove them, Ephesians. 5. 11. And if we cannot trade, or converse with them, unless
we put forth our hand to iniquity, it is better to lose their custom, than to
grieve the good Spirit of God, dishonor the Gospel, and get a snare and wound
to our Souls: And be we confident, that in first seeking the kingdom of God,
and his righteousness, all other things shall be added to us. Oh, Were we so
filled with the Spirit, as to live the life we live in the flesh by the faith
of the Son of God, who loved us, and gave himself for us; we should be helped
to believe, and confidently expect, that he who spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, will also with him freely give us all things, Luke
12. 29-31-33. Romans 8. 32.

3. But if the employment be such as you know not how to follow it, and avoid
the snares that are in it, it is better to leave it, though it be never so
profitable and advantageous, and though thereby you be reduced to the greatest
poverty imaginable, than to abide in it, if you cannot therein abide with God,
1 Cor. 7. 24, By faith Moses when he was come to years, refused to be called
the Son of Pharoah's daughter: Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin, which are but for a season,
Heb. 11. 24, 25. And if our hand or foot offend us (any work or way of ours)
let us cut them off and cast them from us: It is better for us to enter into
life maimed or halt, than having two hands or feet, to be cast into Hell, into
the fire which shall never be quenched, where their worm dies not, and their
fire is not quenched: As our Savior says, Mark 9. 43-46.

Obj. 2. Another may say: Truly Intemperance is a thing I delight not in: But
when I meet with my friends or relations which are near to me, I sometimes,
though seldom, exceed in Wine, or Strong drink: And I do a little the more
comply with them, that I might be an instrument of good unto them, and by that
means bring them to hear and receive the Gospel. And therefore I hope God will
be merciful to me.

To such an one I may say many things.

1. That it is good indeed for us to walk in love toward all men, and to be
courteous to them, 1 These. 3. 12. Luke 6. 27-35. And especially he that has
friends or relations that are beloved in the flesh, should show himself
friendly to such, and be kind toward them, Prove. 18. 24. Philem. 16. But,

2. This is not Love indeed, nor Friendship toward them, when we have
fellowship with them in any unfruitful work of darkness, such as Intemperance;
but hatred to them: For Love works no ill to his Neighbor, or, Brother, Romans
13. 9, 10-13. When we keep Company with them in any thing that is evil, we do,
as Job says, Dig a pit for our friend, Job 6. 27. This may be indeed called,
the love of the flesh, thus to testify kindness toward them, proceeding from
that Wisdom which descends not from above, but which is earthly, sensual, and
Devilish, Jam. 3. 15. But it is not Love in the Spirit: It is not
loving kindness, but hating-kindness toward them. And therefore while thou
pretendest to testify Love to thy friend, thou do but pretend it, for indeed
in such compliance thou hate him, and strengthenest him in those ways which
lead to the everlasting destruction of his soul: And as the Apostle says in
another case, so may I in this, If any man see thee which have knowledge (some
understanding of the Grace of God) sit in Taverns, or Alehouses, and drink to
excess, shall not the conscience of him that is weak, be emboldned in his evil
ways? And through thy knowledge shall thy weak Brother perish, for whom Christ
died, 1 Cor. 8. 10, 11-13.

3. Consider; Though he be a Friend or Brother, to whom thou would thus
testify Love (which is in truth hatred), yet there is a Friend that sticks
closer than a Brother, Prove. 18. 24. And one who has infinitely exceeded all
Friends in expression of Love and affection to us; even our Lord Jesus, who
when we were become dead, died for us, and rose again, and gave himself a
ransom for us; And while we were dead in sins, caused his goodness to pass
before us; and is become our rightful Lord. Now then, if we should testify love
to a friend, should we not first always do it to this our lover, who has so
greatly loved us, and still continues his goodness to us? Whether ought we to
love him or others principally, judge ye? now our love to him is expressed and
evidenced herein, that we keep his Commandments: Amongst which this is one,
That we be not drunk with Wine wherein is excess, no not at any one time, Joh.
14. 21. with Romans 13. 13. Luke 21. 34. And this our Friend says to us; If any
man come unto me, ard hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children,
and Brethren, etc. he cannot be my disciple, Luke 14. 26. Matthew. 10. 37. Deuteronomy.
33. 9. Oh therefore! If thou would be loving to thy Friend, show thy love to
this Lover, in observing his Commands: so shall thou be preserved from every
path of the destroyer, and rightly walk in, and testify love toward such as
are near to thee, or related to thee in the flesh: And in loving pureness of
heart -- the King shall be thy friend, Prove. 22. 11.

4. If by thy compliance with thy Brother, or Friend, thou could gain him to
hear the Gospel, yet thou should not walk in this way to such an end. For,

[1] Thou may see it is displeasing to God, and forbidden by him, who has so
loved the World, as to give his only begotten Son to be the Savior of it, that
thou should do any evil that good may come, Romans 3. 8. He who is the Lord,
hates robbery for Burnt-offerings, and will direct the way and work of his
people in truth, Isa. 61. 8. Deuteronomy. 23. 18.

[2.] If by this means thou should gain in thy Brother to hear and receive
the Gospel after a sort: yet it cannot be expected that thou should, as the
direct consequent of such actings, be any instrument of good to him; But at
best be a means of his hearing and receiving in vain, as thou thy self also
do: And like thy self, he may become a sinner in Zion, and an Hypocrite
amongst Gods people; and that in conclusion will aggravate his condemnation. Do
men gather Grapes of throns, or figs of thissles? Even so a corrupt tree brings
forth evil fruit, Matthew. 7. 16, 17. That which is born of the flesh is flesh,
Joh. 3. 6.

[3.] If by occasion of thee and of thy compliance with him, thy Friend or
Brother come to hear the Gospel; And the Lord, who is not willing that any man
should perish, but that all should come to repentance, open his heart, and he
heartily receive the grace of God, and his Iniquities be pardoned, and he be
graciously received; Do not thou upon this account sacrifice to thine own net,
nor burn Incense to thine own Dragge; for it shall never be for thine honor.
He will say to thee as he did to the House of Israel, Not for thy sake do I
thus, be it known unto thee; Be ashamed and confounded for thine evil ways,
Ezekiel. 36. 32. He will indeed be with his own Ordinances and people; and
wherever he records his name, he will come and bless them, Exodus 20. 24. But
shall the workers of Iniquity have fellowship with him? no surely, Psalm. 49.
20. and Psalm. 5. 4, 5.

5. The way to testify love to thy Friend, or brother is, to withdraw from him
in any thing that is evil, and show thy dislike thereof, both in word and
action; and if thou so do not, thou art an hater and murderer of thy Brother,
however thou pretendest thy self to be a Friend, and to show friendship to him.
Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart; Thou shall in any wise rebuke
thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him: Or, that thou bear not sin for him,
Levit. 19. 17. with 1 John 3. 15. And therefore as the Lord said in former
times concerning open Idolatry, so we may in part of this Idolatry, If thy
Brother, the Son of thy Mother, or thy Son, or thy Daughter, or the Wife of thy
bosom, or thy Friend which is as thine own Soul, entice thee secretly, saying,
Let us go and serve other gods (let us make our belly our god, and serve it) --
thou shall not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him, Deuteronomy. 13. 6-8. with
Philip. 3. 19. and Romans 16. 18. Oh! Withdraw your selves from every Brother
that walks disorderly, and not after the Apostles tradition, that they may be
ashamed, 2 These. 3. 6, 14. And rebuke such an one: And though at present he
takes it grievously, yet he that rebukes a man afterward, shall find more
favor, than he that flatters with the tongue, Prove. 28. 23. with Job. 17. 5.

Obj. 3. Another may say, I may be born with a little for my Intemperance: for
I entertain such as declare the Gospel, and lay out my self, and spend my
estate in receiving the Brethren, and adventure all for the Gospel sake.

Answ. 1. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted, and rewarded? Who is
there even among you, that shut the doors for naught? neither do ye kindle a
fire on Gods altar for naught, faith the Lord of hosts, Mal. 1. 10. God is not
unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love, which ye have showed
toward his name, in that ye have ministered to the Saints, and do minister: And
we desire that every one of you do show the same diligence -- unto the end,
Heb. 6. 10, 11.

Answ. 2. But this should be no plea in your hearts or mouths, for your
Intemperance, and Prodigality: But rather ye should be clean who (in this
sense) bear the vessels of the Lord, Isa. 52. 11, or else by means of you the
name of God will be blasphemed amongst the Gentiles: And still your sin is the
greater, if you walk disorderly, because by receiving the Brethren, you have
greater and more frequent advantage by their company, conference, and
conversation, to abstain and flee from all that is evil. Oh! therefore defile
not the house of God, for, If any man defile the temple of God, him will God
destroy, 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17.

Answ. 3. It is to be feared, that you who are so forward to proclaim your own
goodness, in laying out your selves for the Gospel, are more large in laying
out, and consuming upon your lusts, what God is betrusting you with for the
honoring of him, his name and Gospel: If you would but at the years end
faithfully cast up what you have laid out for the gratifying your own, or
others lusts, on the one hand; and what you have expended toward the service
of Christ, and entertaining his messengers, on the other; and lay both in the
balance, the former may so greatly over-weigh the latter, as that this is
nothing in comparison of that. And it may possibly too truly be said to you in
this case, as he said in another: Is not the gleaning of the grapes of your
prodigality and intemperance, more and better than the Vintage of your
liberality toward Christ, and his Gospel, and people? Judge. 8. 2.

[4.] The more kind you have been toward his people, the more kind should they
be to you; And in love to your Souls beg and be seech you, that you would take
heed, lest at any time your heart be overcharged with Surfeiting and
Drunkenness, or the cares of this life. Oh! refrain your feet from every
crooked path, and from bibbing and bibbers particularly, that you lose not all
your reward in conclusion.

And the Lord in mercy guide us all by his counsel, and help us to be guided
thereby, that hereafter he may receive us to Glory.

So he desires to pray, who is

Your most unworthy Friend and Brother, Charles Phelpes:

Errata.
PAge 17, line 15, for them, read men. p. 21, l. 13, r. Drunkards. p. 22, l.
14, r. excluded. p. 23, l. 16, dele; and put it in l. 17 after daily; p. 25, l.
4, for is, r. in. p. 36, l. 7, r. Mal. 2. p. 48. l. 30, for Isa. 45. r. Isa.
59. p. 51, l. 14, r, you may. p. 52, l. 2, r. sottish children. l. 16, r.
joining. p. 58, l. 27, r. belong. p. 61, l. 20, del. first Comma. l. 23 r.
Nahum. p. 63, l. 24, r. dehort. p. 65. l. 14, for sensually, r. sententially.
p. 70, l. 4, r Romans 8: 3. p. 79, l. 6, r. testified, l. ll, del. first and. p.
93, l. 32, r. fulfilled his. p. 94, l. 3, r. tasted. p. 96, l. 29, for at, r.
as. p. 106, l. 11, for own, r. one. As also in p. 121, l. 11. p. 140, l. 23, r.
Sun. l. 24, for Matthew. r. Mal. p. 142, l. 18, r. might. p. 144, l. 5, r.
deprivations. p. 148, l. 7, r. right. l. 19, r. Drink. p. 155, l. 20, dele it.
p. 156, for the first there, r. they. p. 158, l. 26, r. as are.

There are some other literal escapes and mispointings, which the Reader is
desired to correct as he finds them.

A CAVEAT Against DRUNKENNESS.
Ephesians. V. 18. And be not drunk with Wine, wherein is excess, but be filled
with the spirit.


THese words are a further Admonition and Instruction, which the Apostle gives
to these Believers to whom he writes: unto whom (after his salutation of them,
chap. 1. v. 1, 2,) he had been magnifying the Apostles Office, in chap. 1. v.
3-12, and blessing God for his great mercy to them, in causing the Gospel to be
preached to them, and helping them to receive it, so as it wrought effectually
in them, chap. 1. v. 13-15, Who sometimes were dead in sins and trespasses, in
a sad and miserable condition, chap. 2. v. 1, 2-5, 11, 12: and yet then Christ
made peace for them, and preached it to them, and they were saved by Grace out
of that sad condition, and made fellow-Citizens with the Saints; the Apostles
Gospel being received by them, not as the word of Men, but as it is in truth
the Word of God; chap. 2. v. 13-22: minding them, how that now the Mystery is
opened and revealed, as it was not in former times: In which is contained, That
the Gentiles should have the unsearchable riches of Christ preached among them,
and fellow-heirs in believing this Gospel, which these Believers also were,
chap. 3. v. 1-13. And praying for them, chap. 1. v. 16-23, and 3. 14-21. From
these premises he beseeches them to walk worthy of the Calling wherewith they
were called, chap. 4. v. 1, both in putting off the old man, which is corrupt
according to the deceitful Lusts: not fashioning themselves according to the
former lusts in their Ignorance: not walking as other Gentiles in the vanity of
their mind, chap. 4: like to that 1 Pet. 1. 1-13, 14, etc. 1 These. 4. 1-6. But
putting on the New-man, as Col. 3. 1-16, being followers of God and Christ,
chap. 4. v. 31, 32, and 5. 1, 2. Avoiding and Abstaining from those fleshly
lusts that war against the Soul: And having their Conversation honest amongst
the Gentiles which know not God. chapter 5. v. 3-11. etc.

In which we may take notice of the order of the Apostle in writing to the
believers, namely, how he minds them of the Gospel first of all, as it is now
preached according to the Revelation of the Mystery: And so gives to them
Commandments by the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 These. 1. and 2, and 3, and 4. 1, 2.
And amongst others, he gives unto them this Commandment we have read, and
propounded to speak unto, and as that which was needful to be received, and
obeyed, to the end they might avoid other evils; for surely this is the root of
many other evils which here he admonishes of: and that exhortation here given
is needful to our so walking more generally as to please God.

In which words we have to consider,

1. A Dehortation, or Admonition of the Apostle unto these Believers, [Be not
drunk with Wine.] 2 An Argument or Motive to engage them to receive it,
[Wherein is excess.] 3. An Exhortation, or Instruction [But be ye filled with
the Spirit.]
1. A Dehortation or Admonition of the Apostle to these Believers, [Be not
drunk with Wine.] He says not, use no Wine; for that we may do lawfully, Every
creature of God being good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with
thanksgiving, etc. 1 Timothy 4. 1-5, and 5. 23: but abuse it not: Be not Drunk
with Wine --

In speaking to which words, we shall first speak thereto briefly by way of
Explication: and then note some Instructions.

1. By way of Explication, let us inquire and consider,

1. Of what [Wine] he here speaks, and what is intended hereby. 2. What it is
[to be Drunk] herewith, and when a man may be said so to be.
1. Of what [Wine] he here speaks, and what is intended hereby.

To this we may say, the Wine here spoken of in general, is such as is opposed
to the Spirit in the latter part of the verse: and so it is not here to be
understood as it may, and must be, in some places, to wit, for Spiritual and
Heavenly-drink. So Wine is used at some times, Cant. 2. 4. Isa. 25. 6, and 55.
1, 2, etc. And this still further appears, in what is added to this admonition,
viz. he speaks of such Wine as in which is excess, which there cannot be in our
receiving, and drinking in Christ, and the Spiritual things of and in him: But
now here by Wine is meant that which is Earthly: And indeed it being opposed to
the Spirit, and said to be such as in which is excess, it may be taken more
generally for all things on the Earth in which we are seeking delight,
chearing, and comfort. But yet we shall look upon it in a more strict
consideration, and so speak of it, to wit, either as it signifies,

1. Most strictly, The fruit of Earthly Vines Genesis 9. 20, 21. Mat. 26. 29. The
blood of the Grape, Genesis 49, 11.

2. Or also as more largely it signifies Strong Drink, of whatsoever, or
howsoever it be made. As it seems there was Wine made of other Fruit beside
Grapes in former times (though also there are several sorts of Grapes, and
several sorts of Wine made thereof, Nehem. 5. 18,) as of Pomgranates, Cant. 8.
2, and so there might be of Apples and Pears, etc. As strong liquors are made
with us of these Fruits, as Sider, Perry, etc. and the Drink made hereof might
be called Wine, or however included in this word, when it is mentioned alone;
unless the context necessarily confine it to Wine most properly so taken. So
when the Preacher sought in his heart to give himself to Wine, etc. to that end
he planted him Vineyards, and made him Gardens and Orchards, and planted Trees
in them of all kind of fruit, whereof also Wine might be made, Eccles. 2. 3-5.
And indeed, all Strong Drink is included many times in this expression, when
mentioned alone: So whereas the Nazarites in the Law were forbidden to drink
Wine, or Strong Drink, or the Vinegar of Wine or of Strong Drink, etc. Number. 6.
3, 4; all these are, or may be, included in this one word Wine, in Amos 2. 12.
Thus again, when Eli mistakingly said to Hannah, Put away thy Wine from thee:
She in her Answer supposes that under the word Wine, Strong Drink generally
might also be meant and comprehended; for, She answered, and said, No, my Lord
-- I have drunk neither Wine nor Strong drink, 1 Samuel 1. 14, 15. So when it is
said of John the Baptist, he came neither eating Bread, nor drinking Wine;
without doubt, under the word Wine, is comprehended also all Strong Drink: For
it was Prophetically said of him, He shall drink neither Wine, nor strong
Drink, compare Luke 7. 33, with chap. 1. 15. And so, it seems, Wine and Strong
Drink are indifferently used one for the other: See Prove. 20. 1, and 31. 4, 5,
6. Isa. 5. 11, 22, and 56. 12, etc. And so we shall here look upon it in this
place, and accordingly speak to it, as including all Strong Drink whatsoever.

3. Under this word Wine, may also be included and comprehended Meat of desire,
or such food as wherewith men may be, and are intemperate, and excessive: And
so as Bread many times does include all Food, Mat. 6. 11, Joh. 6. 35. And so,
men may eat for Drunkenness, Eccles. 10. 17; so also Wine may comprehend all
pleasant meat and drink, in the use whereof men are intemperate: Because Wine
is said to make glad the heart, and is usually the principal thing in
intemperate ones desire: So when the Lord speaks of his peoples abuse of his
Corn, and Wine, and Oil, in Hos. 2. 5, 8, 9, he thus describes this Branch of
their iniquity in chap. 3. v. 1, They love Flagons of Wine: Comprehending all
their former abuse of Gods mercies under their inordinate affection to Wine, or
Strong Drink. Thus also when the Apostle Paul, writing unto, and directing
Titus in the ordination of Elders and Bishops, faith, If any be balmeless --
not accused of riot; he adds, as the reason, For a Bishop must be blameless --
not given to Wine, etc. Tit. 1. 6, 7: where surely he gives us to understand,
that the being given to Wine in verse 7, is as large as being guilty of Riot,
as that signifies intemperance, in v. 6: whereas Riot signifies intemperance in
Meat as well as in Drink, as appears 1 Pet. 4. 3, 4. And so being Drunken
signifies being intemperate, both in eating and Drinking; and therefore it is
opposed to Hungry, 1 Cor. 11. 21. And this more large sense we may also speak
to in what follows: Though I principally intend to speak of Wine, in the two
first considerations mentioned, or in the second, in and under which the first
is comprised. And so much to the first Enquiry.

2. What it is [to be Drunk] with Wine, and when a man may be said so to be.

To this we say, That to be Drunk with Wine, of which we are here admonished,
and from which dehorted, does signify:

1. More then Drinking Wine sparingly: Though a man cannot be Drunk without
drinking; yet he may drink and not be Drunk: we are not forbidden to use Wine,
as is before said; but may drink a little lawfully, if we have wherewith to buy
it, or it be given to us; and that for our delight also, Deuteronomy. 14. 25, 26,
Psalm. 104. 15, Luke 7. 34. And in some cases, and for some persons it may be
needful, as in case of Infirmities, and for the Stomachs sake, as the Apostle
says to Timothy: Drink no longer Water, but use a little Wine for thy Stomachs
sake, and for thy often infirmities, 1 Timothy 5. 23. So again, Give Strong Drink to
him that is ready to perish, and Wine to those that be bitter of Soul, or heavy
of heart, Prove. 31. 6, 7, 2 Samuel 16. 2. But that of which we are admonished of
is, of the abuse of it.

2. Nor are men by this dehortation, forbidden a more liberal use of Wine at
some times, and upon some special and extraordinary occasions, when they may
have it lawfully, without abusing themselves, or others, or the good Creatures
of God: Thus it is recorded of Joseph and his Brethren, that they drank, and
they drank largely together, Genesis 43. 34. And at a Marriage where Christ was,
and his Disciples, when they had well drank, he by a Miracle turned Water into
Wine, of which best Wine they also drank, Joh. 2. 1-10. But both were
extraordinary occasions; the former in expression of Joseph's joy for the
company of his Brethren, and especially of his Brother Benjamin, and to testify
love to them, and to show them his honor and greatness God had advanced him
to: The latter, that Christ, the truth of Joseph, might show forth his Glory by
this Miracle, and his Disciples be confirmed in their Faith in him: and others
also might be drawn in to believe on him, seeing this great and miraculous work
of his, Joh. 2. 11, 23-25, and so not to be ordinarily practiced by men.

3. But the Drunkenness here admonished of, and dehorted from, is, when persons
are filled with Wine (as appears by the expression in the latter part of the
verse) and drink to excess, Isa. 56. 12. And so they may be said to be Drunk
who are overcome with Wine, as the Prophet says, I am like a drunken man, and
like a man whom Wine has overcome, because of the Lord, and because of the
words of his holiness, Jer. 23. 9. So the Prophet speaking of the Drunkards of
Ephraim, says, They are such as are overcome with Wine, Isa. 28. 1. And, Of
whom, or of what a man is overcome, of the same is he brought into bondage, 2
Pet. 2. 19, Or, when men are deceived therewith, Prove. 20. 1, or, turned aside
out of the right way thereby; as it is said of the Drunkards of Ehpraim, They
have erred through Wine, and through Strong Drink are out of the way: the
Priest and the Prophet have erred through Strong Drink -- they are out of the
way through String Drink, etc. Isa. 28. 7. And so particularly we may say,
there are degrees in this Drunkenness, and of all we are admonished. As,

1. Some persons are said to be very drunken, as it said of Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.
36, and so drunken as that they fall, not being able to go through much Drink:
and together herewith usually, or oftentimes, they spue and vomit, Jer. 25.
27: thus it is said of the Drunkards of Ephraim, All Tables are full of vomit
and filthiness, so that there is no place clean, Isa. 28. 7, 8, and 19. 14,
Jer. 48. 26. Or make themselves naked, and discover their nakedness, even that
of their Foreskin also, to their shame, Genesis 9. 21-23, Lam. 4. 21, Habbak. 2.
15, 16, and so are wholly bereft of their understanding, Genesis 9. 24, and 19.
31-35. When men are so overcome, they are as, or worse than, bruit beasts: And
all will acknowledge such are guilty of this brutish and heathenish Iniquity.

2. Or men may be said to be Drunk, when they are not so far overcome with Wine
or Strong Drink, as the former; and yet are distempered therewith, and behave
themselves after an unusual manner by reason thereof: As when persons though
they can go, and have not drunk so much, or Drink has not prevailed so far
upon them, as to fall, and wallow in their filth, as the Dog in his vomit, or
Swine in the mire; yet they cannot go steddily, but reel to and fro, and
staggar through Strong Drink, which are evidences of Drunkenness also, as the
Scripture declares to us: so it is said, They reel to and fro, and stagger
like a drunken man, Psalm. 107. 27, Isa. 24. 20, Job 12. 25. As a drunken man
staggerth, Isa. 19. 14, and 29. 9. Or, when men shout or make an unusual noise
by reason of Wine, Psalm. 78. 65, Zechar. 9. 15, or by reason of Strong Drink
are ready to quarrel with, and offer wrong to others that are about them, 1 Timothy 3. 3; or otherwise by the strength of Wine or Strong Drink do behave
themselves strangely, or alter an unaccustomed manner: as by excessive Mirth,
Laughter, Talking, being heavy to Sleep, etc. 1 Samuel 1. 13, 14, Isa. 56. 10-12.

3. Yea, they are guilty of this iniquity also, who drink till Wine inflame
them, though outwardly they may behave themselves well enough, and may not be
discerned by others to be overcome with Wine: and who consume upon their Lusts,
and devour what is given to them to another end, even to live in the use and
enjoyment thereof, to the will of God: (for some men may devour and bear much
more Strong Drink than others, and not be taken notice of): So men are said to
do that for Drunkenness, which is not done for strength, Eccles. 10. 17. And a
Woe is pronounced upon them that rise up early in the morning that they may
follow Strong Drink, that continue until night, till Wine inflame, or pursue
them: And, Woe to them that are mighty to drink Wine, and men of strength to
mingle strong drink, Isa. 5. 11, 12, 22: and so men may be guilty of this
iniquity whose hearts are overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness, though
their outward-man appear to be well enough, Luke 21. 34: and generally they are
guilty of this evil, who pamper the flesh, and make provision for the lusts
thereof, Romans 13. 13, 14.

And the Drunkenness here admonished of, is not only of the highest degree
thereof; But of all intemperance and insobriety whatsoever: And not only are we
dehorted from the habit of Drunkenness, or accustoming our selves to excess;
but from any, and every one particular act. It is true indeed, the evil is
still the greater when men sin in an high, or the highest degree; and accustom
themselves to such a brutish Iniquity: But yet it is a provoking evil to God,
and that of which we are admonished, to be at any one time polluted herewith,
and deceived hereby. Therefore our Savior says to his Disciples; Take heed to
your selves lest [at any time] your hearts be overcharged with surfeting and
drunkenness, etc. Luke 21. 34, and the rather we should take heed hereof, not
only because it is a provoking Iniquity in it self; but because Wine is a
mocker and deceiver of men: many times men think to drink but a little, and
Wine deceives them till they are overcome therewith, and deceived thereby; or
persons think, if for once they should be overtaken, yet they will not make a
trade of it: Truly if they do not, yet that once is a provoking evil. And yet
usually men are deceived; for when they are once overcome, they are more easily
enticed, and deceived again and again, and so brought into bondage, 2 Pet. 2.
19. It is such a Cord, as that when a man is taken therewith, it is an hard
thing to disentangle himself again, Prove. 5. 22: and therefore whosoever is
deceived thereby, though but very seldom, or once, is not wise, Prove. 20. 1.
Good therefore it is for us, to abstain from every kind and degree of this
evil, as well as of others, 1 These. 5. 22. And thus we have spoken to this
second Inquiry, and shown in some measure what it is [to be Drunk] with Wine,
and when men may be said so to be.

2. We come in the next place to note some Instructions which are contained in
this admonition and dehortation of the Apostles: as to say,

I. From the persons to whom it is given, so we may note; That such persons as
have heard and believed the word of truth, the Gospel of our salvation, and
after they have believed, have been sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise,
unto the day of Redemption; need to be admonished and warned of being Drunk
with Wine: Such manner of persons these were to whom the Apostle here writes,
as appears, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14, and 2. 5-10, and 4. 30, and 5. 8, etc. And yet to
these he gives this admonition, and says, Be not drunk with Wine. So our
Savior gives alike admonition to his Disciples; Take heed to your selves, lest
at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, Luke
21. 34. Thus also the Apostle to the Romans, who were the called of Jesus
Christ, beloved of God, etc. yet to them he says, including himself also, Let
us walk honestly -- not in rioting and drunkenness, Romans 1. 6-8, and chap. 13.
v. 13, 14. And to the Thessalonians, on whose behalf he gave thanks to God
always, Remembering without ceasing their work of Faith, and labor of love,
and patience of hope -- knowing their election of God: Yet to them he says,
Let us not sleep as do others, but let us watch and be sober: For they that
sleep, sleep in the night; and they that are drunken, are drunken in the night:
But let us -- be sober, 1 These. 1. 2-4, with chapter 5. v. 6-8. Yea the Apostle
Paul himself did keep under his body, and brought it into sujection, lest that
by any means when he had preached to others, he himself should become a
castaway, or reprobate, 1 Cor. 9. 27. And it may further appear, that hearty
and unseigned Believers, and all of them, need to be admonished of, and
dehorted from this iniquity of Drunkenness, if we consider,

1. They are not wholly spiritual, but partly carnal, yea some more carnal than
spiritual, 1 Cor. 3. 1-4: They have still sin in them, and the lusts thereof
annoying them, both hindering them from what is good, and enticing them to what
is evil: To which sin and its lusts they are naturally apt to sow, and to side
with them: Therefore they need to have and suffer the word of exhortation, and
those warnings given by the Holy Ghost. Thus the Apostle complains, I am
carnal, sold under sin: And when I would do good, evil is present with me, Romans
7. 14-24. And the Prophet complains with grief and sorrow; I am ready to halt,
and my sorrow is continually before me; For I will declare mine iniquity, and
be sorry for my sin, Psalm. 38. 17, 18, And mine iniquities prevail against me,
Psalm. 65. 3. Hence such Exhortations and Commandments are given to us by the
Lord Jesus, Mortify your members that are upon the earth, Col. 3. 5. as
signifying, the affections and lusts of the flesh are our Members, the members
of the Old Man. And the flesh lusts against the spirit, Gal. 5. 17. Abstain
from fleshly lusts that war against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11, and 4. 3-7, Do ye
think, says the Apostle James, that the Scripture says in vain, the spirit
that dwells in us lusts to envy, even to all that is evil and forbidden of
God? And it says not this in vain; but it therefore thus speaks, that we
might take heed to our spirit, that we trust not therein, or thereto: and that
we follow not after it, nor obey it in the lusts thereof, Jam. 4. 1, 3-5, with
Mal. 2. 15, 16, Ezekiel. 13. 3. If there were no sin in them, but they were
perfect as to attainment, and wholly sinless (as some ungodly spirits boast of
themselves, who yet are not washed from their filthiness) there would be no
such need for their being so admonished and warned of this iniquity: But alas!
it is not so with them: For if we say that we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and (instead of having no sin in us) the truth is not in us, says the
Apostle, 1 John 1. 8: and this amongst other things, he did write to the
Believers, not to strengthen them in any evil ways, or to plead for sin, but
that they might not sin, but might lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of
naughtiness, and receive with meekness the ingraffed word, which is able to
save their Souls, 1 John 2. 1, with chap. 1. 8-10, Jam. 1. 14-20, that they
might not trust in their own heart: He that trusts therein is a fool, Prove.
28. 26. For every imagination of the thoughts of his heart is only evil, and
that continually, Genesis 6. 5. From within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil
thoughts (of all things) adulteries, fornication, murders, thefts,
covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy,
pride, foolishness: All these evil things come from within, and defile the man,
says our Savior to his Disciples, Mark 7. 17-20, 21-23. Therefore, because of
their great carnality, and natural inclination and propensity to all evil, they
need to be admonished of, and dehorted from all evil, and particularly from
Drunkenness.

2. They have also enemies without them, who are tempting them to what is evil,
and particularly to this iniquity here warned of, even to this of intemperance.

Namely, Satan, the god of this world, who is eminently and emphatically
called, The Tempter, Matthew. 4. 1-3, 1 These. 3. 5. And he is endeavoring by all
means to tempt and entice them to all that is evil, especially the Believers,
that he might turn them aside to crooked paths, 1 These. 3. 1-5. 1 John 3. 8. He
is their great enemy, and only adversary, who are seeking after, and serving
the Lord: and is therefore using all ways and methods to entice them to evil,
and tempt them to do his Lusts, Joh. 8. 44. And as at first he deceived and
destroyed our first Parents, by causing them to eat the forbidden Fruit, Genesis
3, so still he endeavors to corrupt and destroy men, by causing them to
transgress in Eating and Drinking contrary to Gods Command, Matthew. 4. 4, 5, He
tempts men to Insobriety and Intemperance. Hence the Apostle Peter says, Be
Sober, be vigilant: Because the Devil your adversary as a roaring Lion walks
about seeking whom he may devour: Whom resist steadfast in the faith. 1 Pet. 5.
8, 9.

And the men of the World who lie in wickedness, and under the power of the
Wicked-one, 1 John 5. 19, they are promoting and carrying an-end Satan's design
in the World, and endeavoring to turn the Believers out of the right way:
Hence the Wisdom of God counsels, My Son, if Sinners entice thee, consent
thou not -- Walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from their
path, Prove. 1. 10-15. They will, both by their evil counsel in words, and by
their practice also, entice the Believers to have fellowship with them in their
unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11: and think it strange if they will not
run with them to the same excess of Riot, speaking evil of them: And therefore
also they need to be admonished of Intemperance, and exhorted to be sober, and
watch unto Prayer, 1 Pet. 4. 3, 4-7, Yea, and some, and too many there are of
the Leaders of the people, who endeavor to cause others to err, even to err
through Wine, such there are, who walking in the Spirit (the evil one) and
Falsehood, do lie, Prophesying unto them of Wine and Strong Drink, Micah 2. 11,
Come ye, say they, I will fetch Wine (they can debase themselves to Hell in the
service of their Lusts) and we will fill our selves with Strong Drink, and to
morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant, Isa. 56. 10-12: Therefore
they need also to be admonished to take heed and beware of this Iniquity of
Drunkenness; because they have not only such a secret and homebred enemy within
them; but so many powerful, vigilant enemies without them also, who will
deceive, if possible, even the very Elect.

3. They need also to be admonished hereof; Because it is a very brutish and
heinous Iniquity, a very sinful and provoking Iniquity in the sight of God;
yea, and of men also generally, until they are given up to hardness, and become
past feeling. It is a great and heinous Iniquity against God, such as in which
men more openly and manifestly do rebel against the light, than in many other
evils of which they are admonished: And therefore in the service hereof, they
render themselves openly to be Children of Bilial, Children of the Devil,
Lawless persons, such as will do whatsoever is right in their own eyes, in
despite of, and in direct and open opposition unto the Light in the Testimony,
and to that wisdom and understanding God indues men with, whereby he teaches
them more than the Beasts of the Earth, and makes them wiser than the Fowls of
Heaven, Job. 35. 10, 11. Hence when Hannah was wrongfully suspected to be
guilty of this Iniquity, she thus speaks to clear her self: My Lord -- I have
drunk neither Wine, nor Srong drink -- Count not thine Handmaid for a Daughter
of Belial: Think me not to be, reckon me not as a Drunkard; for such are
Children of Belial, especially if of the Female Sex: In which is intimated to
us the abominableness of this Iniquity, 1 Samuel 1. 14-16. And in committing this
Iniquity, men even work the will of the Heathen: as the Apostle Peter
signifies in saying, The time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought
the will of the Heathen, or Gentiles (which know not God) when we walked in
lasciviousness -- excess of wine, revellings, banquetings, etc. 1 Pet. 4. 3,
with 1 These. 4. 4, 5. And the Holy Ghost, to set forth the abominableness of
this Iniquity, and that of the Lust of Uncleanness (the consequent and
concomitant of it, as we shall show) makes use of the names of these sins to
represent and describe abominable Idolatry by: Read Rev. 17. 2, and 18. 3. See
Jer. 51. 7. And it is a shameful Iniquity amongst men generally (and therefore
they do, or however did, in former times, commit it in the night, 1 These. 5.
7.) and such an one as they will abominate and loathe in others, and testify
their dislike of (until they are become past feeling) and displeasure against.
Thus under the Law, the way to render ones Son vile to others, was to say, He
was guilty of intemperance; as it is written, The Parents shall say unto the
Elders of the City, This our Son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey
our voice, he is a glutton and a drunkard. And all the men of the City shall
stone him with Stones, etc. Deuteronomy. 21. 18-21. Yea, it is such an Iniquity, as in
which men sin against their own bodies also, and ofttimes bring diseases and
death directly upon themselves by their Intemperance, Hos. 7. 5.

4. It is such an Iniquity as God does, and will judge for ever, if they be not
washed from it: And therefore how often does he denounce Woes against them that
are guilty hereof? Woe to the Drunkards of Ephraim -- The drunkard of Ephraim
shall be trodden under seet, Isa. 28. 1-3. Woe to them that rise up early in the
morning, that they may follow strong drink: that continue until night, till
wine inflame them -- Therefore my people are gone into Captivity, because they
have no knowledge -- Therefore Hell has enlarged her self, and opened her mouth
without measure (to receive those Drunkards, where the multitude of them shall
be dried up with thirst): Woe unto them that (though they can carry Drink
well-enough, and others may not perceive them to be Drunk, yet) are mighty to
drink Wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink -- Therefore as the fire
devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumes the Chaff, so their root shall be
rottenness, etc. -- Therefore is the anger of the Lord kindled against his
people, and he has stretched forth his hand against them, and has smitten
them, etc. And threatens to bring upon them Forreiners to wast and destroy
them, Isa. 5. 11-14. 22-25-30. Yea indeed, he is many times so provoked to
anger with men on this account, as that, especially if they continue in this
iniquity, he cuts them off, even in their sin of Drunkenness; as may be
intimated unto us in what is said by the Prophet, The Lord will make an utter
end, Affliction shall not rise up the second time. For -- while they be drunken
as Drunkards, they shall be devoured, etc. Nahum 1. 9, 10. And however,
persisting in this Iniquity, they will hereafter be excluced, and shut out of
the Kingdom of God; Nor drunkards, nor revilers, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom
of God, 1 Cor. 6. 10. The works of the flesh are manifest, which are, adultery
-- drunkenness, revellings, and such like: of the which I tell you before, as I
have also told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God, faith the Apostle, Gal. 5. 19-21. All which
considerations do show unto us, that the Believers need to be admonished and
warned of this Iniquity, that they be not Drunk with Wine, etc.

And this Instruction, as thus spoken unto, may be of usefulness to us:

1. To show unto us, That the believers themselves are not, while in mortal
bodies, perfect as to attainment, Phil. 3. 12. But they have still the Old Man
which is corrupt according to the deceitful Lusts thereof; which though
Crucified with Christ, yet is not whosly destroyed, Romans 6. 6. Therefore are
they instructed and encouraged, through the Spirit to mortify (continually) the
deeds of the Body, that they may live, Romans 8. 13. There is a Generation indeed
that are pure, and sinless in their own eyes, and yet are not washed from their
filthiness. There is a generation, O how lofty are their eyes, and their
eyelids are lifted up, Prove. 30. 12, 13. But it is not so with them that walk
in the light, as God is in the light: they see by the light of Gods testimony,
and prove by experience, that they have sin within them, and many fleshly lusts
that war against the Soul; to abstain from daily ungodliness, and worldly lusts
to deny and renounce: And the consideration hereof causes them to cry out, O
wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us from this body of death? Romans 7.
14-24. 1 Pet. 2. 11. Tit. 2. 11, 12. And this leads them to pity others, Gal.
6. 1.

2. It shows unto us the mercy of God in giving gifts unto men: and fitting
them to go before others in the Word of the Lord, and to warn them of every
path of the Destroyer: and such should not be despised, but esteemed by us, who
are faithful in admonishing us of that which is evil and displeasing unto him,
who is of purer eyes than to behold Iniquity. Thus when the Apostle had been
warning the Thessalonians of Intemperance, and instructing them to Sobriety, he
gives this exhortation to them: And we beseech you, Brethren, to know them
which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you (to wit,
among other things of Drunkenness, and Insobriety, as appears by the scope of
the place): And to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake, 1
These. 5. 6, 7, 8-12, 13: for whosoever despises them in their faithful
admonitions, and dehortations, despises not Man but God, who also has given
unto them his Holy Spirit to accompany and assist them, 1 These. 4. 2-4-8.

3. Seeing such need to be dehorted from this Iniquity of Drunkenness, we may
learn from hence, That they are no friends to them, nor is this love in any,
whatever pretensions and professions they have, and make thereof, who entice
them to this great and provoking Iniquity: They need not be provoked to
Insobriety (for we are all too forward thereto naturally) but dehorted
therefrom: And therefore it is not loving kindness, but hatingkindness to urge
any to eat or drink intemperately; and such an Iniquity as wherewith God is
provoked: Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink, that put thy bottle
to him, and make him drunken also, that thou may look on their nakedness.
Thou art filled more with shame than with glory, etc. Habbak. 2. 15, 16. Though
men may pretend this to be liberality, and to tend to their glory, yet it will
appear in conclusion, that such glory is their shame; and that they call evil
good, and good evil; put darkness for light, and light for darkness, Isa. 5.
20-22. And time will come, when the vile person shall no more be called
liberoel, Isa. 32. 5. Whatever appearance of love such may have to us, yet
indeed it is, and is to be esteemed hatred by us; for, Love works no ill to
his neighbor: Let us then cast off these works of darkness, and walk honestly
-- not in rioting and drunkenness, Romans 13. 8-10-13; and rather esteem them to
be our friends, and reckon them to be lovers of us, and kind to us, whose work
it is to endeavor to preserve us from this, and all other crooked-paths
whatsoever, Prove. 27. 5, 6.

4. The consideration hereof might hide Pride from them, and help them, Not to
be high minded, but fear, Romans 11. 20. Happy is the man that fears always:
but he that hardneth his heart shall fall into mischief, Prove. 28. 14. Truly,
even the Believers have great cause to stand in awe, and not to sin: for they
have sin in them, and many enemies that seek the hurt of them; and too readily
and frequently they offend in many things; and therefore it behooves them to
fear the Commandment, Prove. 13. 13: And suffer the word of Exhortation; and not
to think themselves to be so strong, or wise, as that they need no such
admonitions: But rather to be always jealous of themselves, and to seed
themselves, to eat and drink with fear, Jude v. 12, The wise man fears, and
departs from evil, but the fool rages and is confident, Prove. 14. 16. Yea
indeed, it especially behooves them to flee from Intemperance, and avoid all
occasions thereof. Therefore is this Instruction and Counsel given by Wisdom to
her Children: Hear thou my Son, and be wise, and guide thine heart in the way:
be not amongst Wine-bibbers, Prove. 23. 19, 20. And this leads us to a second
Instruction from these words. viz.

II. In that he says [Be not ye drunk with Wine] so he signifies to us; That
it does especially behove them who have heard and believed the word of Truth,
the Gospel of our Salvation, to flee from Drunkenness; and if they do not so,
their Iniquity will be greater, more provoking, and inexcusable than others,
and their judgment more terrible, and intolerable: Hence to such, and from the
consideration of their nighness to, and mercy they have received from God, he
thus speaks: This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that [Ye] walk not
as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind, Ephesians. 4. 17-20. So the
Apostle Peter says, Dearly beloved, I beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims,
abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the Soul: having your conversation
honest, etc. 1 Pet. 2. 9-12. And this will appear if we consider,

1. They are called out of darkness (out of ignorance and blindness) into Gods
mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. And therefore it more abundantly behooves them to
put off, and flee from this work of darkness: Ye were sometimes darkness (says
the Apostle to these believing Ephesians, and then ye walked according to the
course of this world, etc.) but now are ye light in the Lord, walk as children
of light: walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their minds, having
the understanding darkened; being alienated from the life of God through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart, Ephesians. 5. 8,
with chap. 2. 1, 2, and 4. 17, 18. Indeed, this is the condemnation (as to men
generally, this is their condemningsin, and the cause of their condemnation)
that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light,
because their deeds are evil, Joh. 3. 19, 20. But now as to these, not only
light is come into the world, but they are turned from Darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, as to their state: they have believed in the
light, and are the children of it, born of it, and called into it, endued with
the light of the knowledge of God, which shines in the face of Christ: and
therefore it behooves them especially to avoid, and abstain from all evil, and
from this of Intemperance particularly, or else they will more highly sin and
rebel against the light than others: Christ has given them light: let such see
then that they walk circumspectly, not as fools but as wise -- Let them not be
drunk with Wine, Ephesians. 5. 15-18. Certainly men act as, and render themselves to
be fools, at an high rate, especially the Children of Light, who are Drunk with
Wine; and such deeds are directly and openly opposite to the Light they have
received, and to that Wisdom they are endued with: As on the other hand, it is
an high point of Wisdom, and the way to be more wise still, for those who are
of the light, to avoid Wine wherein is excess, and such as are Bibbers thereof:
Hence the Holy Ghost says, My Son, if thine heart be wise, mine heart shall
rejoice, even mine; yea my reins shall rejoice, etc. But how may the heart of
such an one be wise? Wherein consists, and what is the way to Wisdom? The
Wisdom of God informs us of this, as one thing contained in it, and needful to
it: Hear thou my Son, and be wise, and guide thine heart in the Way: Be not
amongst wine-bibbers, amongst riotous eaters of flesh, Prove. 23. 15-21. This
Argument the Apostle also propounds to the Thessalonians, to move them to be,
and abide Sober. Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day;
We are not of the night nor of darkness: Therefore let us not sleep as do
others, but let us watch and be sober: For they that sleep sleep in the night,
and they that are drunken are drunken in the night: But let us who are of the
day be sober, 1 These. 5. 5-8. And if they be not so who are Children of light,
but become the servants of corruption, as their sin is more sinful than others,
so their judgment will be much more severe and intolerable: For such as these
The blackness of darkness is reserved for ever, Jude 12, 13. For if after they
have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the
latter end is worse with them than the beginning. For it had been better for
them not to have known the way of righteousness, than after they have known it,
to turn from the holy Commandment delivered to them, 2 Pet. 2. 19-22. The
Apostle gives us to understand, that the Iniquity of Intemperance in those who
are Children of Light, is greater than that of other men: and answerably their
judgment and punishment will be heavier and more terrible, if they be not
seasonably washed therefrom; in that he says, I wrote unto you in an Epistle,
not to keep company with fornicators: yet not altogether with the fornicators
of this world, or with the covetous, etc. For then must ye needs go out of the
world. But now I have written unto you, not to keep company: If any that is
called a Brother be a fornicator -- or a Drunkard -- with such an one, no not
to eat: not familiarly to converse, or not to eat at the Table of the Lord with
such an one as this is, 1 Cor. 5. 9-11: Because such sin so greatly against the
Light, and act so very uusutably unto those principles which they have received
of God, in walking according whereto they would certainly be preserved from
such a brutish and beastly Iniquity as is this of Drunkenness and Intemperance.

2. These are Saints by calling and profession, washed, and sanctified in the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our God, and so are brought
nigh unto God: They are no more strangers and forreiners, but fellow-Citizens
with the Saints, and of the household of God: And in Christ they are builded
together for an habitation of God through the Spirit; And so are made nigh unto
him by the Blood of Christ, Ephesians. 2. 13-19-22. They are brought into, and made
of his House: And holiness becomes thy house, O Lord, for ever, Psalm. 93. 5.
And therefore it does behove these especially to escape and flee from the
corruptions of the world, and this also particularly of Insobriety; or
otherwise they will more abundantly provoke the eyes of his Glory, unto whom
they are made so nigh. Be not unequally yoaked together with unbelievers; For
what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion
has light with darkness? And what concord has Christ with Belial? (whose
Children Drunkards are, as we have seen) Or what part has he that believes,
with an Infidel? And what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? For ye
are the Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and
walk in them, etc. And if any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God
destroy; For the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are, 2 Cor. 6. 14-16,
with 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. The Lord will be sanctified in them that come nigh him,
Lev. 10. 3, though he hates sin with a perfect and everlasting hatred in all.
God is of purer eyes than to behold Iniquity, yet it is more bearable, or
rather not so unbearable and loathsome unto him, to see those that are without
his house, and at a distance from him, to pursue and follow this brutish and
swinish Iniquity, than to see men that are brought into his House vomit and
spue there, even in his presence: these are more abundantly offensive to him,
and cause a stink in his nose which he cannot away with. This was an
aggravation of the Iniquity of his people in former times, as the Prophet gives
us to understand: I am like a drunken man, says he, and like a man whom wine
has overcome -- for in mine house have I found their wickedness, says the
Lord, Jer. 23. 9-11. They came into my Sanctuary to defile it; and lo thus have
they done in the midst of mine house -- And a voice of the multitude being at
ease was with her, and with the men of the common sort were brought Sabeans, or
Drunkards, etc. Ezekiel. 23. 38 42. His house is, and should be holy, an house of
Prayer and Sacrifice: But how unseemly and provoking an Iniquity is it unto
him, when his people make it a den of Drunkards! He needs not, nor can endure
it, that mad men, such as are overcome with Wine, should come into his presence
(as 1 Samuel 21. 14, 15, with Jer. 5 1. 7.). They are a Spiritual house, an Holy
Nation, a peculiar People, or people for a possession; therefore they
especially should, and it behooves them highly to, abstain from fleshly lusts,
etc. 1 Pet. 2. 4-9-11: they especially should come out from among men, and be
separate, and touch no unclean thing: for the Lord their God walks in the
midst of them to deliver them, and to give up their enemies before them;
therefore they should be holy, that he see no unclean thing in them, and turn
away from them, 2 Cor. 6. 14-17, with Deuteronomy. 23. 14, and Rev. 1. 13, 14, and 2.
1. As he who has called them is Holy, so should they be Holy in all manner of
Conversation; or otherwise, if they grow fat with the fat of the Kidneys of
Wheat, and with the pure blood of the Grape, and kick against God; when he sees
this, he will abhor them, because of the provoking of his Sons, and of his
Daughters: and he will hide his face from them, Deuteronomy. 32. 14-20. It behooves
them therefore, who are brought so nigh unto him, to receive this admonition,
and obey this word of exhortation; or otherwise their Iniquity will be greater
and more provoking than others; and answerably; their judgment will be more
severe and intolerable. Let every one that names the name of Christ, depart
from iniquity, as becomes Saints.

3. They especially ought to flee from this Iniquity also, otherwise they will
do more hurt to others, and teach and strengthen the wicked-ones in their ways,
Jer. 2. 33, they are the light of the world; therefore they are instructed to
let their light so shine before men, that they may see their good works, and
glorify their Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 5. 14-16. Needful it is for
them especially, to take heed that they put not a stumbling block before the
blind, not to eat flesh, nor drink Wine, nor any thing whereby their Brother
(for whom also Christ died) stumbleth, or is offended: Cursed is he that makes
the blind to wander out of the way, Levit. 19. 14. with Romans 14. 21. and Deuteronomy.
27. 18. Those who have known, and believed the Testimony that God has given of
his Son, are set, and preserved to shine as lights in the midst of a crooked
and froward generation, Philip. 2. 12-15. And to that end, to hold forth the
Word of life, in word and conversation, verse. 16. And if they walk on in
Darkness, in Rioting and Drunkenness, and the consequents thereof; Oh how will
they thereby do hurt to others! By means of them the name of God, and his
doctrine, will be blasphemed and reproached by others, as if it were a Doctrine
of Profaneness and Licentiousness: and they hereby lay stumbling blocks in the
way of poor ignorant ones, so as none will return from, but rather be
strengthened in their evil ways. And, Woe to the world because of offenses; but
woe to the man, especially, by whom the offense comes. Wherefore if thy hand or
foot (any work or walking of thine) cause thee to offend, cut them off, and
cast them from thee: It is better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed,
rather than having two hands, or feet, to be cast into everlasting fire; where
their worm dies not, and their fire is not quenched, Matthew. 18. 7-9, Mark 9.
43-45. They are a City set on an hill, which cannot be hid; and every one is
observing, and taking notice of them, and their demeanor and conversation: And
therefore it behooves them especially, to have their Conversation honest among
the Gentiles, (which they cannot have, unless they abstain from fleshly lusts
which war against the Souls of others, as well as against their own): that
whereas they speak against them as evil doers, they may by the good works which
they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation, 1 Pet. 2. 11, 12, and
chap. 3. 16. It behooves them therefore to have their conversation as becomes
the Gospel of Christ, that they may be pure from the blood of other men, and
that the blood of their Souls be not required of them.

And as it behooves the Believers in general, to receive this admonition given
unto them, and to obey the counsel therein contained: so still it more highly
concerns those amongst them, who are over them, and go before them, to abstain,
and flee from all intemperance whatsoever, whether in meat or drink. The
Apostle was very careful, when he gives Commandment about such as should be
chosen into the Office of a Bishop, or Elder, that he that should be chosen
thereinto, should not be given to this Iniquity of Insobriety: A Bishop, says
he, must be blameless -- not given to wine, etc. 1 Timothy 3. 1-3. So to Titus
also, he says, If any be blameless -- not accused of riot, etc. For a Bishop
must be blameless -- not given to wine, Tit. 1. 6, 7. And the same direction he
gives concerning Deacons also; Likewise must the Deacons be grave, not given to
much wine, 1 Timothy 3. 8, they are to be examples to the Believers, in word and
conversation, 1 Timothy 4. 12. And in all things to show themselves patterns of
good works, that their Brethren may imitate them, Tit. 2. 1-7. And if they
depart out of the way, they will cause many to stumble at the Law: and God will
make them contemptible and base before all the people, according as they have
not kept his ways, Mat. 2. 8, 9; it behooves them therefore to be temperate in
all things, and to keep under their bodies, and bring them into subjection,
lest when they have preached to others, they themselves become reprobates, 1
Cor. 9. 24-27. They have some peculiar service in bearing the vessels of the
Lord, committed to them; and they therefore should be clean, which they cannot
be, unless they deny these worldly lusts, Isa. 52. 11, with chapter 28. 8. This was
a Complaint taken up, and uttered forth against the leaders of the people in
former times: The Priest amd the Prophet have erred through Strong Drink, they
are swallowed up of Wine, they are out of the way through Strong Drink, etc.
Isa. 28. 7. -- They are in their service brought higher unto the God of Israel,
than their Brethren: And therefore he will, most especially, be sanctified in
them: And it greatly concerns them at all times to be temperate, especially
when they approach unto him, lest through their insobriety they offer up
strange fire instead of that of the Altar. It may seem this evil of
Intemperance was found with Nadab and Abihu, and that it was the cause of their
miscarriage: Therefore for the future God gives a strict charge, that those
that come near to him should abstain from this occasion of evil: For upon that
occasion the Lord spoke to Aaron, and said, Do not drink wine, nor strong
drink, thou, nor thy Sons with thee, when ye go into the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, lest ye dye: It shall be a statute for ever throughout your
generations; And that ye may put difference between holy and unholy, and
between unclean and clean, (in which Nadab and Abihu sailed). See Levit. 10.
1-3-8-10. Ezekiel. 44. 21-23. This may and will cause men to follow their own
Spirit, and to speak things to God which they ought not. -- -- They are to be
Gods mouth to the people in some sort, and are to speak his words, and make
known and open his Doctrine to them: And therefore it behooves them greatly to
take heed, and beware that they be not overcome of Wine; that they may teach
his Israel the Statutes of the Lord, Levit. 10. 8-11. For by the excess of wine
they will err in vision, and stumble in judgment, Isa. 28. 7. They are to watch
for the Souls of those which are committed to their charge: their work is to be
watchmen: But alas, how greatly will this Intemperance unfit them for it, and
dispose them to slothfulness and sleepiness! This will unfil them for the
service they are appointed to, and faithfulness expected from them, 1 These. 5.
6-8. It will make them blind, ignorant, foolish-ones, and render them
altogether unmeet for the work of watchmen: hence it is said, His watchmen
are blind, they are all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark;
sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber -- Come ye, say they, I will fetch
wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink: and to morrow shall be as
this day, and much more abundant, Isa. 56. 9-12. -- They should be reprovers of
others, and should admonish and warn them of every path of the Destroyer, 2 Timothy 4. 2. Ezekiel. 3. 17-26. But if they themselves be guilty of Drunkenness, how
should they warn others of Intemperance, or reprove them for it? Thou that
say another should not be Drunk, or commit Fornication, art thou thy self
Intemperate, and unclean? Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy
self? Ram. 2. 19-24. -- They should give themselves to reading (the Scriptures
of truth) to Exhortation, and Doctrine: and to that end redeem the time, that
their profiting may appear to all, 1 Timothy 4. 13-16. 2 Timothy 4. 2. But alas! How
will this Swinish Iniquity unfit men for this, and hinder them from exercising
themselves to what is good and profitable to themselves and their Brethren! And
do not such sometimes complain, they are so straightened by reason of their
callings and employments, that they cannot be so often with their Brethren as
they would be; when yet the same persons can too frequently find time to
distemper themselves, and abuse the good Creatures of God: And thereby cause
others to abhor the Ordinances and Appointments of the Lord: Yea, therefore (as
we have said) God makes them base and contemptible before all the people; And
they are justly taken up in the lips of talkers. Oh how provoking an Iniquity
is this in such as these are! And unto such the Lord also may speak, and say,
What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my
Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words
behind thee? Psalm. 50. 16-20-22, And indeed, the provokingness of this Iniquity
in them, is signified in Gods severity against them. If that servant say in his
heart, my Lord delayeth his coming, and shall begin to beat the menservants,
and the maidens, and to eat and drink with the drmnken, or, to be drunken: The
Lord of that Servant shall come in a day when he looks not for him, and in an
hour that he is not aware of: and shall cut him in sunder, and appoint him his
portion with the Hypocrites and unbelievers: there shall be weeping, and
gnashing of teeth. And that Servant which knew his Lords will, and prepared
not, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. --
For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required: And to whom
men have committed much, of him they will ask the more, Matthew. 24. 48-51. and
Luke 12. 45-48. Oh consider this ye that forget God and his Law (Prove. 31. 5.)
lest he tear you in pieces and there be none to deliver: Lest now spending your
time in mirth and jollity, and in the abuse of the good Creatures of God, you
hereafter howl for a drop of water to cool your tongues, being tormented in
that flame, when you come to drink of the Wrath of the Almighty, Job. 21.
12-20. Luke 16. 19-24. You should especially have your conversation in Heaven,
and be minding the things above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God:
And if you should mind these earthly things, and so dwell in your hearts and
affections upon the earth, how can you escape the snare which will come upon
all the inhabitants of the earth? Therefore take heed to your selves, says our
Savior to his Disciples and Apostles, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life (whereto
Intemperance will necessarily lead you) and so that day come upon you unawares:
for as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole
earth (as riotous persons and Drunkards do). Watch ye therefore, and pray
always, etc. Luke 21. 34, 35, 36.

III. Considering the time when this dehortation and admonition was given to
these Believers, we may learn somewhat from thence which may be instructive to
us from this circumstance. And so, as we may see, it was given unto them [When
the days were evil, Ephesians. 5. 16.] Now they may be said to be evil, in a double
consideration, whereto we shall here briefly speak, and so note something for
our learning: As to say,

1. The days or time may be said to be evil, when they are sinful times, when
Iniquity does abound, and that both Spiritual and Carnal. The days are evil,
sinfully evil, and perilous times, when men have a form of Godliness over all
their Impiety and wickedness, 2 Timothy 3. 1-5. Matthew. 24. 12. As well as also
they are said to be evil, when more gross impiety, and carnal wickedness
abound. As when the words of many amongst the professed people of God, are so
stout, as they say, It is vain to serve God: and what profit is it that we have
kept his ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before him? as Mal. 3.
14, 15: or when they run to all excess of Riot, and commit Iniquity with
greediness: So it was said to be an evil time, when the Lord says, I know your
manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins, Amos 5. 12, 13. And so it
appears, the times or days in this place, were said to be evil, because of the
abounding of gross wickedness: many amongst them did commit uncleanness with
greediness; and were acting unfruitful works of darkness, such as it was a
shame to speak of, Ephesians. 4. 16-19. and chap. 5. 11, 12.

2. The days may be said to be evil, when they are full of affliction, and
when God is executing his judgments upon the earth: So as, All the days of the
afflicted are evil, Prove. 16. 15. So the Prophet imprecates, Bring upon them
the day of evil, Jer. 17. 17, 18. And so the days, or times, are frequently,
and most frequently said to be evil, Psalm. 49. 5. Prove. 16. 4. Eccles. 9. 12.
and 12. 1. Amos 6. 3. Micah 2. 3. Matthew. 6. 34. And from this double
understanding we may take notice of these two instructions from this
circumstance of the time, viz.

[1.] That when the days are sinfully evil, then especially the Believers need
to be admonished to slay from Intemperance, and excess of Wine: And it behooves
them then more abundantly to receive the admonition, Not to be drunk with Wine:
And this will appear if we consider;

1. In such days and times they have more temptations and provocations by the
general evil example of others: Therefore they the more need this admonition to
be given to, and received by them, when Iniquity is so generally and frequently
practiced by those amongst whom we live, and is so openly acted and committed
by them. Hence the Lord gives this admonition to his people in former times:
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23. 2. In which he
signifies, that in such a day we shall have more strong provocations to have
fellowship with them in those unfruitful works of darkness, than when Iniquity
stops her mouth, and hides her head, and a greater inclination thereto: And
this also appears by what Gods professed people plead for the service of
their sins: Namely, the general and open example of their Fathers, and
greatones: We will do, say they, what soever thing goes forth out of our own
mouth, to burn incense to the Queen of Heaven -- as we have done, we, and our
Fathers, our Kings, and our Princes, in the Cities of Judah, and in the streets
of Jerusalem, Jer. 44. 15-17. When men generally declare their sin as Sodom,
and hide it not, Oh then we need especially, and it greatly concerns us to
receive, and obey this admonition given to us. Then we shall have many to
entice, and urge us, by their word and example, to consent to them, and comply
with them, in their crooked paths; and to run with them to the same excess of
Riot whereto they run. And then more especially also, it behooves us to receive
the admonition, when not only the people generally, among whom we live, are
given to Intemperance; but when The leaders of the people also err through
wine, and through strong drink are out of the way: as, Isa. 28. 7, Then the
leaders of the people cause them to err, and go astray also, and they that are
led of them are destroyed, Isa. 3. 12. and 9. 16. I have seen folly in the
Prophets of Samaria, says the Lord -- They caused my people Israel to err. I
have seen also in the Prophets of Jerusalem (of the chief City) an horrible
thing -- They strengthen the hands of evildoers, that none does return from
his wickedness -- Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts concerning the
Prophets: Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink of the
water of gall. For from the Prophets of Jerusalem is profaneneness gone forth
into all the land, Jer. 23. 13-15. When such as these forsake the right way,
and count it pleasure to Riot in the daytime, then it is an evil time: Then
many times they allure through the lusts of the flesh -- those that were clean
escaped from them that live in error, 2 Pet. 2. 13-18.

2. Then also the Believers need to be admonished of Intemperance when the
days are sinfully evil; Because, when Rioting and Drunkenness are commonly
practiced, these evils may be committed without fear of shame and punishment:
then there is none to put them to shame in any thing, as Judge. 18. 7. But they
that tempt God, are even delivered from that shame and penalty which of right
belongs to their transgression, Mal. 3. 14, 15. The wicked walk on every side
(openly and securely, and do not hide themselves) when Vileness (Rioting and
Drunkenness) are exalted amongst the Sons of men: And then it is high time for
the righteous to cry, Save Lord, deliver us from our own, and others
transgressions: Incline not our hearts to any evil thing, to practice wicked
works with men that work Iniquity, and let us not eat of their dainties, Psalm
12. 1-8. and 141. 1-4, The rod and reproof give wisdom: But when persons are
left to themselves, usually they act and commit shameful things, Prove. 29. 15.
This was that which provoked the Lord to anger against Eli, who judged Israel,
and might be some cause of his Sons great Impiety and Iniquity, and that they
were such children of Belial, that when they made themselves vile he restrained
them not, 1 Samuel 3. 13. When Justice and Judgment are executed, and sinners are
shamed, and punished according to the quality of their Offense, this puts an
awe upon others, and causes them to take heed of Iniquity, lest they also
partake of the Punishment: And such righteous Judges, and Magistrates, do put
away evil from among the people: And all the people shall hear, and fear, and
do so no more wickedly, or presumptuously, Deuteronomy. 17. 12, 13. and 13. 8-11. and
19. 18-21. And so it is said particularly, When gluttonus persons and drunkards
are punished fortheir intemperance, by this means the Judges put away evil from
amongst them: And all Israel shall hear and fear, Deuteronomy. 21. 20, 21. But, when
we are all so naturally inclined to evil; and also every man is left to
himself, to do what is right in his own eyes, without check, shame, or
punishment; when every man is a Law to himself, as it were, and the Reins are
laid upon their Necks, that they may go whither they please: And when the Sons
of the Mighty will not do Justice: when they know not, nor will understand, but
walk on in darkness (as Psalm. 82. 1-5,) then it is high time to receive the
admonition which the Holy Ghost is giving unto us, and to accept it thankfully
from those who are over us in the Lord, that they will admonish us of, and
dehort us from this great and root-Iniquity of Intemperance: For then
especially we shall be ready to pollute our selves herewith, when we may do so,
and not be restrained from it, or shamed, or punished for it.

Nay further, the Believers need to have and receive this admonition, when
their Watchmen are poluted with Intemperance, or some of them: because they
that are so, cannot faithfully, or successfully reprove another of an Iniquity
of which they themselves are also guilty. How canthey pluck out the Mote out of
their Brothers eye, when he hold there is a Beam in their own? How can they
fault, or with what face can they reprove their Brethren for Insobriety, when
they also are given unto, and too often defiled with excess of Wine? Matthew. 7.
3-5. Nay indeed, how can they reprove others of any evil whatsoever, while
themselves walk not with a right foot in the Gospel, but eat and drink with the
Drunken? Hence when the Apostle solemnly charges Timothy, Before God and the
Lord Jesus Christ, etc. To preach the Word, and be instant in season, and out
of season, reprove rebuke, exhort, etc. He then instructs him: But watch thou,
or be thou sober, in all things (as the same word is read in some of our
Margins, and so translated elsewhere: as 1 Pet. 5. 8.) As if he should say,
That thou may Preach the word faithfully, and Reprove and Rebuke Offenders,
be thou thy self Sober, and Temperate in all things, be not a partaker of other
men's sins, but keep thy self pure; otherwise thou can not be a Reprover, or
Faithful-reprover of others, 2 Timothy 4. 1-5. and 1 Timothy 5. 22. Alas, how do such
teachers strengthen others in their evil ways! their Brethren will say, surely
Drunkenness and Intemperance are no great evils, for our leaders are
Good-fellows also, and will join, and keep Company with us. And however we need
not fear to be reproved by them; They dare not Prophesy unto us to cause us to
take shame (as Micah 2. 6,) because they themselves too often exceed in their
Intemperance. Oh! needful therefore it is, for us to be dehorted from, and
admonished of this Iniquity, when men may sin without fear of shame or
punishment from the Civil Magistrate, and when also there are like People, like
Priest: And now it is high time for us to suffer this word of admonition and
exhortation; Be not drunk with Wine.

3. Nay, when the days are so sinfully evil, as has been said, we need then
to have and receive this admonition here given to us; not only because then we
have more strong temptations to Intemperance than at other times: nor only
because we may be guilty of it without shame, punishment, or reproof: But also
in such days we shall be reproached, frowned upon, and evilly dealt with; if
we have not fellowship with them in their unfruitful works of darkness: others
will think it strange if we run not with them to the same excess of Riot,
Blaspheming and speaking evil of us, 1 Pet. 4. 3, 4. So it was in evil days in
Israel: Judgment was turned backward, and Justice stood afar off: for truth was
fallen in the streets, and equity could not enter: Yea truth failed, and he
that departed from evil made himself a prey; or was counted a Madman, a
Fanatic, etc. Isa. 45. 14, 15. So now too many hate the good, and love the
evil, Mic. 3. 1-3. And hereby think to affright men, and scare them into their
evil ways and manners, by their reproaches, frowns, scoffs, derisions, etc.
Then it is an evil time indeed, a sinful and perilous time, when the just are
afflicted, because they will not put forth their hand to Iniquity with others,
but refrain their feet from their evil ways and crooked paths, Amos 5. 10-13.
And then especially they need to be admonished to flee Insobriety, when they
will be reproached, vilified, and persecuted by others for so doing, lest by
the evil use they meet with, they be corrupted from the right way, and turn
aside after Satan.

Nay, when the days are sinfully evil, then the way to meet with praise from
others, preferment, and safety, is to do as the most of men do, and to walk in
the broad way with them: then the vilest of the Sons of men are exalted, even
such as walk in riotous ways and practices, Psalm. 12. 8. Then the proud are
counted happy, and they that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt
God are even delivered, Mal. 3. 13-15. And therefore in such days especially
we need to be admonished to abstain from every kind of evil whatsoever, and
particularly from this of Intemperance: for we love naturally to be well spoken
of by others, and to be advanced or lifted up amongst men, or however to enjoy
our liberty, and be secured from all reproach, and molestation from others: and
therefore when all outward encouragement, promotion, and protection are assured
unto, and enjoyed by such as will eat, drink, and be drunken: How ready are we
by occasion hereof, to wander out of the way of understanding, and to have
fellowship with them in their unfruitful works of darkness? The world will love
its own, Joh. 15. 19. They that forsake the Law, praise the wicked, Prove. 28.
4. The world cannot hate them that are of it, and who do fulfill its lusts, but
delights in them, and think, these are the only persons that are meet to be
confided in; and that will be trusty, and faithful, in any trust that is
committed to them, Joh. 7. 7. And therefore these are the persons that shall be
countenanced, promoted, protected, encouraged, and be the men, the darlings and
dillings of the times: These are they that shall be accounted honest men, and
good-fellows, such as will be true to their friends: these are the men that
shall be reputed and reported to be bountiful and liberal persons, (though in
truth they are Churls and vile ones in the esteem and account of him that
judges righteously, Isa. 32. 5-8.) And who so meet for society, countenance,
security, and advance meant, as these? Oh therefore! what great need have we
when the days are evil, to be admonished and warned to flee from this path of
the destroyer, even from Intemperance, and to receive, and obey the admonition
given unto us, and to that end to go forth unto Christ without the Camp,
bearing his reproach, who was spoken against by them that sat in the Gate,
even by the Judges, and Magistrates, and was the song of the Drunkards, or, of
the Drinkers of Strong Drimk, Heb. 13. 13. with Psalm. 69. 12.

Oh then, when the days are evil, suffer this word of exhortation which is
here given to you by the Holy Ghost: And as ye are Children of light, walk as
such: let discretion preserve you, and understanding keep you from those
crooked ways and evil paths; and that you walk in the way of good men, and
keep the paths of the righteous: And to move hereto, let us briefly consider:

1. It has been the practice of good men in evil times, instead of complying
with sinful ones, or having any fellowship with them in their unfruitful works
of darkness, to be filled with grief and sorrow, not only for their own evils;
but for the miscarriages of others also. The righteous Soul of just Lot was
vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked, 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8. Rivers of
waters run down the eyes of the sweet Psalmist of Israel, because men kept not
Gods Law: he beheld the transgressors and was grieved, because they kept not
Gods word, Plal. 119. 136, 158. The Prophet Jeremy cries out, My Bowels, my
Bowels, I am pained at my very heart. My heart makes a noise in me, I cannot
hold my peace, etc. -- For my people is foolish, they are foolish children. His
Soul did weep in secret for men's pride and profaneness, Jer. 4. 19-22. and 9.
2. and 13. 17. They did mourn and weep for the abominations that were committed
in the midst of them, Ezekiel. 9. 4. Yea, our Savior wept over Jerusalem, because
they knew not the time of their visitation, Luke 19. 41, 42. And the Apostle
feared he should have cause when he came to Corinth, to bewail many which had
sinned, and had not repented of the Uncleanness, Fornication, and
Lasciviousness which they had committed, 2 Cor. 12. 20, 21. They were so far
from oyning with evil doers then, as that they were full of heaviness, and
expressed it outwardly in weeping and sighing for the many abominations done by
them amongst whom they lived. Walk we also in the way of those good men, and be
we diligent followers of them.

2. In walking honestly according to the teachings of the Grace of God, we may
be Instruments of mercy and good to them amongst whom we live; Both in causing
them to consider their ways, and to return from their wickedness, unto him
against whom they have sinned, Jer. 23. 14, 22. 1 Pet. 3. 1. And in obtaining
sparing-mercy through the intercession of Christ for such as yet go on in their
trespasses, that judgment may not be speedily executed upon them, nor the woeful
day, the day of desolation hastened upon them, Jer. 17. 16. and 18. 20. God had
spared Sodom and Gomorrha, etc. And had not destroyed those Cities, had there
been ten righteous persons found therein, Genesis 18. 32; and though there were
not, yet he accepted Lot who interceded for Zoar, and did not overthrow it,
Genesis 19. 19-22. And because of that very small remnant of upright ones that
were lest in Judah, therefore that nation was not made as Sodom, and like to
Gomorrha, Isa. 1. 7-9. So when Christ threatens, that if the Angel and Church
of Sardis did not watch, he would come on them as a thief, and they should not
know what hour he would come upon them: He adds; But (as some read) thou have a
few names even in Sardis, etc. As if he should say, I have respect to them, and
therefore will not so suddenly hasten the execution of what I threaten upon
thee, Rev. 3. 3, 4.

3. It Is highly acceptable unto God, and approvable in his sight, that in evil
times they keep themselves unspotted from the world, and defile not their
garments, as the generality do, Rev. 3. 4. And he takes special notice of them,
and grants signal savours to them: And though they, all that will live godly in
Christ, shall suffer persecution: yet in his desolating-judgments he usually
does discriminate them from others, who have in evil times walked before him,
and been perfect. So Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord, He being a just
man and perfect in his generations: And Noah walked with God, when the earth
was corrupt before God: And the earth was filled with violence for all flesh
had corrupted his way upon the earth -- And the Lord said unto Noah, Come thou
and all thy house (it fared the better for him) into the Ark; for thee have I
seen righteous before me, Genesis 6. 7, 8-12-22. and 7. 1. 2 Pet. 2. 5. And when
he turned the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes -- He delivered just Lot
vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked: And the Lord still knows
how to deliver the godly out of temptation, Genesis 19. 2. 2 Pet. 2. 6-9. see
also, Deuteronomy. 4. 3, 4. Numb. 14. 24, 30, 38. And when he threatened to executed
desolating-Judgments upon Jerusalem, yet before the execution thereof, The Lord
said to the man clothed with linen, which had the writers Inkhorn by his
side; Go through the midst of the city -- and set a mark on the foreheads of
them that sigh, and that cry for all the abominations that were done in the
midst thereof. And to the others, which had every man a slaughter-weapon in his
hand, he said, Go ye -- through the city and smite, let not your eye spare,
neither have ye pity: slay utterly old and young, both maids, and little
children, and women: But come not near any upon whom is the mark: And begin at
my sanctuary, those that come nearest to me, Ezekiel. 9. 2-4-6-11. and 14. 14, 16,
18, 20. Rev. 7. 2, 3. And though the iniquity of any Nation, upon whom his name
is called, be so great, as that he is resolved to give it up into the hand of
strangers, and to deal with it, as he said he would do, and did with Israel;
Thus says the Lord, Behold, I am against thee, and will draw forth my sword
out of his sheath, and will cut off (not from the earth, but) from thee the
righteous and the wicked, Ezekiel. 21. 3, 4. Yet, though those who have kept
themselves unspotted from the Pollutions of the World, have their substance and
treasures spoiled by the enemy, and are not wholly hid, he may cause the enemy
to entreat them well in the time of evil, and in the time of affliction, and
give them their lives for a prey, and cause them to be pitied of them that lead
them captives, as he did to Jeremy, Baruch, Ebedmelech, Ezekiel, Daniel, etc.
Jer. 15. 11-14. and 39. 17, 18. and 40. 2-4. and 45. 5. Dan. 1. 9: yea, he by
way of promise says; He will spare them, who exercse themselves to Godliness,
when others of their brethren professedly grow profane, wicked, and
licentious, as a man spares his own son that serves him, Mal. 3. 13-16, 17.
And to such he has a peculiar respect, and will cause them to come nigher to
him than others shall do; though in their returning from their wanderings, he
forgive them, and receive them graciously: The Priests, the Levites -- that
kept the charge of my sanctuary, when the children of Israel went astray from
me, they shall come near to me, to minister unto me, etc. says the Lord, Ezekiel.
44. 10-13, 14, 15, 16. Thou have a few names even in Sardis, which have not
defiled their garments, says the Lord Jesus: And they shall walk with me in
white, for they are worthy. Rev. 3. 4: the consideration of all which might
engage us. To come out from among men in evil days, and be separate, and touch
no unclean thing: And the Lord Almighty will receive us (whoever reject us) and
will be a Father to us, and we shall be to him for sons and daughters. Having
therefore these promises and encouragements, let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, etc. 2 Cor. 6. 14-17, 18. and 7. 1. Again,

2. As evil signifies evil of Affliction and Judgment; so we may receive this
further instruction: That when the days are evil, when God's Judgments are
poured forth amongst us, and felt by us, and greater feared; then especially we
need to have, and receive this Admonition, that we be not drunk with Wine, but
that we watch against all intemperance and insobriety: When thy judgments are
in the earth, says the Prophet, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness, Isa. 26. 9. And therefore then it behooves the Believers
especially to be temperate in all things: So it was with Daniel and his three
companions when they were in captivity, and under great affliction: they would
not defile themselves with the portion of the King's meat, nor with the Wine
which he drank, Dan. 1. 5-8-16. And indeed, as it is always sinful, so it is
most unseasonable to eat and drink to excess, when God is casting us down in
his Providence, and ordering occasions of mourning, and lamentation to us:
when men are minished and brought low through oppression, affliction, and
sorrow, Psalm. 107. 39. When we see a sword, a sword is sharpened, and also
furbished: it is sharpened to make a sore slaughter; it is furbished that it
should glitter; should we then make mirth? Ezekiel. 21. 9, 10. should we unfit our
selves for a wise consideration of the Lord's doings, when he is making
desolations amongst us? surely this will be an high aggravation of our
iniquity, as is once and again signified to us: Woe unto them, says the Lord,
that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink, that
continue until night, till Wine inflame them: And the harp, and the viol, the
tabret, and pipe, and wine, are in their feasts; but they regard not the work
of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, Isa. 5. 11, 12. In that day did
the Lord God of hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to
girding with sackcloth: And behold, joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and
killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine, etc. And it was revealed in
mine ears by the Lord of hosts, surely this iniquity shall not be purged from
you till ye dye, says the Lord God of hosts, Isa. 22. 1-12-14. Woe to them that
put far away the evil day -- that lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch
themselves upon their couches, or abound with superfluity; and eat the lambs
out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall. That chaunt, or
quaver to the sound of the viol: -- That drink Wine in bowls, and anoint
themselves with the chief ointments: But they are not grieved for the
affliction of Joseph. Therefore now shall they go captive with the first that
go captive, and the banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be removed,
Amos 6. 1-3-6-8. Truly, as our Savior gives us to understand, now the
Bridegroom is taken away from us, it is a continued time of fasting; and
outward occasions of mourning are presented to his disciples, till God shall
send us him again who now is preached to us, Mat. 9. 14, 15. Luke 5. 34, 35.
And to all this time that may be long, which our Savior speaks to his
Disciples, when he is taking his leave of them, Verily, verily, I say unto you,
that ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice; and ye shall be
sorrowful, etc. Joh. 16. 20. And yet at some times more abundantly they have
o^^ard cause of mourning administered to them: And they then are instructed to
be afflicted, and mourn, and weep: To let their laughter be turned into
mourning, and their joy into heaviness, Jam. 4. 9, 10. And such have been, and
are the times in which we live: wherein God has been sharpening his sword, and
has made great slaughters amongst us in former times: And as yet, it is not
put up into it is Scabbard. As also, he has been sweeping away multitudes,
multitudes by the Pestilence, and other grievous diseases which he has been
inflicting amongst us: And has also been contending by devouring Fire, whereby
the crowning City has been almost destroyed: yea, and has been pleading with
us by Water, and unusual floods, whereby he has washed away the things that
grow out of the earth, and destroyed the hope of man, as Job 14. 19. And has
through decay of Trade, and otherwise, brought our formerly rich and flourishing
Nation very low, and into great poverty and straits: And has removed and taken
away many merciful and righteous ones from amongst us, even in the midst of
their days: so as we may say; Woe is us, for we are, as when they have gathered
the summer fruits, as the grape gleanings of the vintage, there is no cluster
to eat -- The good man is perished out of the earth, and men of kindnesS and
godliness are taken away, Mic. 7. 1, 2. Isa. 57. 1, 2. Psalm. 12. 1, etc. And
this is an heavy Judgment in it self, and the forerunner, and way-maker for
greater, and more dreadful to come; if we prepare not to meet the Lord in the
way of his Judgments. Yea, what cause of mourning is also presented to us, now
there is such an abounding of spiritual iniquity, and of diverse and strange
Doctrines, and such a multitude of poor Souls deluded, and in the highway to be
destroyed thereby? And how long and often has God been threatening to give up
our Nation to that strong delusion, which has been brought into, and preserved
in the World, by him, whose coming was after the working of Satan, with all
power, and signs, and lying wonders: because the inhabitants thereof have not
received the love of the truth to be saved thereby? 2 These. 2. 8-11. yea, how
many have departed from the faith already, giving heed to seducing spirits, and
doctrines of devils, or Doemons! 1 Timothy 4. 1. yea, and how has God cast upon
us the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and indignation, and trouble, by sending
evil angels amongst us, as Psalm. 78. 49? yea his anger is not turned away, but
his hand is stretched out still; and what he is further threatening to do unto
us, is evident and apparent: And is this a time for us then to work the will of
the gentiles, and to walk in excess of Wine, revellings, banquettings, etc?
Surely no: cause we have rather, abundant cause, to sigh with the breaking of
our loins, and with bitterness, for the judgments, and occasions of heaviness
already come, and for the tidings of what is a coming, because it comes: And
every heart shall melt, and all hands shall be feeble, and every spirit shall
faint, and all knees shall be weak as water, etc. Ezekiel. 21. 6, 7. Surely the
present days are such as might cause all the merry-hearted to sigh, and not to
drink Wine with a song; yea, to cause strong drink to be bitter to them that
drink it: For all joy is darkened, the mirth of the land is gone, Isa. 24.
7-11. And what wrath is yet laid up in store, and what the end will be, or how
soon he may so order Judgment, as when he begins, he will also make an end, and
affliction shall not rise up the second time. But while they be drunken,
drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry; he only perfectly
knows, before whose eyes all things are naked, and opened, Nehem. 1. 8-10.
But such times seem to be coming, as will cause men's hearts to fail for fear;
yea certainly they shall come, Luke 21. 25, 26. And oh! how does it then behove
those who know and believe in some measure the testimony of God concerning
Christ, to be sober, and watch unto prayer in such evil days! 1 Pet. 4. 7. And
to take heed to themselves, lest at any time their hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting, and drunkenness, etc. Luke 21. 25, 26-34-36. And now to redeem, and
not mispend the opportunity, because the days are evil. God is loudly awakening
us to his righteousness in his providence, and in the lifting up of his hand
amongst us; and shall we still follow our insobriety, and be companions of
riotous persons, and thereby make our selves so sottish and insensible, as to
be live him that lies down in the midst of the sea, or as he that lies upon
the top of a mast; who though stricken, yet is not sick; though beaten feels it
not, but says, when shall I awake? I will seek Wine and strong drink again,
Prove. 23. 31-35. Oh! though Israel thus play the Harlot, let not Judah, Gods
pleasant plant, thus offend, and that in such a day of adversity and affliction
also: let them not now make their belly their God, and debase themselves to
Hell, for the satisfying of their fleshly lusts and desires: And so for a
morsel of meat, like Esau, sell their birthright. And most especially, let not
such transgress through Wine in such evil times, who are as the Hee-goats
before the flock: yea, let all the believers now, both those who are taught,
and those who teach, look diligently, lest any man fail of the grace of God,
lest any root of bitterness springing up, trouble them, and thereby many be
defiled: lest there be amongst them a root that bears Wormwood and Gall; any
person, or persons that say in his, or their heart: We shall have peace, though
we walk after the imagination of our hearts, adding drunkenness to thirst: For
the Lord will not spare such an one; But then the anger of the Lord, and his
jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written in
the book of God shall lie upon him, Heb. 12. 14, 15. with Deuteronomy. 29. 18-20. Let
us all then, now especially, receive and obey the Dehortation and Admonition
given to the believers when the days are evil, both sinfully evil, and evil
also by reason of the manifold Afflictions and Judgments which have been, and
are already amongst us; and further also, which are threatened: And now be we
not drunk with wine: And to move us hereto, consider we another Instruction
contained in this Dehortation of the Apostles, viz.

IV. In that he says, Be not drunk with wine, so he signifies to us, that we
may through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, keep our selves pure from this
iniquity here warned of; and obey this Admonition which is here given to us: He
does not exhort us from that which we may not possibly abstain from, or which
God is not in and by his Gospel inabling and strengthening us against, and
making possible to us to flee from: But in those Exhortations and Dehortations
given unto us by our Lord Jesus, there is the power and influence of his spirit
to enable us to abstain from what he is warning us of; and to will and do what
he is exhorting and counselling us unto; as the Apostle says, when he is
giving Exhortations to the believers: It is God that works in you, both to
will and to do, of good pleasure: Do all things without murmuring and
disputing, that ye may be blameless and harmless, Phil. 2. 12-15. And when he
writes to the Thessalonians, and re-minds them of what Commandments he and his
fellow laborers gave them by the Lord Jesus, namely, to abstain from
uncleanness, intemperance, etc. he says, He therefore that despises,
despises not man but God, who also has given unto us his holy spirit: As
signifying, God in and by his spirit was present with those Commandments given
by Christ, to enable men to what was commanded them, 1 These. 4. 1, 2-7, 8. And
indeed, this encouragement our Lord assures unto, and promises his Servants,
that in their preaching the Gospel to every creature of all the Nations, and
therewith teaching men to observe whatsoever he had commanded them, he would be
with them always, even unto the end of the world, Mat. 28. 18-20. Rev. 3. 8.
And faithful is he that promised, who also will do it, Mark 16. 15-20. So that
though we are all naturally inclined to all that is evil; and have many
temptations and provocations thereto from without, especially in evil days; yet
we may in the strength afforded, be saved and preserved from the lusts of the
flesh which war against the Soul, because his Spirit is not straightened toward
us, but his words do good to them that walk uprightly, Micah 2. 1-7. Now there
are many arguments contained in the Gospel, propounded to, and set before us,
which are mighty through God, to help and enable us to flee from all
Drunkenness and Intemperance: As to say,

1. In the Gospel is shown unto us, that we have a comfortable enjoyment of our
lives, and of all our Meat and Drink, vouchsafed to us through the mediation of
Jesus Christ; we were all dead, sensually dead, condemned to dye, as the
Apostle signifies to us when he says, If one died for all, in the room and
stead of all, then were all dead: And upon the account of, and by virtue of
ones dying for all, and rising again, dead men now live in their several ages
and generations, to the end they might not live to themselves, or the lusts of
men, but to him which died for them, and rose again, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. 1 Pet.
4. 1-3. He partook with us of flesh and blood, that he might through death
destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil: And deliver them
who through fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage, Heb. 2.
14, 15. God had threatened, that in the day man did eat of the forbidden fruit,
in dying, he should dye: And by our first Fathers disobedience we fell under
the sentence of death: And though we might have had a sensible being, yet it
had heen a miserable one; we could have had no comfortable being in this world:
But now, when Christ was interposed, and God promised this Seed of the Woman;
Adam in belief of God's promise, of his purpose and grace, gives his Wife a new
name, and called her Eve, or Chavah, because she was the mother of all living,
who otherwise had been the mother of all dead, Genesis 2. 17, with chap. 3. 15-20.
In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because God sent his only
begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him, 1 John 4. 9. Joh.
6. 51. Romans 5. 12-18. And through his precious Blood and powerful Sacrifice,
God does us good -- and fills our hearts with food and gladness. We must
otherwise have been always, and altogether accursed, Cursed in basket, and
cursed in store, cursed in our meat and drink, cursed in all we had enjoyed, or
partaken of: But Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made
a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. And now because he descended into the lower parts
of the earth, and is ascended up on high, and has led captivity captive, and
received gifts for men, yea for the rebellious also -- As the consequent and
fruit hereof, God daily loadeth us with his benefits, and is a God of salvation
to us: And to God the Lord belong the issues from death, Psalm. 68. 18-20. and
85. 10-12. Every creature of God is good, for it is sanctified (and made clean)
by the word of God, and prayer, or intercession (as the word signifies), that
is by the word of God, even by Jesus Christ his being made flesh: and in that
body of his flesh bearing our sins, and dying our death, in the virtue whereof
he is raised again: His name is the word of God, Heb. 4. 12. Rev. 19. 13. and
by his intercession for us, 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5. And hence we are instructed to give
thanks always for all things unto God and the Father, in the name of Jesus
Christ our Lord, Ephesians. 5. 20. To signify to us, that all the mercies we are made
partakers of, we partake of them upon the account of the Sufferings, Sacrifice,
and Mediation of our Lord Jesus Christ: and all mixtures of mercy and
compassion in afflictions, and deliverance therefrom, is, because God has
found out a ransom, Psalm. 75. 3-8. Job 33. 19-24. And the end of all his
goodness extended and continued to us through our blessed Mediator, is, to lead
us to repentance, Romans 2. 4. 2 Cor. 5. 15. And surely, were this heartily
minded and considered, that our lives, and our comfortable enjoyment of Gods
mercies, are the price of his Blood and Sacrifice, and vouchsased to us that we
might live, not to the lusts of men, but to the will of God: it would be
powerful to preserve us from consuming upon our lusts the good things we
receive at so dear a rate. Hence the Apostle when he exhorts the Believers to
walk honestly -- not in rioting and drunkenness; he to this end instructs them
to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13. 13, 14; and counsels them to walk in
the Spirit, whose work it is to glorify Christ, and receive of his things, and
show unto us: and says he, Ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh: Amongst
which are revellings and drunkenness, Gal. 5. 16-18-21. And from the
consideration hereof, that the earth is the Lords, even the Lord Jesus Christ's,
and the fullness thereof: and that by grace we are made partakers of a
comfortable enjoyment of Gods mercies, even by the grace of our Lord Jesus, who
so greatly humbled himself for our sakes: And by the grace of God, whereby
Jesus Christ tasted death for every man: The Apostle exhorts the Believers,
that whether they eat, or drink, or whatsoever they did, they should do all to
the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 21, 26-28-31. And the not considering, or taking
notice of this, is the reason and cause of men's abuse of the good creatures of
God, and of their consuming them upon their lusts, or in the service of their
Idols. Hence the Lord says, the did not know, or take notice, that I gave her
Corn, and Wine, and Oil -- which they prepared for Baal, Hos. 2. 6-8. Did we
indeed consider at what a dear rate we have all the mercies vouchsafed to us,
it would powerfully help us, thus to say, Seeing these are the price of the
Blood of my blessed Redeemer, shall I abuse and waste that which cost so dear?
Shall I tread under my feet the precious Blood of Christ? God forbid. How shall
I do such wickedness and sin against the precious Blood, and powerful mediation
of my Lord, who loved me, and gave himself for me, and affords me these
conforts and refreshings, that I might live to him that died for me, and rose
again? 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Romans 12. 1. 1 Pet. 4. 1-3.

Yea indeed, now, the greatness, and preciousness of the sufferings of Christ,
and the wonderfulness of the grace of God, are more brightly manifested and
clearly discovered to us, than they were in former times; and thereby greater
obligation is laid upon us now, than upon others under the more dark
ministration of the Law, to flee from the service of our Lusts and Idols.
Through the tender mercy of our God, the dayspring from on high has visited
us, To give light to them that sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death,
and to guide our feet into the way of peace, Luke 1. 78, 79. Jesus Christ is
now evidently set forth before our eyes, as one who has been Crucified for us,
in which the vileness and odiousness of our sins and vanities is clearly
discovered to us, Gal. 3. 1, with Romans 3. 8. The Gospel is preached according
to the Revelation of the mystery; and the grace of God has been more clearly
revealed than before Christ's coming in the flesh; yea, than before he had
poured down, and shed forth the Holy Spirit upon his Apostles from Heaven,
after he ascended on high: Therefore now especially it behooves us, and we are
more powerfully enabled and moved to flee from all Intemperance, and the evil
fruits thereof. The night is far spent, the day is at hand, let us therefore
cast off the works of darkness, and put on the armor of light; let us walk
honestly as in the daytime; not in rioting and drunkenness, etc. Now it is
high time for us to awake out of Sleep: for now all things that are reproved,
are made manifest by the light, Romans 13. 11-14. with Ephesians. 5. 13-18 They that
sleep, sleep in the night, and they that are drunken are drunken in the night:
But let us who are of the day, be sober -- For God has not appointed us to
wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus, who died for us, that whether
we wake or sleep we should live together with him, 1 These. 5. 4-8-10. The grace
of God which brings Salvation to all men, has appeared: Teaching us, that
denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, etc. Tit. 2.
10-12. The true light now shines -- love not the world, neither the things
that are in the world, not the lust of the flesh, etc. 1 John 2. 8 15, 16. At
the times of men's ignorance God winketh at them, Act. 17. 30. But now men's sins
will be greatly aggravated, if they count it a pleasure to riot in the day
time, 2 Pet. 2. 13. Surely it will be more tolerable in the day of judgment for
Sodom and Gomorrha, than for such as now walk on in preferring darkness before
light.

2. In the Gospel of Christ the holy Spirit is discovering to us infinitely
better things prepared for us in Christ, than any of those things in the abuse
whereof we are vainly seeking comfort and contentment to our Souls: Therein is
discovered to us, that by means of the precious blood of Christ, all things are
now actually prepared, and made ready for us: The holy Spirit is lifting up
Christ as an object in whom there are all spiritual blessings in heavenly
things provided for mankind: A feast of fat things for all people, of Wines on
the Lees, etc. That we might look unto him, and be saved from our sins, and
from the vanity of our conversations, Luke 14. 17. Genesis 22. 18. Ephesians. 1. 3. Isa.
25. 6. and 45. 22. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. And that we might labor for, and seek
after, not that meat which perishes, but this which indureth unto everlasting
life, which the son of man will give unto us, Joh. 6. 27-35. And in hearkening
diligently unto, and coming to him, we may eat that which is good, and our
souls may delight themselves in fatness, Isa. 55 1-3, we may rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory, in the worst of days and times, 1 Pet. 1. 6-8.
Alas, men do propose a great deal of satisfaction and contentment to themselves
in the abuse of God's mercies: they think that is the way for them to lead
merry and comfortable lives, and to spend their days in gladness and jollity:
that this is the way to be delivered from all melancholy, and evil and
afflictive sadness: And especially in evil times, in days of affliction and
mourning, they suppose the only way then to drive away sorrow from their
hearts, is, to pour in Wine and strong Drink, till Wine inflame them: when as
in such a time, the Lord is then calling to weeping, and to mourning: And
therefore, sorrow is better then laughter, for by the sadness of the
countenance the heart is made better. The heart of the wise is in the house of
mourning: But the heart of fools is in the house of mirth, Eccles. 7. 1-5-14.
And besides, men do but deceive themselves in promising to themselves any solid
or durable joy and comfort from their excessive partaking of Wine and strong
Drink, or eating any dainty and delicious food to excess; for this is but
deceitful meat, Prove. 23. 1-3. Many times hereby men make themselves sick, and
so increase and heap up sadness to themselves, and add grief to their former
sorrow, Hos. 7. 5, they distemper, and bring diseases upon their bodies, waste
their substance, lose their good names amongst sober people, wound their
consciences; such shall not find quietness in their belly, or spirit, for there
is no peace to the wicked, says my God, Job 20. 20. Isa. 57. 21. And therefore
such persons do but deceive themselves, and are deceived by Wine, for Wine is a
mocker, strong Drink is raging: and whosoever is deceived thereby, is not wise,
Prove. 20. 1. The holy Ghost says not, who has a merry heart, and cheerful
spirit? who has solid and substantial joy and gladness? But, who has woe? who
has sorrow? who has contentions? -- who has wounds without a cause, etc?
They that tarry long at the Wine, they that go to seek mixed Wine: And though
while they are drinking, and in their Cups, they may outwardly laugh and be
merry; yet such laughter is but the laughter of fools, which is like the
crackling of thorns under a Pot, which though they make a great blaze and noise
for the present, yet they are out in a moment: And the end of such mirth is
sorrow, yea an heap of grief: For at last this Wine wherewith they so abuse and
distemper themselves, will bite like a Serpent, and sting like an Adder: this
they shall receive from God's hand, they shall lie down in sorrow, Prove. 23.
29-32. Isa. 50. 10, 11. For God gives to the Sinner, to him that wanders out
of the way of understanding, travel and grief, Eccles. 2. 26. But now in Jesus
Christ God has prepared for us, and in the Gospel the holy Spirit is
discovering to us, that which is proper to comfort and rejoice the hearts of
all that mourn: here is a Cup of consolation, which being Drunk in by us, will
comfort us in all our tribulations and sadnesses, and make the heart truly and
lastingly, yea everlastingly merry: And though all the days of the afflicted
are evil; yet he that has a merry heart has a continual feast, Prove. 15. 14,
15, such an one is filled with joy and peace, in believing: and a stranger does
not intermeddle with his joy, Romans 15. 13. Prove. 14. 10. And though in evil
days, outward occasions of sorrow are presented and administered to him; and his
belly trembles, his lips quiver, and rottenness enters into his bones: And all
seen comforts and delight are removed and taken away: Although the figtree
shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines (and so the Drunkards
weep, and Drinkers of Wine and strong Drink howl, Joel 1. 5.); yet they may and
shall rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of their salvation, Habbak. 3.
16-18. Cant. 1. 2-4. When God's judgments are so in the earth, as that the new
Wine mourns, the vine languisheth, all the merryhearted do sigh: the mirth of
tabrets cease, the noise of them that rejoice ends; the joy of the harp
cease: they shall not drink Wine with a song, strong drink shall be bitter to
them that drink it -- When thus it shall be in the midst of the land among the
people, even then the righteous, who are seeking the Lord, and seeking his face
and his strength, such as have their dwelling in Heaven, they shall lift up
their voice, they shall sing for the majesty of the Lord, etc. Isa. 24. 7-16.
Oh blessed are the poople that know the joyful sound, come what times will
come, they shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance. In thy name
shall they rejoice all the day; and in thy righteousness shall they be exalted
(to honor and safety), For thou art the glory of their strength, Psalm. 89.
15-17. In Christ, to whom the holy Spirit is directing us, we may rejoice
always, even in the time of greatest affliction and sadness also, Phil. 3. 1.
and 4. 4. His blood is drink indeed, this will cheer, revive, and refresh the
very heart and spirit of the drinker: And his love therein commended, is
better, infinitely better than Wine, and more to be desired, and rather to be
chosen than strong Drink. And who so eats his flesh, and drinks his blood,
has everlasting life, and he will raise him up at the last day, Joh. 6. 54-57.
Cant. 1. 2-4. and 2. 3-5. Oh therefore in evil days and times, when sorrow and
sadness is administered to you; and how many Temptations and Provocations from
others soever you meet withal; yet be not drunk with Wine -- But be ye filled
with the spirit, etc. Ephesians. 5. 16-18, 19, Forsake not the Lord, the fountain of
living waters, to hew to your selves cisterns, broken cisterns that can hold no
water: But if any man thirst, let him come unto Christ and drink: And whosoever
drinks of this water of life that he will give him that comes unto him,
shall never thirst; but the water that he will give him shall be in him a well
of water springing up into everlasting life, Jer. 2. 13. Joh. 7. 37, 38. and 4.
10-14. And when shame shall be the promotion of fools: when the crown of pride,
the drunkards of Ephraim shall be trodden under foot -- In that day shall the
Lord of hosts be for a crown of glory, and for a Diadem of beauty to the
residue of his people, who in the light and strength of his grace, denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, have lived soberly, etc. And come unto Christ as
the rest for their weary Spirits, and unto him as the refreshing, Isa. 28.
1-3-5-12. Oh then! that we may not spend our money and time for that which is
not bread, nor labor for that which satisfies not; let us hearken diligently
unto Christ in his Gospel, and eat that which is good, and let our Souls
delight themselves in fatness: Let us go into the house of the Lord, and eat of
Wisdom's bread, and drink of the Wine which she has mingled; let us forsake
the foolish, the drunken Drunkards, and live, and go in the way of
understanding. Instead of lavishing our money out of the bag for strong Drink,
let us buy the truth, and not sell it, Isa. 55. 1-3. Prove. 9. 1-6. and 23.
20-23. Is it because there is no comfort, peace, satsfaction, joy, and
contentment in Christ, that we walk in rioting and drunkenness? What iniquity
is there, or have we found in him, that we should turn our backs upon, and
forsake him, and make our bellies our God? Has he been, or is he a barren
Wilderness, or a dry Tree, that we scatter our ways unto strangers, and prefer
the Service of our vile and brutish affections before him, in whom dwells all
the fullness of the Godhead bodily; and in whom is all compleatness prepared
for us? surely no: Oh then! Return from all your wanderings unto him who is the
rest, in whom God has dealt bountifully, and plentifully prepared for us: And
from the admirable excellency of his loving kindness to the children of men,
Let us put our trust under the shadow of his wings, that we may be abundantly
satisfied with the fatnefs of his house, and drink, and drink abundantly of the
river of his pleasures, Psalm. 36. 7, 8, 9.

3. In the Gospel is showed unto us the great meanness of our Lord Jesus in the
days of his personal Ministration; and how contented he was with, and how he
condescended to mean things: such was the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
being rich, for our sakes became poor: He did not fare deliciously every day;
he sought not after the best and costliest meat and drink: But when he was
thirsty, he desired a little cold Water to quench his thirst, Joh. 4. 6, 7. And
had for himself, and his disciples, and the multitude, barly-loaves, and
fishes, Joh. 6. 9-13, His knees were weak through fasting, and his flesh failed
of fatness, Psalm. 109. 24. And though the men of that generation did falsely
accuse him, and laid to his charge, that he was a gluttonous person, and a
Winebibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners, yet Wisdom, this heavenly
wisdom, was justified of all her children: they knew that the Scribes and
Pharisees laid to his charge things which he knew not, nor was guilty of, Luke
7. 30-35. But on the contrary he wept, and afflicted his Soul with fasting, and
that was to his reproach: He made sackcloth also his garment, and he became a
Proverb unto them -- And he was the song of the drinkers of strong drink, Psalm.
69. 10-12. much hardness he endured, and did not please himself, but was
content in every condition, and with all Provision: And therefore did the World
hate him, because he testifies of them (both in word and works) that their
deeds were evil, Joh. 7. 7. And he instructed his Disciples to eat and drink
such things as they gave them into whose houses they came, and admonishing them
of intemperance and insobriety at all times, Luke 10. 7. and 21. 34-36, surely
then it also behooves his followers to endure hardness as good Soldiers of Jesus
Christ, and to flee from all intemperance whatsoever: And not to delight in,
and be Companions of them who made Songs of the Captain of our Salvation, Psalm.
69. 12. 2 Timothy 2. 3. Oh! shall we, who profess our selves to be his Disciples
and Servants, seek after, and surfeit in the abuse of the best and most
excellent meat and drink that we can come by? will this be by him accounted an
imitating him, and following his steps, and that example which he has left us?
or shall we not rather provoke him, if we walk on in surfeiting and
drunkenness, severely to testify displeasure against us, even to cut Us in
sunder, and appoint us our portion with the unbelievers, even with such as
never professed themselves to be his Disciples? Luke 21. 34, 36. Oh then! set
the Lord before you, and be imitaters of him as dear children, for he that
says, He knows and abides in him, ought himself also so to walk, even as he
walked, 1 John 2. 4-6: If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in
darkness, in rioting and drunkenness, we lie, and do not the truth, 1 John 1.
6. with Romans 13. 11-13. Do ye then especially, who profess your selves to be
Christ's disciples, Abstain from these fleshly lusts that war against the soul;
that ye may not make others believe, or give them occasion to think, that
Christ is the minister of sin, but all may know you are his disciples: And it
is sufficient for the Disciple to be, and fare as his Master, and the Servant
as his Lord, 1 Pet. 2. 9-11. Mat. 10. 24, 25. Ephesians. 5, 1, 2, 3-8. 1 Pet. 2.
20, 21, 22.

4. Yea, in this glorious Gospel there is set before us the things which are
not seen, which are eternal; To move us, and prevail with us to avoid and
abstain from all intemperance whatsoever.

On the one hand, there is propounded to, and set before us a blessed hope, to
be enjoyed at the appearing of our Lord Jesus, by all those who are diligent,
that they may be found of him in peace without spot, and blameless: And every
man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself (from the Pollutions of the
world) even as he is pure, 1 John 3. 3, Every man, says the Apostle, that
striveth for the mastery, is temperate in all things: now they do it to obtain
a corruptible Crown, but we an incorruptible; men here will deny themselves,
and abstain from an immoderate and unsober use of meat and drink, that they may
get a fading and corruptible Crown: and it is very uncertain whether they have
it, though they give all diligence: For many run and strive, and but one
receives the prize: But we have an incorruptible Crown set before us, the
prize of the high calling of God in Christ: And therefore it highly concerns us
to be temperate in all things, as the Apostle also was, from this
consideration: I keep under my body, says he, and bring it into subjection,
lest that by any means when I have preached to others, I my self should be a
reprobate, 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25-27. And as the living soberly is contained in the
posture in which we should wait for that hope; so also, the looking for that
blessed hope, is powerful to engage us to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts,
and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, Tit. 2.
11-13. For we are saved by hope, even from our sins and vanities, Romans 8. 24.
The promises, these exceeding great and precious promises, ministered to us in,
and with the Gospel, do powerfully oblige and engage us to cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God: And to add to our faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge
temperance, etc. 2 Cor. 7. 1, 2. 2 Pet. 1. 4-6. He has promised that he will
hereafter save them that look for him, as his grace instructs, from all their
sins, sorrows, griefs, enemies; and completely and everlastingly satisfy them
with his goodness, and they shall inherit all things. Oh then, let none of us
be so profane as for a morsel of meat, or for a little Strong Drink, to sell
our birthright, and deprive our selves of that Inheritance incorruptible, and
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in the Heavens for them who are
kept by the power of God through faith unto that Salvation, ready to be
revealed in these last days: But gird we up the loins of our mind; be we
sober, and hope perfectly for the grace that is to be brought at the Revelation
of Jesus Christ: As obedient Children, not fashioning our selves according to
our former lusts in our ignorance: But as he that has called us is holy, so
let us be boly in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 4-13, 14. Let our loins
be always girded about, and our lights burnings; and we our selves like unto
men that wait for their Lord, when he will return from the wedding, that when
he comes and knocks, we may open to him immediately. Blessed are those
servants whom the Lord when he comes shall find watching (and not eating and
drinking, and being drunken). Verily I say unto you, faith our Savior, that he
shall gird himself, and make them sit down to meat, and will come forth and
serve them, Luke 12. 35-38-45. Be we then temperate in all things, and let us
flee from all insobriety, that we may enjoy that Crown of life which the Lord
has promised to them that wait for, and love him. Considering also,

On the other hand, That Drunkards shall not inherit the kingdom of God; for
without are dogs, whereto Drunkards are compared, and which name is given to
them, because their tables are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there is
no place clean, 1 Cor. 6. 10. 2 Pet. 2. 13-22. with Isa. 56. 10, 11. and 28. 8.
with Rev. 22. 14, 15. But to this we have spoken somewhat before, and therefore
shall not further enlarge to it.

Yea, and now also it is the last time, and therefore it behooves us to walk
honestly as in the daytime, not in rioting and drunkenness: The end of all
things is at hand, be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer, says 1 Pet.
4. 7. Little Children, young men, Fathers, love not the world, neither the
things that are in the world; love not the lusts of the flesh, etc. Pamper not
the flesh now especially; glut not your selves with the good things here below;
now the world passes away, and the lusts thereof; little children, it is the
last time, or hour, 1 John 2. 12-15, 16-18. And you may perfectly know that the
day of the Lord so comes as a thief in the night: Therefore sleep not as do
others, but watch and be sober, 1 These. 5. 2-6. Remember what our Savior has
foretold, and spoken for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are
come. As it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of the
Son of man: they did eat, they drank, etc. until the day that Noah entered
into the Ark, and the Flood came and destroyed them all. Likewise also, as it
was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, etc.
But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained Fire and Brimstone from
Heaven, and destroyed them all: Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son
of man is revealed, Luke 17. 26-30. Oh! be not then drunk with wine, lest that
day, or the day of death, come upon us unawares: for as a snare shall it come
upon all them that dwell on the face of the whole earth: watch we therefore,
and pray always, that we may be accounted worthy to escape all these things
that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man: as our Savior
speaks to his Disciples. Luke 21. 34-36. And what we have spoken, shall suffice
to the first thing we propounded to consider and speak unto: Namely, the
dehortation, and admonition which the Apostle gives unto these Believers, and
at such a time. And now we come to speak unto the second thing propounded to be
further considered by us from this verse we are speaking unto; Namely,

[2] We have an Argument, or motive laid down by the Apostle, to engage the
Believers, that they should not be Drunk with Wine, viz. [Wherein is excess.]
And surely did we understand what is contained herein, it would be powerful to
engage us to receive and obey the admonition which is here given to us by the
Holy Ghost.

Now we may understand these words, either as an account of what the Apostle,
means and intends by the Wine wherewith he would not have us be Drunk, or
filled; namely, that wherein is excess: in the use, or abuse whereof men may
exceed the bounds of Sobriety: And then he does intimate to us, that there are
Wines and Dainties whereof we may drink, and drink abundantly, and wherewith we
may be filled, and yet there is no excess in so doing: But the more we drink,
the more welcome and acceptable we are to God, and profitable to men; and this
blessedness they shall partake of, who from the wonderful preciousness, and
admirable excellency of Gods loving kindness to the Children of men, do put
their trust under the shadow of his wings; such shall be inebriated, or,
plentifully silled, and satisfied with the fatness of his house, with whom is
the Fountain of Life, Psalm. 36. 7-9. But to this we shall have more apt
occasion to speak in the Exhortation following. [But be ye filled with the
Spirit.

Or also, we may look upon these words [Wherein is excess], as an argument to
engage the Believers, not to be drunk with wine; and so to flee from all, and
all manner of Insobriety: and so we desire to speak to them: And so,

1. By [Excess] is not only meant intemperance in eating and drinking; for of
that he had warned them before, in saying, Be not drunk: and to which we have
spoken. But also by [Excess] is meant Prodigality, and wastfully spending this
worlds good which God is putting into our hands, that we might honor and
glorify him, Prove. 2. 9, 10. So the Prodigal did prodigally and profusely waste
his substance with this Intemperance amongst other things, Luke 15. 12, 13. And
we may see by experience, that ordinarily in Drunkenness is such excess, an
excessive spending and consuming men's estates and riches, and impoverishing
themselves thereby, and directly bringing themselves, and also provoking God to
bring them to penury and beggary: He that loves Wine and Oil, shall not be
rich, Prove. 21. 17; from this evil concomitant and consequent of Drunkenness,
the Holy Ghost gives us this admonition: Hear thou, my Son, and be wise, and
guide thine heart in the way: Be not amongst Wine-bibbers, amongst riotous
eaters of flesh: For the Drun ard and the Glutton shall come to poverty, and
drowsiness shall cloathe him with rags, Prove. 23. 10-21. He that follows
after vain persons, shall have poverty enough, Prove. 28. 19. Men do lavish Gold
out of the Bag for the satisfying this brutish and swinish affection and lust:
yea, and by their Intemperance they unfit themselves for diligence in business,
and dispose themselves to sleepiness, drowsiness, and slothfulness, 1 These. 5.
6, 7; Prove. 23. 21: And hereby also they bring want and poverty upon
themselves. I went by the field of the slothful -- And lo it was all grown over
with thorns. -- Then I saw and considered it well, I looked upon it, and
received instruction. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of
the hands to sleep; so shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy
want as an armed man, Prove. 24. 30-34. and 6. 6-9-11. And by their Drunkenness
and Intemperance, and the want which follows thereupon, they do usually bring
upon themselves, and load themselves with many distracting and distressing
cares, how they shall be provided for, and their Families; or how they shall
pay and discharge their debts, and keep themselve out of Prison: or possibly
how they shall have enough continued to them to consume upon their lusts for
the future. Hence our Savior puts the cares of this world as the consequent of
Intemperance: Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your heart be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, Luke
21. 34. And this excess which is in Drunkenness, is a great evil, and the cause
of very many evils also, some of which have beeen intimated before.

As, Hereby men unfit themselves for the end for which they are betrusted with
this Worlds good, which is, to do good therewith to others also: For whatsoever
interest men have in the things of this world, or right to dispose them; yet
they are owners of them, not as absolute Lords, but as accountable Stewards,
Luke 16. 1-8; and must give an account to the great and supreme Lord in due
season, Romans 14. 9-12. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Now when men consume these goods upon the
service of their lusts, many times their own Families, if they have any, their
Wives and Children, etc. may be in great want: And he that provideth not for
his own, especially for those of his own household, he has denied the Faith,
and is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5. 6-8. Or, if they be provided for, there
are many poor creatures of mankind, for whom Christ died, who are in great
wants, and straits, and destitute of daily food: And what God has put into our
hands, and committed to us, is, to take our own portion out of it, and to do
good to others with the residue, who stand in need. And so they are called, and
are another man's; even given to us for refreshing the Bowels of others, Luke
16. 12. And we are instructed, not to withhold good from them to whom it is
due, or from the owners thereof, when it is in the power of our hand to do it,
Prove. 3. 27, 28. But now when men are given to Wine, or Strong Drink, and so to
prodigality, they put themselves out of capacity to administer to others to
whom it is due, by the instructions of their Lord, as otherwise they might do.
This was the iniquity of Sodom, pride and fullness of bread; and as the
consequent, and concomitant thereof, abundance of idleness; neither did she
stregthen the hand of the poor and needy, Ezekiel. 16. 49. Indeed this Drunkenness
and excessive spending, both take away the heart, and hinder men from pitying
others; and also disable them, so as it is not in the power of their hand to do
good, as otherwise it might be.

And again, when men through their intemperance are prodigal and prosuse, many
times at last it so impoverishes them, as that they fall into some other bad
course and practice for providing for themselves, or for their lusts: As, by
their poverty they are led to desraud and overreach others; and sometimes more
grossly to steal from others: Agur prayed God to feed him with bread convenient;
lest, says he, I be poor and steal, and take the name of my God in vain, Prove.
30. 9.

However, it makes men greedy of filthy lucre, that they might still have
wherewith to riot, and spend upon their lusts. As the Lord says of Isreal's
Watchmen in former times: they are all greedy dogs, which can never have
enough, which know not to be satisfied -- they all look to their own way, every
one for his gain from his quarter: Come ye, say they, I will fotch Wine, and we
will fill our selves with strong drink; and tomorrow shall be as this day, and
much more abundant, Isa. 56. 11, 12. so it is said of the King of Babylon.
Because he transgresses by wine -- he keeps not at home, who inlargeth his
desire as hell, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathers unto
him all nations, and heapeth unto him all people. Where [his transgressing by
Wine] is laid down as the cause of all his greedy and insatiable desire after
the enlarging his Dominions, as one that could never have enough, Hab. 2. 5.
yea, many are the evil fruits of this Drunkenness, and of that excess and
prodigality which is in it. As sometimes when persons have spent all, and
reflect, and look back again upon it, it fills them with an heap of grief, and
desperate sorrow, even with worldly sorrow, which works death, Ezekiel. 23. 33.
sometimes their excess leads them to bear false witness against others, or to
kill and murder them in secret, if they may but advantage themselves thereby,
and get more sewel to consume upon the fire of this brutish, and vile affection
and lust of intemperance.

And indeed, that there is such excess in Drunkenness, namely, a profuse and
prodigal spending of ones estate, and that also leads to many other evils, as
is in part shown: The consideration of it might move us to flee from
insobriery, as from the face of a Serpent. Alas, what account will men give of
their stewardship, when they appear before the Judgment Seat of Jesus Christ
our Lord? If the unprofitable Servant, who hid his Lord's talent in the earth,
and when his Lord came to reckon with him, returned back to his Lord that which
was his, must be cast into outer darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth, Because he had not improved it; how can such escape the wrath to
come, who consume their Lord's goods upon their lusts? How altogether
unaccountable will their prodigality and wastfulness appear to be, when God
shall render to every one according to his deeds! Matthew. 25. 24-30. with Chap.
24. 48-51. Then will he say to the unprofitable ones, and much rather to those
great Wasters who continue such, and are not washed from this Iniquity in the
blood of the lamb: Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels: For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat, I
was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink, etc. Which account of the eternal
Judgment is immediately subjoyned to that of the unprofitable Servant, Matthew.
25. 30-42, He shall then have judgment without mercy, who showed no mercy, but
wasted away all that substance which his Lord committed to him, and remembered
not to show mercy to the poor and needy, Jam. 2. 13. Psalm. 109. 14-16. Remember
what was the portion of the rich man, who lived like an Epicure; and which
parable is presently added after that concerning the steward who had wasted his
Lord's goods: He fared sumptuously every day, and remembered not to show mercy
to poor Lazarus: And at last, the place of torment was his portion, in which he
could not obtain a drop of Water to cool his tongue, who had swallowed and
devoured so much Wine and strong Drink in his lifetime, Luke 16. 1-19-25. Oh
consider this now, yet that forget God, that you may not pursue Drunkenness in
which is excess, lest hereafter he tear you in pieces, and there be none to
deliver.

2. In which is [Excess]: namely, a profuse wasting and mispending our precious
time which God is graciously giving and continuing unto us, to the end we might
seek after the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near
at hand. In verse 16, of this Chapter, the Apostle had exhorted these believers
to walk circumspectly -- redeeming the time, or opportunity: now as opposed to
redeeming the time, he warning of Drunkenness, says, therein is excess, a
wasteful consuming and mispending, or selling away our time upon, and for the
Service of our lusts: And this should powerfully move and engage us to receive
the Admonition here given unto us, not to be drunk with Wine: certainly had not
Christ been made flesh for us, had he not been made a partaker of flesh and
blood, and died for us, and through death destroyed him that had the power of
death, that is, the Devil: we must necessarily have been all our lifetime
subject to the bondage of the Devil, and must have done and fulfilled his lusts
and requirings, Heb. 2. 14, 17. But to the end that his snare might be broken,
and we delivered, therefore our Lord Jesus by the grace of God tastes death
for every man: And has procured a comfortable lifetime for us here: But to
what end, suppose we, has he so done? Is it that we should return to our
former bondage? no certainly; for then he needed not to have been so greatly
abased, and so to have humbled himself, that he might deliver us therefrom. But
therefore he died for us, and rose again, and continues through his mediation a
lifetime to us; that after his grace brings Salvation to us, we should no
longer live the rest of our time in the flesh, to the lusts of men, but to the
will of God, 1 Pet. 4. 2, 3. where it plainly appears, the lusts of men, our
own or others, and the will of God, are opposed the one to the other. Those
that live to the former, cannot live to the latter. Though to every thing there
is a season, and a time to every purpose under heaven, Eccles. 3. 1-11, yet it
is contrary to the will of God, that we should live any of our time in the
flesh, to the lusts of men: nor was it at all the end of Christ toward us in
dying for us; But that we being dead to sin, might live to righteousness, 1
Pet. 2 24, He has delivered us from the hand of our enemies, that we might
serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days
of our life: that our whole time might be employed in the Service of him who
has so greatly loved us, and so wonderfully testified it toward us, Luke 1.
74, 75. But now in Drunkenness is excess, a great wasting and mispending our
precious time, the comfortable enjoyment and continuance whereof we have at so
dear a rate: A great deal thereof is spent, or misspent rather, in the act of
intemperance; And a great deal in the consequent thereof; for thereby men fit
and dispose themselves to slothfulness and sleepiness, as is said; and unfit
themselves for the seeking after, and serving the Lord, in whose hand is our
breath, and all our time: Oh how prodigal are men, such men, of their time, as
if it were given them to such an evil end! or as if they knew not how otherwise
to pass it away, when as alas, our days upon the earth are as a shadow, and
there is no abiding: And we are sojourners here, and should therefore pass the
time of our sojourning in fear, 1 Pet. 1. 17, 18. How like fools do men act
herein, especially such as profess themselves to know God, and his grace in
Christ! they cannot recall that which is past, nor can assure themselves of a
days continuance for the future: they cannot boast themselves of the morrow;
for they know not what a day may bring forth, Prove. 27. 1. No man is sure of
life, Job 24. 22. And yet how prodigal are intemperate ones of their time, as
if they were delivered, or preserved to do whatsoever is right in their own
eyes, or could continue themselves in this world during their own pleasure! Oh!
it does behove us always to redeem the time and opportunity, and especially,
when the days are evil; that we may hear wisdom, and watch daily at her gates,
and wait at the posts of her doors: And the holy ghost says; To day if ye will
hear his voice, harden not your hearts, Heb. 3. 7, 8, 15. But alas, how shall
we be thus found doing, if we overcharge our hearts with surfeiting and
drunkenness! Consider, what excess and mispending of time there is in such evil
and riotous practices, and consider it before it be too late; before the day
and time pass as the chaff before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you;
lest you mourn at the last, when the things belonging to your peace are hid
from your eyes, because you knew not the time of your visitation, and say, How
have we hated instruction, and our hearts despised reproof! say not as the
people in former times did, The time is not come, the time that we should come
to Christ, and be made an habitation for God, that he may dwell in us at his
house: for is not that time come? and yet is it time for you to make Provision
for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof? Does God continue you still in the
land or the living, that you should abuse your selves, and his good creatures,
for the satisfying of your vile and brutish affections? Hag. 1. 2-4, etc. Truly
men herein are more brutish than many brute creatures, which are made to be
taken and destroyed. Even the Stork in the heaven knows her appointed times,
and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming
(and will not be hindered therefrom by any means). But alas, intemperate ones
know not the opportunity, they observe not the time for applying their hearts
to wisdom, that is allotted them: they still in their actions cry, The time is
not come for that: And therefore great will be the misery of such as go on in
not knowing, or mispending their time: For as the fishes that are taken in an
evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare; so are the sons of men
snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them, Jerem. 8. 7, 8.
Eccles. 8. 6-8. and 9. 12. Truly all our lifetime is little enough to be spent
in the service of him who has so greatly loved us, when we were dead in sins
and trespasses, as to give his Son to die for us: And how have good men
complained of the shortness of it? Job 10. 20. Psalm. 39. 4, 5. Job says, My
days are swifter than a Weavers shuttle, Job 7. 6. My days are swifter than a
Post, they flee away, Job 9. 25: And yet his days were days of wonderful
affliction and heaviness; and it might be thought he might otherwise have
judged of them: But alas, Drunkards in their excessive spending and mispending
of their times, do by their works declare, that they think their days are so
long and tiresome, that they know not how to pass them away, were it not for
such riotous filthy practices. Oh! that the time past of our life may suffice
us, that we have wastfully and unprofitably misspent so much of our time
allotted us to seek the Lord in; and that now we may avoid, and flee from all
Intemperance, in which is such excess, and profuse wasting of it: For yet while
it is called to day, it is an accepted time; now is the day of salvation, in
which we may receive his grace to purpose, that we may be saved, 2 Cor. 6. 1,
2; lest we provoke him at last to rise up, and shut to the door against us; and
then it will be too late for us to cry and call, and seek to enter in at the
strait gate, Luke 13. 24-26. Prove. 1. 24-31; Whatsoever thine hand finds to
do (in the present time) do it with thy might, for there is no work, nor
device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the Grave whither thou go: And there is
no man has power over the Spirit, to retain the Spirit; neither has he power
in the day of death, and there is no discharge in that war: neither shall
wickedness deliver those that are given to it, Eccles. 9. 10. and 8. 8. Jam. 4.
13-17.

3. In which is [Excess]: namely, uncleanness and incontinence, and all manner
of filthiness of the flesh: This is an ordinary concomitant and consequent of
Drunkenness and Intemperance: and so the word here translated [Excess] is
rendered [Riot]. Tit. 1. 6. 1 Pet. 4. 4. As that includes in it all manner of
fornication, and uncleanness, 1 Pet. 4. 3. with verse. 4. And so whereas of the
Prodigal it is said, He wasted his substance with riotous living, or, living
[Excessively], (the same word, as here) it is afterward said, He has devoured
thy living with Harlots, Luke 15. 13. with verse 30. And this understanding of
it, agrees well with the scope of the Apostle in this Chapter, in which he had
been warning the believers of uncleanness: But, says he, fornication, and all
uncleanness, etc. let it not be once named amongst you, as becomes Saints;
neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, etc. For this ye know,
that no whoremonger, nor unclean person -- has any inheritance in the Kingdom
of Christ and of God: Let no man deceive you with vain words, for because of
these things comes the wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience: Be not
ye therefore partakers with them, Ephesians. 5. 3-7. And again, Have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them: For it is a
shame even to speak of those things which are done of them in secret, verse. 11,
12. And now to the end they might flee from, and avoid all filthiness of the
flesh, he gives them this counsel, and backs it with this motive and argument,
Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess, or Riot; even all incontinent lust
whatsoever: And so the Scripture elsewhere, and frequently signifies to us,
that in Intemperance is uncleanness, that does provoke and prepare men for all
filthiness and uncleanness whatsoever: As to say,

1. It is the cause of unnatural uncleanness, of going after strange flesh, and
committing those vile affections, in the service and satisfying whereof, Women
change the natural use into that which is against nature: Likewise also the
men, leaving the natural use of the woman, burn in their lust one toward
another; men with men working that which is unseemly, and even a shame to speak
of, Romans 1. 26, 27. Ephesians. 5. 11, 12. And which Iniquity is so abominable in the
sight of God, as that by the Law those that were guilty of it, shall surely be
put to death, their blood shall be upon them, Levit. 18. 22, and 20. 13. And by
the Law of Christ, those that are guilty of it, and not washed from it, shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. I say Intemperance leads
many persons to this abomination which is against nature, both Men and Women.
This was the Iniquity of Sodom (which was so highly guilty of this unnatural
abomination, as that upon the account thereof God destroyed them with Fire and
Brimstone from Heaven: and from whence this uncleanness is called Sodomy; and
those guilty of it, Sodomites, Genesis 19. 5-7. 24. 1 King. 14. 24, etc.) I say,
this was their Iniquity, Pride [fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness]:
they surfeited upon the abundance of those things which that fruitful Country
afforded; and so apted themselves for this Iniquity, Ezekiel. 16. 49; with Genesis
13. 10. Luke 17. 28, 29. And so the Apostle says of those that turned the
Grace of our God into lasciviousness, and whom he compares to Sodom and
Gomorrha, for going after strange flesh, and so defiling the flesh; That they
fed themselves without fear, Jude 4. 7, 8-12. And Lasciviousness, Lusts, Excess
of Wine, Revellings, Banquetings, etc. are all joined together by the Apostle,
1 Pet. 4. 3, 4. And before he speaks of Isreal's great Iniquity, viz. They have
deeply corrupted themselves, as in the days of Gibeah: at which time the
inhabitants thereof were desiring, and would have defiled themselves with
strange flesh, Judge. 19. 15, 16-22, 23. I say, before the Prophet taxes them
with this evil, he first reproves them for their great Intemperance, and
Drunkenness, Hos. 2. 5-8. and 3. 1. and 4. 11. and 7. 3-5. and 9. 9.

2. And also in Drunkenness is excess and Incontinence, as to all natural
uncleanness whatsoever: When men are fed to the full, they then, too usually,
commit adultery, and assemble themselves by troops in the Harlots houses: They
are as fed horses, every one neighing after his neighbors wife, Jer. 5. 7, 8.
This the Daughters of Lot knew, and therefore they made their Father Drink
Wine, that thereby he might be provoked to that Incestuous evil, Genesis 19.
31-38. And when the Holy Ghost warns the Sons of Wisdom to beware of
Drunkenness, he sets before them this, as a motive to engage them to receive
the admonition, viz. That it will lead to uncleanness: Therefore he says, Look
not thou upon the Wine when it is red, when it gives its color in the Cup,
when it moves it self aright -- Thine eyes shall behold strange women, and
thine heart shall utter perverse things, Prove. 23. 29-31-33. So the Apostle
puts Rioting and Drunkenness, before Chambering and Wantonness, to signify,
that the former Lusts lead men and women unto, and apts them for the latter,
Romans 13. 13. And so Drunkenness and Revellings, or, excess of Wine and
Revellings, are joined together; In which Revellings they gave up themselves
to, and acted all uncleanness and filthiness; and whereto they prepared the
way, and fitted themselves by their Drinking Wine or Strong Drink excessively,
Gal. 5. 21. 1 Pet. 4. 3. And surely, so it too often comes to pass, that those
persons who are unsober in their use of the good creatures of God, do hereby so
pamper the flesh, as that such persons give up themselves to lasciviousness, to
work all uncleanness with greediness; and many times such are so swallowed up
of Strong Drink, as that they are bereaved thereby of the understanding of a
man: and how then should they be in any capacity to avoid, or abstain from any
manner of filthiness, though it be never so abominable to God, loathsome to
sober men, and destructive to themselves; and that, not unto their Souls only,
but to their outward man also? To the end therefore that we may flee
Fornication, and abstain from all filthiness of the flesh, whether unnatural,
or natural, which is so highly displeasing and provoking to God, be we
temperate in all things, feed we our selves with fear, and let us not surfeit
on these perishing meats, or drinks: Meats for the belly, and the belly for
meats, but God shall destroy both it and them: Now the body is not for
fornication, but for the Lord; and the Lord for the body, 1 Cor. 6. 13. And
when we are at any time in such places as in which there are rich and sumptuous
feasts, and great abundance of Wine, and Strong Drink, and may partake thereof
freely; Oh! then especially let us put a Knife to our Throats, if we be persons
given to appetite. Take we heed that we be not desirous of those dainties; for
they are deceitful meat: But let us keep under our Bodies and Appetites, and
bring them into subjection: and let us not (in this sense) suffer our mouths to
cause our flesh to sin; lest we thereby provoke God to be angry with us, 1 Cor.
9. 25-27. Eccles. 5. 6. And so much also to the motive and argument laid down
by the Apostle to seal home his Dehortation, Be not drunk with Wine, wherein is
excess; excessive spending our substance; excess in wasting and mispending our
precious time; and all, and all manner of incontinence and uncleanness.

3. We come in the last place to consider, and speak unto the Exhortation and
Instruction which the Apostle gives to these Believers, by way of opposition
unto what he had dehorted them from, and warned, and admonished them of; [But
be yo filled with the Spirit.]

In speaking whereto we shall endeavor to consider and show these following
things: Namely,

I. What is meant and intended by [the Spirit] here spoken of, and with which
they should be filled. II. How, or in what respects [the Spirit] answers unto,
though yet it infinitely exceeds Wine. III. What it is [to be filled] with
the Spirit. IV. Note some Instructions from this Exhortation of the Apostle.
I. What is meant and intended by [the spirit] here spoken of, and with which
they should be filled. To that we say, that by [the spirit] is not meant the
Spirit of the World, or any evil Spirit (1 Cor. 2. 12. Ephesians. 2. 2.) which
leads us to love the World, and the things of this World, of which we are
admonished, 1 John 2. 15, 16. Col. 3. 1, 2. for the Spirit here is opposed to
Wine, which may in general signify, all the things here below, in which men
are in vain seeking comfort, chearing, and rejoicing to their Hearts and
Spirits: But here by is meant, the spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12, even the holy
Spirit, the comforter, whom the Father has sent forth in Christ's name, to
give forth the full of the Testimony; and by which we have the Gospel now
preached to us according to the Revelation of the mystery: and the mystery so
opened and made known, as in former times it was not made known to the sons of
men, Joh. 14. 16, 17, 26. and 15. 26. 1 Pet. 1. 12. Ephesians. 3. 3-5. And the work
of which Spirit is, to testify of Christ, Joh. 15. 26. Of his death, as
actually sustained, and overcome; of his having been actually raised again from
the dead, according to the Scriptures; of the excellency, compleatness, and
everlasting acceptableness of his own Sacrifice once offered; so as, there
needs no more sacrifice for sin: Of his being exalted with, and to God's right
hand, a Prince and Savior: The Savior of the World, in what he has done and
is become: The Savior of all men, especially of them that believe, in what he
is now doing, etc. Joh. 15. 26. Act. 5. 30-32. Heb. 10. 10-15. 1 John 4. 13,
14. 1 Timothy 4. 10. And that he shall come again, Joh. 16. 13. This Spirit is
called, and is the spirit of Christ, Romans 8. 9. Phil. 1. 19. Both because it
rests upon him immeasurably in the nature of man, upon the account of his
having been slain for us, Mat. 12. 28. Act. 2. 33. Rev. 5. 6. And he has shed
forth, and sent him from the Father, Luke 24. 49. Joh. 15. 26. Act. 2. 33. And
it is his work and office to glorify Christ, and to take of his things, and to
show unto us, Joh. 16. 14, 15. And in glorifying him in the Testimony, as now
come forth, To reprove and convince the World of sin, of righteousness, and of
judgment; and to teach the Believers all things, and guide them into all truth,
and show them things to come: And to be the Comforter of them, and Advocate in
and for them; To be the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation to them in the knowledge
of Christ, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. To bring to their Remembrance, and mind them of his
sayings, Joh. 14. 26. To teach them how to pray, and what to pray for as they
ought, Romans 8. 26. To give them wherewith to Answer all their Adversaries and
Opposers, Mat. 19. 19, 20. Luke 12. 11, 12. To baptize them into one body, and
make them to drink into one Spirit, one enlightened mind and judgment, 1 Cor.
12. 13. Ephesians. 4. 3-5. To strengthen them, that Christ may dwell in their
hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 16. To prepare them more and more for an habitation of
God, Ephesians. 2. 22. To help them to mortify their lusts and corruptions, Romans 8.
13. Gal. 5. 16, 17. To conform them, in beholding Christ's glory in the Gospel,
into his Image and Likeness, 2 Cor. 3. 18. To fill them with the fruits of
Righteousness which are by Jesus Christ to the praise and glory of God, Gal. 5.
16-22. Ephesians. 5. 9. To direct them to have their Access through Christ unto the
Father at all times, and for all things, according to his light and direction,
Ephesians. 2. 18. To make them useful instruments of good to others among whom they
live, and unto whom they have opportunity to speak, Isa. 59. 21. 1 Cor. 12. 7.
and so to perfect whatsoever does concern them: All which he does by his
bearing witness of the blood of Christ which has been shed for mankind, and
the ends and virtues thereof; and the free and immense love and charity of God
therein commended to us, 1 John 5. 4-6. And because by this holy Spirit in
glorifying Christ, God does work all our works in us; and perfect all that does
concern us; and all is given by this Spirit, therefore [the spirit] is used as
a comprehensive word, in which all heavenly and spiritual things are contained.
It is even the whole of, and answers unto the blessing of Jehovah, as Isa. 44.
3, I will pour [my spirit] upon thy seed, and [my blessing] upon thine
offspring. And he is set down as comprehensive of all spiritual good things:
Hence whereas in one Evangelist Christ says; How much more shall your father
which is in heaven give [good things] unto them that ask him? It is thus
expressed in another: How much more shall your heavenly father give [the holy
spirit] to them that ask him? Mat. 7. 11. with Luke 11. 13. And this was the
one thing, as it were, Christ promised that he would pray for, and send unto
his Disciples, when he was taking his leave of them; even the holy spirit, Joh.
14. 16, 17, 26. and 15. 26. and 16. 7-15. Luke 24. 49. And [the spirit] is set
down, as containing the blessing of Abraham, as the Apostle intimates in
saying, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse
for us -- That the blessing of Abraham might be in Christ for the gentiles,
that we might receive the promise of the spirit through faith, Gal. 3. 13, 14.
And hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us
of his spirit: And he that has not this spirit of Christ, (whatever else he
may have, or be possessed of) he is none of his (in a peculiar consideration),
1 John 4. 13. Romans 8. 9. This is the Spirit here meant and intended by the
Apostle, of which, now in this day, the believers receive but a first fruits:
The harvest thereof is still to be waited for, as well as the Adoption, the
Redemption of the body, which is to be given and effected in due time also, by
this holy Spirit, Romans 8. 11, 23. John 6. 63.

And by [the spirit] is also meant, together with the former, The Gospel of
Christ, especially as it has been now preached to us according to the
Revelation of the mystery: And many times this bears the Name of the Spirit;
because it has been given forth by the Spirit, and with the holy Spirit came
down from Heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 12. And the Apostles in preaching it, have spoken
it, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the holy Ghost
teaches, compareing spiritual things with spiritual: they spoke as the holy
Ghost gave them utterance. Yea, in these last days the Spirit was poured forth
more abundantly than in former times; especially after Christ's ascension, and
receipt thereof in the nature of man, To make known the mystery to the Apostles,
and by them to us, as in former times it was not made known to the Sons of men,
Act. 2. 1 Cor. 2. 10-12. Ephesians. 1. 8, 9. and 3. 3-5. And with this Gospel of
Christ the holy Spirit is present unto the end of the World; so as that it is
the ministration of the spirit and life, 2 Cor. 3. 6, 8. And he that ministers
it, ministers the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 6. Gal. 3. 5. And he that receives this
testimony of Jesus, receives the Spirit, Gal. 3. 1, 2. And he that rejects
and despises it, despises and rejects the holy Spirit, 1 These. 4. 8. Hence
the words which Christ spoke unto us are said to be, and are spirit and life,
Joh. 6. 63. And the Apostles were able Ministers of the new Testament, not of
the letter, but of the spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 5, 6. And the Spirit is said to be the
word of God, even the Gospel of Christ, Ephesians. 6. 17. And the Testimony of
Jesus is the spirit of prophecy, Rev. 19. 10. And whereas our Savior signifies
unto us the necessity of a man's being born of the Spirit, that he may enter
into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3. 5, 6, 8, the Apostles explicating it unto us
shows, that the immortal and incorruptible seed is the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4. 15.
the word of truth, Jam. 1. 18, 19. the word which by the Gospel has been
preached to us, 1 Pet. 1. 23-25. Gal. 4. 21-29. And so also [the spirit] with
which they should be filled, is the Word and Testimony of Christ: And this
understanding of it agrees well with the saying of the same Apostle in another
Epistle, in which he is speaking to the same purpose as here. For whereas here
he says, Be ye filled with the spirit; speaking to your selves in Psalms, and
Hymns, etc. He thus elsewhere expresses it: Let the word of Christ dwell
richly in you in all wisdom: Teaching one another in Psalms, and Hymns, etc.
Compare Ephesians. 5. 18, 19, with Col. 3. 16. 17. And this [the spirit] wherewith
they should be filled, the Gospel of Christ, and the holy Spirit which breathes
therein, and always accompanies it; and in which he testifies of Christ,
glorifies him, and takes of his things, and shows unto us. And so we have
briefly spoken to the first thing, and come to the second, viz.

II. How, or in what respects [the Spirit] answers unto, though yet it
infinitely exceeds Wine.

It does appear in the very words, that though the Spirit be opposed unto Wine,
and signified to be exceedingly and inexpressibly better: yet there is some
answerableness between these two: But there is nothing in the Spirit answering
to any evil in the Wine. Of the former it is said, therein is excess, but not
of the latter: we cannot exceed in drinking in the Spirit; nor will our being
filled therewith, lead us to any thing that is displeasing unto God, or hurtful
unto men: But the Spirit does in many particulars answer unto Wine, as that is
good, and may lawfully and commendably be made use of by us (though still, as
we have said, it infinitely exceeds, and excels it): As to say,

1. Wine is the blood of the Vine, or Grapes, which are the fruit of the Vine;
it proceeds from the Vine, without which we could have no Wine properly so
called, Genesis 49. 11, 12. Matthew. 26. 29. So it may be said of the Spirit as sent
forth, and communicated to us; It is the blood, or fruit of the Vine, of the
true Vine, which cheareth the heart of God and man, even of Jesus Christ who is
the true Vine, Joh. 15. 1. We could have had no Spirit but by and from him, by
his having been trodden in the wine press, as it were: It is indeed the blood
of the Vine, the procurement and product of the precious Blood and sufferings
of our Gracious and blessed Redeemer. It is upon the account of Wisdom's having
killed her killing, that the Wine is mingled, that the Spirit is received into
the nature of man, that it might be imparted to us; and that we have any
Gospel, or glad tidings preached to us by the messengers, Prove. 9. 1-3. So much
our Lord Jesus signifies to his Disciples: It is expedient for you, says he,
that I go away (that he departed from them by death, that he died for our
offenses, and rose from the dead for our justification, and went to him that
sent him): For if I go not away, the Comforter, this Holy Spirit, will not come
unto you: But if I depart, I will send him unto you, Joh. 16. 7. The Father
has so loved him, that he has given all things into his hand; and
particularly, given the Holy Spirit unto him without measure, to speak and make
known Gods words: But the reason why he so loved him, was because he laid down
his life, that he might take it again, compare Joh. 3. 34, 35. with chap. 10.
17. It is because Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and was
raised again, and exalted, that he has received of the Father the Holy Spirit,
which also he shed forth upon his holy Apostles, that by them the Preaching
might be fully known, Act. 2. 31-33. It was upon the Lamb that had been slain,
that John saw the seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God sent forth
into all the earth, Rev. 5. 6. And because this Spirit is procured for us, and
dispensed to us by the Blood of this Vine, therefore it may be called, and
included in his Blood, as that which is obtained by Blood is called Blood, 2 Samuel 23. 16, 17. Act. 1. 19. So whereas in one place it is said, Come drink of
the Wine that I have mingled, to wit of his Spirit: In another it is said, My
blood is drink indeed: He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells
in me, and I in him, says our Savior: compare Prove. 9. 3-5. with Joh. 7.
37-39. and 6. 53. 54-56. Oh! this Spirit is Wine in this respect, Wine by way
of eminency; it is the product of the true Vine, who has been tormented for
our transgressions, bruised for our Iniquities: Hence the Spirit is called, as
has been said, the Spirit of Christ, because obtained by him, put upon him,
and sent forth from him, 1 Pet. 1. 11. Romans 8. 9. Philip. 1. 19. And the Spirit
of Gods Son, whom he in the fullness of time sent forth, made of a woman, made
under the Law, to redeem us that were under the Law, Gal. 4. 4, 5, 6. This is
Wine indeed, the Blood of the true Vine; to him are we beholding for it, and
have therefore cause to give thanks to God for his unspeakable gift; and to do
it in the name of our Lord Jesus; and so to thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who
has been Sacrificed for us, that this Wine might be mingled for us, and
dispensed to us, 2 Cor. 9. 15. Ephesians. 5. 18-20. 1 Timothy 1. 13-15.

2. As Wine was used to wash away spots from Garments, and make them clean and
comely; for so much appears to be meant by that Prophesy of Jacob concerning
Judah: He washed his garments in Wine, and his clothes in the blood of Grapes:
Whereto possibly respect may be had, in saying, They have washed their robes,
and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, who is the true Vine, Genesis 49.
11. Rev. 7. 14. And as Wine was used to cleanse away filth, the filth of
Wounds, as appears, Luke 10. 34: So it is certainly true concerning this
Spiritual Wine: It is proper to wash us from all our pollution and defilements,
and to cleanse and heal the Spiritual Maladies of our Souls: This is therefore
called frequently the Holy Spirit, not only to denote that he is so in himself,
but in his work also, to sanctify us, by bearing witness of, and sprinkling and
applying the Blood of the true Vine, even of Christ, unto us. Hence the Apostle
declaring what filthy and poluted creatures some of the Corinthians were, he
says, They were washed and sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6. 9-11. And the Lord does wash away the
filth of the daughters of Zion, and purge the blood of Jerusalem -- by the
Spirit of judgment, and by the Spirit of burning: so that he that is left in
Zion, and he that remains in Jerusalem shall be called holy, Isa. 4. 3, 4.
And the Baptist does declare unto us, that this is the work of Jesus Christ, to
Baptize, and wash men with the Holy Spirit, Mar 1. 8. And the sanctifying men,
separating them from their polutions, and dedicating them unto God, is
attributed to the Spirit as his proper work, 2 These. 2. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 1, 2. And
so also in and by the Gospel of Christ, which is called Spirit, as we have
seen, Christ does give us an escape from the pollutions of the world: And it is
the power of God to salvation, to every one that believes, even to save them
from their sins, Romans 1. 16. Now are ye clean, says our Savior, through the
word that I have spoken unto you, Joh. 15. 1-3. And hereby may a young man, who
is most apt and inclinable to pollution, cleanse his way, his works, walkings,
and garments. Psalm. 119. 9, And they that are undefiled, and sincere in the
way, who walk in the Law of the Lord -- they also do no iniquity, Psalm. 119.
1-3. with Gal. 5. 16, 17. Oh! this is Wine indeed, to cleanse, and rinse us
from whatsoever is polluting and defiling to us; to wash our Garments, and make
them white: and therefore those who live in the Spirit, are instructed to walk
in it also, whereby they shall be enabled to mortify the deeds of the body; and
as he who has called them is holy, so also to be holy in all manner of
conversation, Gal. 5. 25. Romans 8. 13.

3. Wine moderately taken, is proper to quench the thirst, and so to allay and
remove the torment and affliction thereby caused unto a man, which is very
great; so as it causes their tongues to fail, and cleave to the roof of their
mouths, Isa. 41. 17. Lam. 4. 4. Thirst causes the youngest and strongest to
faint, Amos 8. 13. And even to die, Exodus 17. 3. Judge. 15. 8. But now Wine is
proper to assuage and quench it. Hence it is given as one Branch of the
description of Covetous worldly men, that have no power to enjoy what God gives
them: they tread their Wine-presses, and suffer thirst: Intimating, they
refrain from, and deny themselves that which would quench their thirst, Job 24.
11. And the thirsty person is invited to buy Wine to quench his thirst, and
satisfy him, Isa. 55. 1, 2. So we may say of the Spirit, it is Wine in a most
eminent consideration in this respect, viz. to quench the thirst of the Soul
and Spirit, which no other Drink or Wine will do: all other things are such as
will not satisfy: but herewith our Souls may delight themselves, and be
abundantly satisfied, even every, or any, poor thirsty Soul, Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3.
Hence our Savior in the last day, the great day of the Feast of Tabernacles,
stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst (which he might do notwithstanding
that Feast) let him come unto me, and drink -- But this spoke he of the Spirit,
which they that believe on him should receive, etc. Joh. 7. 37-39. And indeed,
such is the excellency of this Heavenly and Spiritual Wine, that it does not
simply quench the thirst of the Soul; but so abundantly satisfy it, as that in
continually drinking in hereof; a man shall be preserved from thirsting after
any other Wine: and he that comes unto Christ continually, unto whom God has
not given the Spirit by measure, shall never thirst, Joh. 6. 35. This will take
off his desire and appetite from all stolen-waters, of Wine of violence; from
lusting after such things as our natural Spirit is thirsting for: As our
Savior says in another Metaphor, Whosoever drinks of any other water shall
thirst again: But whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him (of
this Aquavitoe, this blessed Spirit, Isa. 44. 3.) shall never thirst (to wit,
after any other kind or number of Drink): But the water that I shall give him
shall be in him a well of living water, springing up to everlasting life, Joh.
4. 10-13, 14. Such shall be inebriated, and fully satisfied with the fatness of
his house, and he will make them drink of the River of his pleasures: for with
him is the Fountain of life, Psalm. 36. 7-9. Oh! Such a Feast has God prepared
for us in Christ, such Wines on the Lees, well refined, whereto this Holy
Spirit is directing us, and which it is bringing nigh unto us in the Gospel,
that were we feeding on, and drinking in hereof, our Souls would be so
contented and satisfied, as that all excess in natural Wine, or Strong Drink,
would be bitter to us, and we should loath, and not lust after perishing,
deceitful things, which cannot profit, nor satisfy us, because they are vain.
In Christ (whom this Holy Spirit glorifies, and of whose things he receives,
and shows unto us) it has pleased the Father that all fullness should dwell:
and therefore there is an emptiness in all other things: And in drinking in of
this Spirit, we should be helped to see, and say, and set our Seals to the
truth of that saying of the Wisdom of God by the wisest of mere men, Vanity of
vanities, vanity of vanities, all is vanity and vexation of Spirit, Eccles. 1.
2. and 2. 1 -- II, Colos. 1. 19.

4. Because as Wine does make one forget ones poverty, and remember their
misery no more, Prove. 31. 7, and does comfort, cheer, and make merry the heart
of man, Judge. 9. 13. Plal. 104. 15. Eccles. 10. 19. So eminently, the Spirit is
Wine indeed, and answers to, though it inconceivably excels all other Wine: It
is proper to heal the brokenhearted, and bind up all their griefs, and to
comfort all that mourn; and does comfort them that drink it in with everlasting
Consolations: It gives unto them beauty for ashes, the Oil of joy for mourning,
the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, Isa. 61. 1-3. Luke 4. 18.
Hence the Holy Spirit is called the Comforter; because it is his work and
office to comfort in all tribulations, and trials, and to make the heart merry,
though heaviness be occasioned to the outward man by the temptations and trials
man here meet with, Joh. 14. 16. 26. and 16. 7. And he is the Comforter, in
bearing witness of Christ, of his sufferings, and the glory which therethrough
he has received, Joh. 15. 26. And indeed this Comforter does glad at the heart
those that drink in of his Cup of Consolation, in showing unto them the great
abasement of Christ, who by the grace of God tasted death for every man, and is
raised again for their justification; and has offered up himself a spotless
Sacrifice unto God through this Eternal Spirit; and so has made peace for us
by the Blood of his Cross; purged away the guilt of our first sin and
sinsuluess, so as that it is no longer retained in Heaven against us; abolished
our first death, and destroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the
Devil: taken out of the way all contrary to us, etc. And the Law of the Spirit
of life in Christ Jesus, does make them free from the Law of Sin and Death,
that walk after it, Romans 8. 1-3. As well as also it shows unto us, that our
loss is recovered, and all fullness treasured up in Christ, that we might be
brought back to God: That by his own Sacrifice once offered, he has obtained
plenteous Redemption, even the forgiveness of sins for ever, whereof the Holy
Ghost is a witness to us; and that God has given to us eternal life, and this
life is in his Son, Heb. 10. 10-15-18. 1 John 5. 6-11. That in him all things
are ready and prepared for us, even all things pertaining to life and
Godliness: That in him there is a feast of fat things prepared for all people,
of wines on the lees; of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well
refined: In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily: and in him is
all compleatness for us: And the Spirit and the Bride say come, Isa. 25. 6.
Col. 2. 9, 10. Rev. 22. 16, 17. Oh! what joy has this found of the Spirit
caused to those amongst whom it has been sounded? Act. 8. 5-8: and how has
their hearts been comforted, and helped to rejoice with joy unspeakable and
full of glory, who have received, and been made to drink into this one Spirit?
And Blessed are the people that know this joyful sound -- In thy name they
shall rejoice all the day-long, Psalm. 89. 15, 16. Indeed the natural Wine
exceedingly falls short of this herein: though that be proper to comfort and
cheer the natural Spirit of a man; yet the Soul in a Spiritual consideration
may be overwhelmed with sorrow and sadness, mean time: But this Spirit will
fill the heart with solid and durable joy; and the heart of such as drink it
in, shall rejoice, and their joy no man takes from them, Joh. 16. 22. with
chap. 14. 16-18. And though the believing Thessalonians received Christ's Gospel
in much affliction, yet also they received it with joy of the Holy Spirit, 1
These. 1. 6. And though now the days were evil in which the Apostle writes to
these Ephesians, sinful days, and days of affliction, both which cause
sorrow: yet now he gives this exhortation and instruction to them, Be ye filled
with the Spirit; and signifies in what follows, that this would apt, and
dispose them to Sing, and make melody in their hearts to the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 18,
19. Oh! this is Wine indeed, that will make the heart truly, solidly, and
everlastingly merry, and cheerful, and comfort it with everlasting
consolations, and good hope through Grace: well therefore may it be likened to
Wine.

5. Wine is that which is proper to deliver the natural Spirit of a man from
his fears and timerousness; and to make one bold, courageous against ones
enemies, and notwithstanding any cause, or occasion of fear. Hence we have such
expressions used: Like a mighty man that shouts by reason of Wine: And he smote
his enemies in the hinder parts, he put them to a perpetual reproach, Psalm. 78.
65, 66. They shall devour and subdue with sling-stones, and they shall drink,
and make a noise as through wine, Zech. 9. 15. And they of Ephraim shall be
like a mighty man, and their hearts shall rejoice as through Wine, chap. 10.
5-7. And so it is an usual thing now in our days, that men may be delivered
from fears, to drink Wine or Strong Drink: And indeed the Spirit is Wine in an
eminent consideration in this respect, namely, it is that which does strengthen
against, and deliver from fears, those that drink it in: For God has not given
us the Spirit of fear, or cowardice; but of power, of love, and of a sound
mind: Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of the Lord -- But be thou
partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel, according to the power of God, 2 Timothy 1. 7, 8. Romans 8. 15. And whose hearkeneth unto Christ, the Wisdom of God,
receives and entertains his Gospel, and turns at his reproofs; To such an one
he will pour out his Spirit, and make known his words: And he shall dwell
safely, and shall be quiet from the fear of evil, Prove. 1. 20, 21-23, 33.
Hence, as the Lord says to his people in former times, My Spirit remains
among you, fear ye not, Hag. 2. 5. So when he sent his Apostles to preach the
Gospel in all the world, he first tells them, they should be endued with power,
after the Holy Spirit was come upon them, and then should be his witnesses,
being thus strenghened and imboldened, as well as fitted and furnished, Act. 1.
8. Truly we may say, This Holy Spirit in glorifying Christ, and showing unto
us, that he is indeed the Savior of the world; In bearing witness of that
plenteousness of redemption, and everlasting righteousness that is in him; and
the love of God manifested in Christ, and that he is Love and Charity it self;
hereby casts out all fear, all fear that has torment, out of the hearty
Believer hereof, as with respect to God: and saves them from his wrath, and
from the fears thereof: And such receive not the Spirit of bondage to fear, but
the Spirit of Adoption: the Spirit of child-like boldness and confidence, to
approach through Christ by this Spirit unto the Father, and so unto the Throne
of Grace, and to cry Abba Father, 1 John 4. 14-18, 19. Romans 8. 15. Gal. 4. 4-6,
Ephesians. 2. 18. Psalm. 49. 5. And by this Holy Spirit we may be delivered from the
fears of death, and though we walk in the midst of the valley of it, yet to
fear none evil; because in the Light, and by the Testimony of the Spirit we may
see, that Christ has abolished it, and destroyed him that had the power of it,
that is, the Devil: And will in due time destroy it utterly, even this first
death, Heb. 2. 14, 15. Psalm. 23. 4. 2 Timothy 1. 7-10. And in drinking in, and
walking after this Spirit, we shall have boldness in every day of judgment, and
both be delivered from the fear of our enemies, and be made courageous against
them, and wax valiant in fight: Hence the Apostle faith concerning himself, and
such as in whom this Spirit dwells, and abides; Who shall separate us from
the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine,
or nakedness, or peril or Sword? -- Nay, in all these things we are more than
conquerors through him that loved us, 1 John 4. 14-17, 18, 19. Romans 8. 1-37.
Herethrough they were strengthened with strength in their Souls; strengthened
with might by his Spirit in the inner man; and the word of God abiding in them,
they were strong, and helped to do valiantly; even to overcome the wicked one:
and not to fear what Men or Devils could do unto them, Ephesians. 3. 16. 1 John 2.
14. and 5. 4, 5. Those that drink in of this good Spirit, are of God, and shall
overcome all their opposers, because greater is he that is in them, than he
that is in the world: And they shall be valiant and victorious, Not by might,
nor by power, but by the Spirit of the Lord of Hosts, Zech. 4. 6. And as in
former times it was said, The Spirit of the Lord came upon such and such a man,
And he went out and prevailed against his enemies, Judge. 3. 10. and 6. 34. and
II. 29-33. and 14 19: Even so still, by this Spirit of the Lord, we may be
delivered from all our fears of amazement, and be made bold and courageous like
Lions, to resist and put to slight all our Spiritual enemies: Hence when the
Apostle tells the believers, That they wrestle not against flesh and blood; but
against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of
this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places, or things: he directs
them to take unto themselves, the whole armor of God; and particularly, the
sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, whereby we may overcome the
wicked one, and all his instruments and temptations, Ephesians. 6. 10-12-17. Rev. 12.
11. And so this spiritual wine is proper and powerful to deliver us from the
fear of man which brings a snare, and causes men to comply, and have fellowship
with them in their Drunkenness and intemperance, and in other unfruitful works
of darkness, lest they should incur their displeasure, or lose their favor and
friendship: And to strengthen us to resist unto blood, striving against sin.
And in walking in this Spirit, we shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh,
either for fear of the loss of men's favor, or for fear of their evil will, or
punishment, but shall be strengthened to resist and overcome the world
there-through.

6. Wine is good to be used for those who are infirm, and for their stomach
sake, to strengthen them, and help them to digest: And it begets and preserves
in them an appetite to their food, that they may thereby be fitted for any work
or business: As the Apostle signifies, when he says to Timothy, Drink no
longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomachs sake, and thine often
infirmities, 1 Timothy 5. 23. So it is as with respect to this heavenly and
spiritual Wine; in drinking in thereof, and being filled therewith, this will
still beget in us an earnest desire and appetite unto wisdom's provision. It
will indeed, as before we have said, take off our hearts and desires from
thristing after the Devils cup, For we cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and
the cup of Devils, 1 Cor. 10. 21. But yet, if we have tasted the graciousness
of the Lord by this Spirit, it will cause us still to come unto him and drink,
And to desire, as newborn babes, the sincere milk of the word, that we may
grow thereby; that we may grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 2-4. And 2 Pet. 3. 18, And even as the heart
pants after the water brooks, so with our Souls to pant after, and thirst for
God, the living God, even Jesus Christ, and God in him, which is the true God,
and eternal life, Psalm. 42. 1-3. and 63. 1-8. To hunger and thirst after
righteousness, after Jesus Christ, who is Jehovah our Righteousness, that we
may win him, and be found in him, not having our own righteousness which is of
the law, but the righteousness which is through the faith of Christ, even the
righteousness which is of God by faith. And that we might be changed into his
Image, and be framed to a likeness of mind, and demeanor after the example of
our Lord Jesus, Matthew. 5. 6. Phil. 3. 7, 8-10. Thus it was with Christ's Spouse,
while she sat down under the shadow of that blessed Apple Tree, and his fruit
was sweet to her taste; and he brought her into the banquettinghouse, into the
house of Wine, caused her to drink in of his Spirit: or ever she was aware, she
was so filled with spiritual desire after, and earnest appetite unto this
heavenly food, that she cries out; Stay me with flaggons: vessels of small
quantity, or small draughts, would not now suffice, or content her: But in
drinking in of this Spirit before, she had such a good stomach, that she now
cries out and calls for flaggons; for a more abundant participation of this
Spirit: And, comfort me with apples, for, says she, I am sick of love: She was
even restless and unsatisfied in her desires, that she might more eat of this
living bread, even the flesh of Christ that was given for the life of the
World, and drink in of his blood, as knowlng this was most sweet, and
desirable, and would nourish her Soul, and preserve it in life, even to the
enjoyment of everlasting life, Cant. 2. 3-5. and 5. 8-16. and 6. 1. They that
know, and have tasted of this gift of God, will still, and more abundantiy ask
and desire after it, that their Souls may delight themselves in that excellent
feast which is prepared for men in Christ, and be satisfied therewith as with
marrow and fatness; Joh. 4. 10. Psalm. 63. 1-5-8. And this Spirit being drunk in
by them, will cause their Souls to digest the food, the Spiritual food, which
they eat, so as their Souls may prosper, and be like unto watered Gardens, and
like Springs of water, whose waters fail not; that they may flourish in the
Courts of our God, and bring forth fruit in old age, and be fat and green: To
show that the Lord is upright -- And there is no unrighteousness in him, Psalm.
92. 12-14. That they may spring up as among the grass, as willows by the water
courses: And may be trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord; Filled
with the fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus Christ to the glory and
praise of God, that he in all things may be glorified by them through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Isa. 44. 3, 4. and chap 61. 1-3. Phil. I. II.

7. Wine being drunk in, especially in any large measure, will inflame the
natural heart with love, and lustings toward the proper object thereof: And
therefore David, that he might cover his great evil and iniquity, made Uriah to
eat and drink, yea he made him drunk; As knowing this was the way to cause him
to go down to his Wife, and lie with her: and though David's policy herein
failed him, yet, therein is signified, that this was a proper means to bring to
pass his evil and naughty intendment, 2 Samuel 11. 11-13. So we may say, this
Spirit is, by way of eminency, Wine; that wherewith being filled, we shall be
enflamed with heavenly and Divine Love: Hence this Spirit is called the Spirit
of Love, 2 Timothy 1. 7: and the Love effected in the Believers, is called their
love in the Spirit, Colos. 1. 8: and to move the Believers to walk in the
Spirit, the Apostle tells them, The fruit of the Spirit is love: This is that
which the Holy Spirit does produce in them in whom it is, and abides, Gal. 5.
16-22. And so this Spirit does inflame the heart with love to Jesus Christ, and
God in him: It does discover, make known, and shed abroad the love of God in
the heart of the Believer, even that love, that while we were yet without
strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly: the Spirit causes to appear,
the kindness, and love of God to man ward, in sending his Son the Savior of
the world; and of Christ, in laying down his life for us, and tasting death by
the grace of God for every man: That this love being seen, known, and believed
by us, we might love him who has so testified love to us, with all our hearts:
and hereby is their love made perfect, who know, and believe it, and that God
is love; so as they love him, because he first loved them, Romans 5. 5-8. Tit. 3.
4, 5. 1 John 4. 13-16, 17-19. Hereby he makes them sick of love, and helps them
to cleave to him in love with full purpose of heart, Cant. 2. 3, 4, 5. And in
discovering of the excellency and comeliness of Christ; of the plenteousness of
Redemption in him by his blood, even the forgiveness of our sins: of the
everlasting righteousness brought in by, and treasured up in him: of the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge hid in him: of that eternal life given us in
him, and all things pertaining to life and godliness: of the favor of his good
ointments wherewith he is anointed as the great Apostle and High Priest; yea of
his complete, perfect, and universal loveliness; hereby the Spirit renders him
as an object worthy to be delighted in by the Soul; And therefore do the
virgins love him: He is the He, whom their Souls love, Cant. 1. 3, 4. and 5.
8-16. And this Love is such as is clean, and leads to the abhorring all that is
evil, even whatsoever is forbidden by the Lord, and discovered by the light,
the Spirit in the Testimony, to be displeasing and offensive to the beloved.
Hence, whereas God in giving forth his Law at first, says, Thou shall have no
other gods before me. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. Remember the
Sabbath Day to keep it holy, etc. all is summed up in this short saying
elsewhere; Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and soul, and
mind, and strength, Exodus 20. 3-11. with Deuteronomy. 6. 4, 5. Matthew. 22. 36, 37. To
signify, that the love of the Spirit is such as is exercised in abstaining
from, and denying all ungodliness, and in cleaving unto, and following
whatsoever is well-pleasing in the sight of the Lord; and this Spirit is also
purifying the heart from all unclean and filthy love, in obeying the truth,
unto the unfeigned love of the Brethren, that they might love one another with
a pure heart, fervently, 1 Pet. 1. 22. 1 John 3. 16-18. And this Love thus
begotten, even by the Spirit, in commending Gods love in Christ, works no ill
to ones neighbor: and so preserves from Murder, Uncleanness, Thest, bearing
False-witness, Covetousness, Rioting, and Drunkenness; or any other thing that
is contrary to sound Doctrine, Romans 13. 8-13. And also, this Spirit, in
discovering the greatness and extensiveness of the Love of Christ, to wit, that
this One died for all, constrains the Believers thereof, to love all men, even
their enemies also, Mat. 5. 44, 45. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15.

8. Wine is proper to make men free to speak; it causes them to be talkative,
to open their mouths freely in discoursing, or speaking about any matter or
business: So Elihu says, Behold my belly is as Wine which has no vent; it is
ready to burst like new bottles: I will speak that I may be refreshed: I will
open my lips and answer: And that which made him so free to speak, was this
Spiritual Wine we are speaking of. He was full of matter, and the Spirit within
him did constrain him, Job 32. 17-20. And thus it was with the Apostles, and
the residue of the Believers, when the Holy Spirit was poured down from on high
upon them; They were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak, etc.
They did freely declare the wonderful works of God: And though some foolish
ones, mocking, said, These men are full of new wine, because they were so free
in speaking: yet as Peter says; These were not drunken with Wine, as they
supposed: But this was that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel: It shall come
to pass in the last days, says God, I will pour out of my Spirit, etc. Act.
2. 1-4-11-13-17, 18. This Spirit will apt and enable us to speak, not as men
filled with Wine do, to wit, vain and unprofitable things: But it will help us
to speak unto God, and to pray unto him in Christ's name for what we want: And
to give thanks unto him always for all things, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 5. 18-20. The Spirit, in opening the things of Christ unto us,
helps our Infirmities; for we know not what we should pray for as we ought;
But the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings that cannot be
uttered: And he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the
Spirit, because he makes intercession -- according to God, Romans 8. 26, 27. And
this Spirit will apt, and incline us to be speaking unto our selves in Psalms,
and Hymns, and Spiritual songs, Ephesians. 5. 18, 19. To be teaching and admonishing
one another, Col. 3. 16. And to speak unto others, even all men, or any man, we
have opportunity to converse with, that will hear: To speak unto them, and make
mention of the sufferings of Christ, and what he has thereby done, and
obtained into himself, for every poor sinful creature of mankind; And the love
of God manifested in Christ to man-ward: And in all, to make mention of Gods
righteousness, even of his only, 1 John 4. 13, 14, 15. Act. 5. 29-32. The mouth
of the righteous speaks wisdom, and his tongue talks of judgment: The Law
of his God, even the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, is in his
heart, Psalm. 37. 30, 31. with Romans 8. 2. This Holy Spirit does open Wisdoms
words to those that turn at her reproofs, so as they may speak with
understanding to others: and is like Wine within them that receive and drink it
in, to constrain them to speak what they have seen and heard, Prove. 1. 23. Act.
4. 19, 20. And they who are filled with it, are full of power by the Spirit of
the Lord -- and of might, to declare unto others their transgressions and sins,
as they have instruction, opportunity, and capacity, Micah 3. 7, 8.

In such like respects, this Holy Spirit does answer unto, and yet infinitely
exceed all Wine whatsoever; and is therefore compared thereunto: But we shall
add no more to this second thing, but now we come to speak unto the third;
Namely,

III. What it is to [be filled] with the Spirit.

And surely that is more, and a further business than to receive this blessed
Spirit, which these had done: and all Believers do, in receiving the hearing,
or report of faith, Gal. 3. 2. For if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he
is none of his; viz. in a peculiar consideration, Romans 8. 9, which surely these
Believers were, as does plentifully appear in the former part of the Epistle:
Yea, and after they Believed, they were Sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise,
which is the earnest of the Apostles inheritance. They had this holy Spirit in
a first fruits, and as a a first fruits of the harvest; and as a pledge and
assurance, that in abiding in Christ, they should in due time gloriously enjoy
that inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and which fades not away,
reserved in the heavens for them who are kept by the power of God through faith
unto the salvation ready to be revealed in these last days, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.
with 1 Pet. 1. 3-5. By this Spirit they were Sealed and marked out unto the day
of redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. with Exodus 12. 23. They were built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone -- In whom they were builded together for an habitation of God
through the Spirit: and so they were brought and Baptized into the unity of the
Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 17-22. and 4. 2, 3, 4. And yet still as a further business, or
as to a further degree, he exhorts them, Be ye filled: for a man may be, and so
might they be somewhat filled, or in some measure filled therewith, as Romans 15.
24: and yet the Apostle might exhort them to be filled therewith in a greater
measure, or to an higher degree: to be exceedingly filled, (as Psalm. 123. 3, 4.)

But before we speak more particularly hereto, we may say, this Phrase of being
filled with the Spirit, or Holy Ghost, is used in a double sense in the
Scripture: That is to say,

1. Sometimes it means, a being filled therewith after an extraordinary manner,
so as to be enabled thereby, or furnished therewith unto extraordinary things:
as in former times he so filled Bezaleel and Aholiab, etc. for making the
Priests garments, the Tabernacle, etc. Exodus 28. 3, 4. and 31. 3. and 35.
31-35. So others were filled with the Holy Spirit to enable them to Prophesy,
and foretell things to come, Luke 1. 41, 67. And after the Ascension of Christ,
some were filled with the Holy Ghost, and spoke with other tongues, as the
Spirit gave them utterance: And wrought many signs and wonders amongst the
people, etc. Act. 2. 4. and 4. 30, 31. and 6. 5, 8. But now in this sense the
Apostle here intends it not: For he does suppose that all these Believers might
be filled in some sense, with the Spirit; and that shows he intends it not
after an extraordinary manner: as well as also so much is signified by the
manner of expression, in that he gives us to understand, somewhat was required
of them hereto, and therefore exhorts them, Be ye filled.

2. But we are here to understand it as all hearty and unfeigned Believers may
be filled with it, as Sons of God by faith in Jesus Christ, Gal. 4. 6. And so
indeed the being filled herewith is somewhat, which, though opposed to, yet,
does answer unto being [Drunken] in the former part of the verse; as being full
of, or filled with Wine, and Drunken, are used indifferently the one for the
other, as before we have said, and as may be seen, Act. 2. 13-15. Now as Wine
may be in a man, and yet a man may not be Drunken; so the Spirit may be in a
Believer, and yet he not filled therewith, as here exhorted to: But as a man is
said to be Drunken, or filled with Wine, when he is in Wine, or Strong Drink;
so a man may be said to be filled with the Spirit, when he is in the Spirit: (I
mean not extraordinarily, Rev. 1. 10. and 4. 1, 2. but as all Believers may
be): As the Apostle says, Ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be
that the spirit of God dwell in you, Romans 8. 9, 10. And indeed, then a man may
be said to be filled with it, when the word of Christ, and Spirit therein,
dwell richly, plenteously, and abundantly in him in the full of the Testimony
of Jesus Christ: as is expressed in another place, which is like unto this,
Col. 3. 16. And so we may say a little particularly;

As a man when he is Drunken, is said to be overcome with Wine, Isa. 28. 1.
Jer. 23. 9, 10. So a man is then said to be filled with the Spirit, when he is
overcome therewith, and led, and ordered thereby in all things; as the Apostle
says, As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God; not
only so as to their state, but as to their exercise and demeanor also: and
not only is the Spirit in such an one, but also he is in the Spirit, Romans 8.
14. with verse. 9. as it is said of Christ, He being full of the Holy Spirit --
was led by the Spirit, etc. Luke 4. 1. Now the work of this Holy Spirit is to
lead us out of our selves, out of our own wisdom, wills, designs, affections,
and enterprises, into Jesus Christ for all: Unto him for all wisdom, that we
may be made wise unto salvation: For in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge, 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24. and 22. Col. 2. 3. Unto him for all
righteousness; for all forgiveness of our sins, and acceptance in this beloved
one; putting him on by faith a a robe of righteousness, to appear before God
in, in whom is everlasting righteousness, Isa. 45. 24: and who is Jehovah our
righteousness, Jer. 23. 6: unto him as our holiness, that we may be washed, and
sanctified in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the spirit of our God,
1 Cor. 6. 11. Joh. 13. 8: Unto him as our redemption, to free us, and set us at
liberty in our minds from all bondage and thraldom whatsoever, whether to sin,
death, Satan, an evil conscience, Law, world, or whatever we are naturally
inslaved withal, Joh. 8. 31, 32, 36. Romans 8. 1, 2, 3. Gal. 5. 1, 13. 1 Cor. 1.
29-31. The work of this Holy Spirit is to lift up, and glorify Jesus Christ,
that we may run unto him continually, as to that good and only foundation of
faith and hope, Isa. 28. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 4-7. As to the fountain of light and
teaching, who is the light of the world, the Son of righteousness, Joh. 8. 12.
Matthew. 4. 2. To him as the matter of our feeding, who is the living bread: and
the bread that he gives, is his flesh, which he has given for the life of the
world, Joh. 6. 35. 51-58. So as to have our life in him, and he to be our life,
the life, of our Souls and Spirits; to be our self as it were, Gal. 2. 20.
Colos. 3. 3, 4. And they are in some measure filled with this Spirit, who are
not led by themselves as men, but led and guided by this heavenly Wine, so as
they suffer the loss of all things, and go on to count them as dung, that they
may gain Christ, and be found in him, that Christ may be all unto them, as the
life of their Spirits, Philip. 3. 7-9 When they are overcome of this Spirit,
and subdued and conquered by it, to be under its regiment and government; and
being brought out of themselves, are translated and removed into Jesus Christ,
who is the beginning of the creation of God; And so live in the Spirit, Gal. 5.
25, and are new Creatures, 2 Cor. 5 14 17. Ephesians. 2. 10. and helped to reckon
themselves in and after Jesus Christ, Romans 6. 3-11. Col. 2. 12.

And then men may be said to be Filled with the Spirit, when they grow up into
the knowledge of Christ in all things, so as that He in the full of the
Testimony is formed in them, Gal. 4. 19. And they are filled with the knowledge
of Gods will in all wisdom and Spiritual understanding, Col. 1. 10. And have
through the knowledge of Christ in the Gospel, a right judgment concerning all
things effected in them. He that is Spiritual judges, discerns, all things;
yet he himself is judged, discerned, of no man, 1 Cor. 2. 13-15, 16. and chap.
3. 1, 2. For this the Apostle prays for these Ephesian Believers, that the God
of our Lord Jesus, the Father of Glory, would give unto them the spirit of
wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of Christ; the eyes of their
understandings being enlightened, that they might know what is the hope of his
calling, etc. This he prayed for them who were sealed with the Holy Spirit of
promise, after they believed, Ephesians. 1. 13-17, 18-23. and 4. 30. And when as the
consequent of the former, the Believers are established in the faith, and
rooted and grounded in Jesus Christ, standing fastly and firmly in him: For
this the Apostle also prays for these Believers, That God would grant them
according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his
spirit in the inner man; that Christ migh dwell in their hearts by faith, That
they being rooted and grounded in love, might be able to comprehend with all
Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height: and to know the
love of Christ which passes knowledge: That (so) they might be filled whth all
the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3. 16, 17-19. And unto this the Apostle exhorts the
believing- Colossions, that they would walk in Christ, rooted and built up in
him, and established in the faith, as they had been taught, etc. Colos. 2. 6, 7.

And when also with the former, they are filled with joy, and spiritual mirth;
and have a merry heart effected in them, rejoicing in Christ Jesus; rejoicing
with joy unspeakable, and full of glory; and having no confidence in the flesh:
rejoicing in Christ, in his Cross, and what he has thereby done for us, and
obtained into himself, and is become, and is: and in what he is now doing, both
from Heaven in the name of the Father, and in the anointing of the Holy Spirit
to us: and in Heaven with the father for us: and what he will do hereafter. As
a man when he is in Wine, his heart is made merry and cheerful therewith; he
remembers not his former or present poverty, affliction, and misery, but he
sings and rejoices: So also it is here in a spiritual consideration: This
Heavenly Wine being largely drunk in by us, will cause our hearts to rejoice as
through Wine, even to rejoice in the Lord, Zech. 10. 7. So here the Apostle
exhorts these Believers: Be ye filled with the spirit -- singing and making
melody in your hearts, etc. Ephesians. 5. 18, 19, Giving thanks always for all
things (not only at some times, and for such things as our natural spirit is
desiring, and pleased withal, but for those things which seem to be grievous
unto us also) unto God, and the Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
verse. 20. In being filled with this Spirit, they are filled with joy and peace,
with joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. and 15. 13. And whatever occasions of
sorrow and sadness they have as with respect to the temptations, trials and
troubles, which they here meet with, and depravations which are ordered to
them: Though their belly trembles, and lips quiver, and rottentess enters into
their bones, etc. Yet they rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of their
salvation: and even glorify him in the fires, Habbak. 3. 16-19. Isa. 24. 7-14,
15, 1 Pet. 1. 6-8. Psalm. 89. 15. 16. Prove. 15. 15.

And then they may be said to be Filled with the Spirit, when they walk in
Christ Jesus as they have received him; and through this blessed Spirit crucify
continually the lusts and affections of the Flesh: Mortify their members which
are upon the earth: then are they led by this holy Spirit, as the Apostle
signifies, when he says, If ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the
body, ye shall live: For as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the
Sons of God: intimating to us, that such as these are in, and led by the
Spirit, Romans 8. 7-9, 13, 14. Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the
lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5. 16, 17. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk
in the Spirit, let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another,
envying one another, verse. 24, 25, 26. To this the Apostle exhorts these
Believers, That they put off as concerning the former conversation, the old man
which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts; To put away lying; To be
angry and not sin, etc. Ephesians. 4. 22-30, 31. And when also they so drink in of
this Wine, as that they are filled with the fruit of the Spirit, with love,
joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance,
against which the Law is not. The fruit of the Spirit is in all, goodness, and
righteousness, and truth, Gal. 5. 16-22. Ephesians. 5. 8, 9. And have the
righteousness of the Law fulfilling in them more and more, Romans 8. 3, 4. And
are seeking after, and setting their affections upon things above, where Christ
sits on the right hand of God: having their conversation not on earth, but
in Heaven, Col. 2. 12. and 3. 1-5. Philip. 3. 7-9-20.

And when they are led by this Spirit, and overcome thereby, to speak unto, and
to be teaching, and admonishing one another, sounding forth Gods praises,
holding forth the word of life in word and conversation; holding fast, and
holding forth the profession of their faith and hope, without wavering, without
fear of men, or their fear; without fear of amazement, speaking the word of
Christ, and walking in his way, and as he has left us an example, with
boldness, and confidence, and cheerfully, and confidently enduring whatever
they may meet with, and undergo: taking joyfully the spoiling of their goods,
for Christ and his Gospel sake; so as walking in the wisdom and humility of
Christ; not being moved by any thing they suffer, nor counting their lives dear
to themselves, that they may finish their course with joy; when they are so
filled with Christ's Gospel, as that it is a burning fire shut up in their
bones, and they are even constrained to speak what they have seen and heard,
Psalm. 39. 1-3. Jer. 20. 7-11. Act. 2. 11-13. The being filled with the Spirit,
is to be imboldned by it (as Esth. 7. 5.) So of the Apostles and Believers it
is said, They were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and they spoke the word of
God with boldness -- And with great power gave the Apostles witness of the
Resurection of the Lord Jesus, etc. Act. 4. 30, 31, 32. and verse. 20. Mic. 3.
8. To which we shall not enlarge any further, because we have spoken so largely
in showing the answerableness of the Spirit unto Wine, before: nor indeed am I
in a meet capacity to speak any thing hereabout, because I am not filled
therewith my self: and therefore do but darken Counsel by words without
knowledge.

IV. We come in the last place, briefly, to note some Instructions from this
Exhortation of the Apostle: [Be ye filled with the Spirit]. Namely.

I. That even the Believeres themselves, which have received the Holy Spirit,
and have been sealed therewith unto the day of Redemption, may not be filled,
or so filled with the Holy Spirit, as God would have them to be, as is before
signified in what we have said: These were Believers, and had received this
good Spirit in some measure; and yet they are instructed and exhorted to be
filled therewith, and made more spiritual thereby. The Believing- Corinthians
were Baptized into one body, and made to drink into one Spirit; and yet they
were not filled with the Spirit: For the Apostle could not speak unto them as
unto spiritual ones, but as carnal, as unto Babes in Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 13.
with chap. 3. 1-3. The Believing- Hebrews, though in receiving the word of
Christ they received his Spirit; yet alas! they still needed to be taught which
were the first principles of the Oracles of God, and were become such as had
need of Milk, and not of strong meat. Through their dullness of hearing, and
slowness of heart to believe the first and great things of Gods Law, the word,
of the beginning of Christ, the Apostle knew not well how to speak unto them of
the High Priesthood of Christ, his Sacrifice which he had offered; his
Mediation in the Heavens, and Advocation for Believers; his coming again, with
the high acts and works of faith, etc. Heb. 5. 10-14. and 6. 1, 2, etc. The
Thessalonian-Believers, though they received the word in much affliction, with
joy of the Holy Spirit; yet there were wants found in their Faith: and
therefore the Apostle did pray night and day exceedingly, that he migh see
their face, and might perfect that which was lacking in their faith, 1 These. 1.
2-6-10. and 2. 13. and 3. 10. There may be much, or somewhat lacking in them
that have received this good Spirit, as to their being filled therewith: there
may be somewhat wanting in their knowledge, faith, establishment, rejoicing,
confidence, consolation in Christ, conformity unto Christ, conversation, etc.
They may be, and some of them are, but little children: And others, though they
be young men, yet still they may receive and dirnk in more and more of this
Spirit in the Testimony of Christ: yea, and the fullest may yet be fuller,
while they are here in mortal bodies: For they receive here but some First
fruits of the Spirit, Romans 8. 23. And this Instruction may be of usefulness
unto us,

1. To warn and admonish us all to take heed and beware of high-mindedness, and
that we should not think of our selves more highly than we ought to think, but
to think soberly, as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith, Romans 12.
2. 3. A sad and dangerous thing it is for us all to think and say, We are rich,
and increased with goods, and have need of nothing: This is the highway so to
provoke Christ, as to cause him to spue us out of his mouth, Rev. 3. 15-17. We
have none of us yet attained, nor are we already perfect, as to attainment,
Philip. 3. 12, 13. Alas! how short are we in every thing? We have cause
continually to cry out and complain of, and and bewail our leanness, emptiness,
blindness, instability in the faith, inconformity to Christ: Oh! be we not
high-minded: think we not more highly of our selves than is meet, for that will
hinder us from coming continually unto Christ, who is the fountain of life, and
Spirit, and all spiritual blessings.

2. This instruction shows unto us, and informs us, that the receipt of the
Spirit is a gradual thing; it is not wholly received at once: But the Light and
Spirit of Christ is received, and shines more and more unto the perfect day,
Prove. 4. 18. They who have obtained like precious faith with the Apostles, and
know, and are established in the word of truth, the Gospel of our salvation,
may grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2
Pet. 1. 1-12. with chap. 3. 18. They who are in Christ, go from strength to
strength, from one degree to another, until every one of them appear before God
in Zion, Psalm. 84. 4-7.

3. This Instruction may teach us, that we should not conclude concerning any,
that they have not the Spirit of Christ, because they are not so filled
therewith as they should be: for the former may be, where the latter is
wanting, as we have seen and said before: The Gospel of Christ, and Spirit
therein, may be received by men; and the Spirit in the Testimony may be in
them, though yet they are not in it; not so overcome, led, enlightened,
established, and framed thereby to the mind of Christ, as might be desired, and
ought to be endeavored: And Christ will not break the bruised reed, nor quench
the smoking flax, or dimly-burning week, but nourish and cherish every little
spark. Be we more like-minded after the example of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
we may not despise the day of small things, nor discourage, but support the
weak, Zech. 4. 10. 1 These. 5. 14.

4. It may exhort and provoke us all to come unto Christ, and drink, and drink
in abandantly of the Wine which is in him, for us, That we may grow thereby,
and increase with the increase of God, Joh. 7. 37-39. He that comes unto him
continually, shall never thirst, but his Soul shall be abundantly satisfied,
and his faith shall grow exceedingly, and his charity toward all men, and
especially toward the Brotherhood, shall abound: But to this we shall have
occasion to speak afterward.

II. A second Instruction we may note from these words is, That the Believers
cannot fill themselves with the Spirit, they have no sufficiency hereto of
themselves, as of themselves: Therefore he says not, fill your selves; but, Be
ye filled with the Spirit: They have not the fountain of Spirit in themselves;
The Spirit is not put upon them for themselves; but it is given unto, and
rests upon Jesus Christ, Isa. 11. 1-3: and is put upon him, that he might
dispense thereof unto us: This was he, says the Baptist, of whom I spoke, He
that comes after me, is preferred before me, for he was before me: And of his
fullness have all we (Prophets, and holy ones) received, and grace for grace,
Joh. 1. 15, 16. In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily: And in
him ye are complete, Col. 1. 19. and 2. 3, 9, 10. God has not given the Spirit
by measure unto him, but has immeasurably filled him therewith: And to that
end he has so done, that he might pour forth thereof to us, according to our
needs and capacities, Joh. 3. 34, 35. Isa. 42. 1. Upon this stone (this
precious cornerstone, and sure foundation, this Stone which the builders
disallowed, and which is now become the head of the corner), are the seven
eyes, even the seven spirits of God, which are sent forth into all the earth,
Zech. 3. 8, 9. and 4. 10. with Rev. 5. 6. Indeed in us, that is, in our flesh,
in us as of us, we have no good thing dwelling: we have all sinned, and are
come short of the Glory of God. But our Lord Jesus has restored that which he
lost not; and recovered by his Blood, and is possessed of all fullness for us;
being glorified with the Father's own self, with the glory which he had with
him besore the world was, Joh. 17. 4, 5. He has the seven spirits of God, Rev.
3. 1. And from him the Apostles received the Holy Spirit: And unto every one of
us it is given according to the measure of the gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 7-10.
And this Instruction might be of usefulness unto us all,

1. To hide Pride from us, and preserve or deliver us from boasting of, or
glorying in our selves: for wherein are we to be accounted of? Isa. 2. 22. Who
makes thee to differ? And what have thou that thou did not receive? Now, if
thou did receive it, why do thou glory as if thou had not received it? 1
Cor. 4. 7. The blessing of Abraham is in Christ for us Gentiles, that we might
receive the promise of the Spirit through faith, Gal. 3. 13, 14. To him are we
beholding for all, and none can fill themselves with this Holy Spirit out of
their own store: For we are poor empty creatures, destitute of all spiritual
good, Job 11. 12. We cannot furnish, or fill our selves with this blessed Wine,
but need continually to be supplied therewith from Jesus Christ, Philip. 1. 19.
Where is boasting then? it is excluded: We neither have this good Spirit of our
selves, nor can we purchase it by any price of ours that we can give to God:
But it is the gift, the free gift of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of God in and
through him, Act. 5. 32. and 8. 20. 1 John 3. 24.

2. This may also warn and admonish us, to take heed heed that we sin not
against Christ: Oh! let us all beware of him, and not provoke him, but obey his
voice, lest he withhold, or withdraw his good Spirit from us; for his it is
primarily, properly, and fully: So he says to the Angel of the Church in
Sardis: These things says he that has the seven Spirits of God -- Remember
how thou have received and heard, and hold fast, and repent: If therefore thou
shall not watch, I will come upon thee as a thief, etc. I will take away mine
Holy Spirit from thee, which I have given unto thee, and which thou have so
much, and so often grieved, and sadned, Rev. 3. 1-3. Psalm. 51. 11. And if he
take it away from us, no man has power over the Spirit, to retain the Spirit,
Eccles. 8. 8: nor can we fill our selves therewith by any wisdom, strength, or
works of righteousness of ours: It is not received, nor can we fill our selves
therewith by any works of the Law, Gal. 3. 2. Oh then let us take heed and
beware that we sin not against Jesus Christ; But let us Kiss the Son, and be
ruled, and ordered by him, lest he be angry, and we perish from the way, Psalm.
2. 12.

III. We may also note from this Exhortation, in that he says, Be ye filled
with the Spirit; That God is so giving his Holy Spirit to them that obey him,
that they might be filled therewith, Act. 5. 32. He is not like unto them that
say, Be ye warmed and filled, and yet give them not needful things, Jam. 2. 16.
He says not, Be ye filled with the Spirit, and yet withholds it from them, or
gives it not unto them, so as they might obey his exhortation: But, He gives
liberally to all men, and upbraids not, Jam. 1. 5. He who loves a cheerful
giver, is himself a cheerful and liberal giver, and dispenser of his Holy
Spirit to them that believe in him, Joh. 7. 37-39. He will pour out his Spirit
unto such as hearken to him, and receive his Gospel, and make known his words
unto them, as he has promised both to the Jews and Gentiles, Prove. 1. 20-23.
Act. 2. 38, 39: his readiness to dispense his Spirit, is manifested and
evidenced to us, in that he has at so dear a rate prepared it for us, and
caused it to rest upon his Son; to that end that it might be made communicable,
and be poured forth unto us, he has killed his killing. He has not spared his
own Son, but delivered him up for us all, and raised him again, and put his
Spirit upon him, and pours forth thereof to men preventingly, that they might
come unto Christ; and dispenses it plentifully, and gives it to them richly
with Christ, who receive him, that they might be filled therewith, Romans 8. 32.
Indeed, they have not this Holy Spirit in themselves, as of themselves; nor can
fill themselves therewith: But this needs be no discouragement to us; for it is
in his hand who is graciously affected toward us: and is a bountiful giver to
us according to our capacities, to the end we might be filled therewith: nor is
it good or safe for us to conclude, that he gives it not, because we have it
not; for he gave it unto his people in former times, his good Spirit to
instrust them, and withheld not Manna from their mouths: nevertheless they were
disobedient, and rebelled against him, Neh. 9. 20-26. Isa. 63. 10.

IV. And lastly; In this Exhortation we may also learn, that there is somewhat
required of the Believers, that they may be filled with this Holy Spirit;
Therefore he says, Be ye filled with the Spirit. Indeed they cannot fill
themselves with it by any wisdom or strength of theirs, as we have seen before;
But yet this Commandment is given unto them by the Lord Jesus, and they are
exhorted to be filled with it. So in many things in which there are passives,
there is yet somewhat required of them in the light and strength of Gods grace:
They cannot save themselves; yet it is required of men to look unto Christ and
be saved, Isa. 45. 22. They cannot reconcile themselves to God; and yet it is
said, We pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5. 18,
20. Men cannot regenerate themselves, but of Gods own will he begets with the
word of truth: and yet our Savior says, Ye must be born again, Jam. 1. 18.
with Joh. 3. 7. So we may say here, they cannot fill themselves: but yet it is
required of them, Be ye filled with the spirit: and so to this end and purpose,
that they may be filled with it, it is needful for them,

1. To hear wisdom, and watch daily at her Gates, and wait at the posts of her
doors: To hearken diligently unto Christ, as he is speaking unto us by his
Gospel; and to frequent the assemblies of his people; for where two or three of
them are gathered together in his name, he has promised he will be in the
midst of them, Prove. 8. 32-35. Mat. 18, 20. Drunkards love their own company,
such as they call Good-fellows, and by frequenting their companies, they are
the more provoked to drink, and drink largely: and the way for us to be filled
with the Spirit is, not to forsake the assembling of our selves together, but
to gather together, and be together, as often as we may; For there has God
commanded the blessing, even life for evermore, Psalm. 133. 3. And to that end
it is needful for us to redeem the time from other business and employment,
that we may wait upon the Lord without distraction, Ephesians. 5. 16. If two lie
together, then they have heat (warmth and Spirit) But how can one be warm
alone? Eccl. 4. 11. Thus it is said, When the disciples of Christ were all with
one accord in one place, suddenly there came a sound from Heaven, as of a
mighty rushing wind -- And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, etc. Act.
1. 13, 14. and 2. 1-3, 42-47. Those that be planted in the house of the Lord,
shall flourish in the Courts of our God -- They shall be fat and green; To
show, that the Lord is upright, etc. Psalm. 92. 13-15. A day in his Courts is
better than a thousand elsewhere -- For the Lord God is a Sun and shield; He
will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from them that
walk uprightly, Psalm. 84. 4, 5-10. 11.

2. Needful also it is, to the end we may still, and further be filled with the
Spirit, that we part with, and let go the things reproved by the Gospel, and
which he is discovering to be sinful and poluting to us; as here he says, All
things that are reproved, are made manifest, by the light; for whatsoever does
make manifest, is light; Wherefore be says, Awake thou that sleep, and
arise from the dead (both persons and things) and Christ shall give thee light.
See then that ye walk circumspectly, etc. Ephesians. 5. 13-18. As signifying to us,
that this is the way to be enlightened by, and filled with the Spirit; To
abstain from those things and persons which are evil and hurtful to us, and
manifested so to be, by the light of Gods Testimony: And in this verse we are
speaking to, he first gives this Admonition, Be not drunk with Wine, wherein is
excess; before he says, Be ye filled with the Spirit: to give us to
understand, that we cannot be filled with both: but we must abstain from the
former, that we may be filled with the latter: For whoredom, and wine, and
new-wine, take away the heart from the mindfulness of the things of the spirit;
and from the receiving and drinking them in, Hos. 4. 11. And provoke God to
withhold, and withdraw his good Spirit from them; so as such are inclined unto,
and polluted with this Iniquity; They are all blind, they are all ignorant,
they are such as cannot understand, Isa. 56. 10-12. Yea indeed, needful it is
to deny and mortify our members upon the Earth generally, and to abstain from
all fleshly lusts, for they war against the good and prosperity of the Soul, 1
Pet. 2. 11. Hence the Apostle exhorts these believers, To put off concerning
the former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt according to the
deceitful lusts: To put away lying -- To be angry and not sin; not to steal; To
let no corrupt, rotten communication proceed out of their mouth -- To let all
bitterness, anger, wrath, and clamor, and evil-speaking be put away from them,
with all malice: or else they would grieve and sadden the Holy Spirit of God,
and cause him to depart from them: For he is an holy Spirit, and will not
dwell, or abide richly in them that willingly entertain, and retain what is
reproved, filthy, and unclean, Ephesians. 4. 22-31. 1 Samuel 15. 23. with chap. 16.
14. Genes. 6. 3. As is said concerning Gods people in former times, They
rebelled and vexed his holy spirit, therefore he was turned to be their enemy,
and he fought against them, Isa. 63. 10. Needful therefore it is, that we may
be filled with this holy Spirit, that we daily and continually lay apart all
filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness; and flee from the things which God
is faulting by his Spirit in his Testimony; And then he will largely dispense
unto us this blessed Spirit, that we may be filled with it; according to that,
Turn you at my reproof; Behold I will pour out my Spirit unto you, I will make
known my words unto you. Prove. 1. 21-23. So the Lord also says concerning his
people in former times: They shall take away all the detestable things -- and
all the abominations thereof -- And I will put a new Spitit within you -- But
as for them whose heart walks after the heart of their detestable things, and
their abominations (he will not put a new Spirit within them, but says he) I
will recompense their way upon their own head, says the Lord God. And again, I
will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your
filthiness, and from all your Idols I will cleanse you -- And a new Spirit I
will put within you. And I will put my Spirit within you, etc. Ezekiel. 11. 18-21.
and 36. 25-27. Oh then! to the end we may be filled with this holy and blessed
Spirit, and drink in, and drink abundantly of this Wine, let us forsake the
foolish, both persons and things; And let us have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them, Ephesians. 5. 11-18. Come we
out from amongst men, and be we separate, and let us touch no unclean thing:
And this is the way for us to be filled with the Spirit, Genesis 6. 3-6. 1 These.
4. 1-8.

3. Needful also it is, that we may be filled with the Spirit, that we be
emptied of our selves, and of our conceits of our knowledge, fullness, and
sufficiency: The full Soul loatheth the Honeycomb: But unto the hungry soul
every bitter thing is sweet, Prove. 27. 7. He fills the empty and hungry with
good things; but the rich he sends empty away, Luke 1. 5 3. Woe unto you that
are full, says our Savior, for ye shall hunger, Luke 6. 24, 25. When men once
begin to think, and say, they are rich, and increased with goods, and have need
of nothing; when they conceit they know enough already, and need not to receive
help from others, and that they are already whole and clean; Alas this will
hinder men from being filled with the Spirit, and make them wax wanton against
Christ, and shut the door against him, Rev 3. 17-20. If they think unsoberly of
themselves, and of their knowledge, parts, seize, cleanness, and
uprightness, How should they as newborn babes desire earnestly the sincere milk
of the word, that they may be filled therewith, and grow thereby. Woe to them
that are rich and full, in, and of themselves: But, Blessed are they that are
empty, and who hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled,
Matthew. 5. 6. While men retain a lie in their right hand, and fill their bellies
with the wind, how shall they receive, and be filled with the truth, the Spirit
of truth? we must be emptied of the former, that the latter may dwell
plentifully in us, Isa. 44. 20. Men cannot press forward toward the mark for
the prize of the high calling of God in Christ, unless they be like-minded with
the Apostle, namely to count and reckon that they have not yet attained,
neither are already perfect; that they have not yet apprehended, Phil. 3.
12-15. See thou a man wise in his own eyes? there is more hope of a fool than
of him, Prove. 26. 12. with chap. 29. 22.

4. Needful also it is, that we come continually unto Jesus Christ, and believe
in him, that of his fullness we may receive, and be filled with this holy
Spirit. If any man thirst, says our Savior, let him come unto me and drink:
If any man be empty, and sensible of his need and want, of his emptiness and
incompleatness in himself, let him come unto Christ, the house of Wine, Cant.
2. 4. In whom there is a feast prepared for all nations, of fat things, of
Wines on the lees, Isa. 25. 6. And let him drink: let him take freely of it,
Rev. 22. 17. But how should such an one come unto him and drink? Our Savior
acquaints us how this may be done: He that believes on me, as the Scripture
has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water, says our
Savior: But this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should
receive: Such an one shall so receive the Spirit, as that his belly, and inward
man, shall be abundantly filled with it: even as with new Wine, Joh. 7. 37-39.
And indeed this coming unto him is, a believing on him, as the Scripture has
said; and so according to his word cleaving to, and depending on him: And in
his Word, and Gospel, there is Christ and his Spirit: So that the way to come
to Christ, and be filled with his Spirit, is, to receive, and let the word of
Christ dwell richly in us, as has before been said, Ephesians. 5. 18. with Col. 3.
16. Avoid we then, and go from the presence of all strangers that consent not
to wholesome words, the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine
according to godliness: Reject all false Doctrines, and listen not to them, for
this Spirit is not in them, but another, even the Spirit of the Devil, and
Error, 1 John 4. 1-6. But receive and keep his word in the midst of your
hearts, as the wisdom of God says, Let thine heart retain my words, keep my
Commandments, and live, Prove. 4. 4, 5. For his words are Spirit and Life, Joh.
6. 63. And having, and keeping his Commandments, his word, God and Christ will
by his Spirit come unto us, and make their abode with us, Joh. 14. 21-23. Come
we then unto Christ, the fountain of Spirit, continually in his Testimony, and
so he will pour out his Spirit unto us, and fill us therewith.

5. In an exercise of faith, pray we, and pour out our hearts unto the Father
in the name of Christ, for his Holy Spirit, and for a plentiful effusion
thereof: Howl we not firstly for Corn and Wine for the outward man, as we are
too apt to do: But if any of us lack wisdom, this Spirit of wisdom (as who does
not?) let him ask of God, who gives liberally to all men -- and it shall be
given him: But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering, Jam. 1. 5, 6. I say unto
you, says our Savior, ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall
find; knock, and it shall be opened to you: For every one that asks,
receives; And he that seeks, finds; And to him that knocks, it shall be
opened -- If ye being evil, know how to give good gifts to your Children; How
much more shall your Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?
Luke 11. 7-13. If thou knew the gift of God, says our Savior to the Woman
of Samaria, and who it is that says unto thee, Give me to drink: Thou would
have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water, even this good
and Holy Spirit, Joh. 4. 10. with chap. 7. 37-39. Ask then, in Christ's name,
and ye shall receive, that your joy (in the enjoyment of this Holy Spirit) may
be full, Joh. 16. 24. with Romans 14. 17. 1 These. 1. 6. For this the Apostle made
mention of these Believers in his prayers, That the God of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of Glory, would give them the Spirit of wisdom and
Revelation in the knowledge, and for the acknowledgment of him: The eyes of
their understanding being enlightened, that they may know what is the hope of
his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints,
etc. Ephesians. 1. 16-19. And good encouragement have we to pray, that we may be
filled with this blessed Spirit; because our Lord Jesus, the last Adam, who by
the Grace of God tasted death for every man, and is raised again for their
justification, is made a quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45. And has the Spirit
given immeasurably to him, Joh. 3. 34, 35. And also prays the Father to give
the Holy Spirit to them that ask it in his name: while they pray on earth, he
prays in Heaven for them. And has also promised, that abiding in him, and his
words abiding in them, they may ask what they will, and it shall be done unto
them; He will do it for them, Joh. 14. 13-16, 17. and chap. 15. 7. Oh then!
Restrain we not our prayers: but as he has encouraged, and given us liberty,
let him see our countenance, and hear our voice: And let us come boldly to the
throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in the time
of need, Cant. 2. 14. Heb. 4. 14-16.

6. And lastly, That we may be more and more abundantly filled with the Spirit,
walk we in and after it: mind we the things of the Spirit, the things of
Christ, which the Spirit takes, and shows unto us: And be we led by the Spirit,
and yield up to his operations; so shall we not fulful the lusts of the flesh,
Gal. 5. 16. But be helped continually to mortify them, and put them to death,
Romans 8. 13. Col. 3. 5. And whatever this Holy Spirit is working in us to will
and do, let us do all things without murmuring and disputing: It will produce
nothing hurtful in us; For the fruit of the Spirit is in all, goodness, and
righteousness, and truth, Ephesians. 5. 8, 9. Oh! Quench not this Spirit, but let it
inflame your hearts with love to Christ, and God in him; and to Men and
Brethren, according to his Instructions and operations, and fill you with joy
and peace in believing: And effect in you Long-suffering, gentleness, goodness,
faith, meekness, temperance, Gal. 5. 16-22. And smother not this blessed
Spirit; but work out that Salvation he is working in you, with fear and
trembling; make confession, and hold forth the profession of the faith unto
salvation, without wavering: And fear not the reproach of men, nor be afraid of
their fear: Follow the leading of this Spirit without doubting, wherever, or
unto whatsoever it leads you, Act. 11. 12. Romans 8. 14. Have in usefulness what
God has given to you: For to him that has, shall be given, and he shall have
more abundantly: But from him that has not, shall be taken away even that
which he has, Matthew. 13. 12. And sow to this blessed Spirit, in labors of
love, according to your capacity and ability: make not your bellies your gods:
For he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption,
everlasting corruption: But he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit
reap life everlasting. And let us not be weary in well doing; for in due season
we shall reap if we faint not. As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good
to all men, especially to the household of faith, Gal. 6. 6-10. If thou draw out
thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul; Then shall thy light
rise in obscurity, and thy darkness shall be as the noonday: And the Lord
shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy Soul in droughts, and make fat
thy bones: And thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water
whose waters fail not, Isa. 58. 7-11.

Consider what is said, and the Lord give us understanding in all things. And
the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Communion of
the Holy Ghost, be with us all, Amen.

The END.

