A True ACCOUNT OF THE CAPTIVITY OF Thomas Phelps, AT MACHANESS IN BARBARY, AND
Of his strange Escape in Company of Edmund Baxter and others, as also of the
Burning Two of the greatest Pirat-Ships belonging to that Kingdom, in the River
of Mamora; upon the Thirteenth day of June 1685.

By THOMAS PHELPS.

Hoec olim meminisse juvabit. Licenced,

August the 21st. R. L' s.



LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, Jun. for Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Golden-Ball
over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1685.

To the Honorable SAMUEL PEPYS, Esquire
SIR,
HAving by your generous Favor had the Honor of being introduced into His
Majesty's presence, where I delivered the substance of this following
Narrative, and being pressed by the importunity of Friends to Publish it to the
World, to which mine own inclinations were not averse, as which might tend to
the information of my fellow Seamen; as well as satisfying the curiosity of my
Countrymen, who delight in Novel and strange Stories; I thought I should be
very far wanting to my self, if I should not implore the Patronage of your ever
Honored Name, for none ever will dare to dispute the truth of any matter of
Fact here delivered, when they shall understand that it has stood the test of
your sagacity. Sir, Your Eminent and Steady Loyalty, whereby you asserted His
Majesty's just Rights, and the true Privileges of your Country in the worst of
times, gives me confidence to expect, that you will vouchsafe this
condescension to a poor, yet honest Seaman, who have devoted my Life to the
Service of His Sacred Majesty and my Country; who have been a Slave, but now
have attained my freedom, which I prize so much the more, in that I can with
Heart and Hand subscribe my self,

Honorable Sir, Your most Obliged and Humble Servant.Tho. Phelps,

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
SInce my Escape from Captivity, and worse than Egyptian Bondage, I have
methinks, enjoyed a happiness with which my former life was never acquainted;
now that after a Storm and terrible Tempest, I have by Miracle put into a safe
and quiet Harbor, after a most miserable Slavery, to the most unreasonable and
Barbarous of Men; now that I enjoy the immunities and freedom of my Native
Country, and the Privileges of a Subject of England, although my circumstances
otherwise are but indifferent, yet I find I am affected with extraordinary
emotions and singular transports of joy; now I know what Liberty is, and can
put a value and make a just estimate of that happiness, which before I never
well understood, which observation agrees very well with a lesson in Morals I
remember I have been taught, viz. that all Happiness here below is only
Relative, and has a value only put upon it by Comparison, Riches and Abundance
have their Measures of good and convenience, from the consideration of the
Miseries and Inconveniences that attend Poverty and Want; Health can be but
slightly esteemed by him, who never was acquainted with Pain or Sickness, and
Liberty and Freedom are the happiness only valuable by a Reflection on
Captivity and Slavery, they who are unacquainted with, and have no notice of
the Miseries of the latter, will never put a due Value and consideration upon
the former; of which general Rule, the most part of my Countrymen, I am sorry
to say, are too particular an instance, who of all the Nations of the Earth are
possessors of the greatest Liberty, but least sensible of the happiness; Here
the Government secures every Man in the possession and enjoyment of what Gods
blessing and his own industry has allowed; Here even the Poor and Needy, the
Impotent, and those whom the Hand of God has touched, have a comfortable
subsistence, and plentiful provision against all extremities; Here the
industrious Mechanic or Country-Farmer, can sit down at his Table better
provided than many Barons of Germany, Marqueses in France, and Knights in
Spain; in a word Slavery is so strange a condition to England, that to touch
its soil, is ipso facto Manumission, and the generality of the People have but
little heard, and less understood the miserable State which the most part of
the World is now subject to, so that the Plenty and great Liberty of the
English Subjects is no great happiness to them, because they never weigh their
Condition with what is the Lot of other Nations: Upon this consideration I have
adventured to Publish this account of the Miseries I underwent, with many
others, during our Captivity in Barbary, and of my Escape thence. My design is,
Christian Reader, to work in thee by this true, though plain Narrative, some
pity toward the sharp sufferings of thy poor Brethren at the hands of
Infidels; to instruct thee to prize the blessings of that pleasant place, where
thy Let is fallen, and where having only the benefit of Air, thou have a goodly
Heritage; and lastly with me, to Magnify the Name of God, who in his word,
commands us to tell what things he has done for us, and to show forth his
works with gladness.

A True Account of my being taken, and Sufferings during my Captivity.
UPon the 27th. day of August 1684. I Thomas Phelps set fail from the Downs in
a Vessel called the Success of London, about forty Tuns, laden with Salt,
bound for a place in Ireland called the Ventrey, where we arrived the 10th. day
of September: I stayed there some while, and killed Beaf, designing for the
Madera's and Mount Surrat; accordingly on the 20th. of September, I set sail
for the Madera's, but my design was crossed, and my Voyage stopped as follows:
Upon the 5th. of October (being then a Hundred Leagues, West off the Rock of
Lisbon) we saw a sail to windward of us, which immediately we found to give us
chase; we made what sail we could from him, and night coming on, we had, for
about Two hours, lost sight of him, but at the rising of the Moon, he got sight
of us, and quickly came up with us, hailing us whence our Ship, we answered
from London, demanding the like of him, who made answer from Algeir, and withal
commanded us to hoist out our Boat, which we refused to do, but we braced our
head-sailes for him, immediately he sent his Boat toward us, when it was got
almost by our side, we gave them Three shouts, which so surpised them, that
they thought it convenient to retire aboard their own Ship; We were not a
little cheered at their departure and made from them with all the sail we could
make, for we had not one great Gun, and as for Powder, I believe one single
pound was the outmost of our store: In the mean time he was hoisting in of his
Boat, I had got above two miles from him, which made me think I was clear of
him, and withal that the Ship must be an Algerine, she appearing so great,
that, according to the stories in England, I thought no such Ship could belong
to Salle; But I found my self within a little while, mightily mistaken, for as
soon as his Boat was hoisted in, he presently setch'd us up again: We had tried
his sailing all ways, but found we could not wrong him any way; so seeing him a
stern, and a thing impossible to lose sight of us, I put out a light for him,
notwithstanding I was possessed at that time (God knows) with fear enough, but I
thought, in the Dark, my seeming confidence and resolution might impose upon
him, so as to fancy I was of some force; And truly afterward he confessed to
me, that he thought I had six Guns aboard and that I did intend to fight him.

He kept a stern of me all night, and in the morning he put out Turkish
colors, which I answered with our English; then he came up, and saw I had no
boat in sight, for my boat was stowed down betwixt decks, he commanded me
therefore to brace to my head-sailes, and then he sent his boat to demand my
pass; Aboard he was an ancient Moor, who formerly had been a slave in England
and spoke good English, and who was set at liberty by our late Gracious King
Charles the 2d. He seeing us in readiness with what arms we had, asked me, if I
had a mind to break the Peace, he told me I needed not trouble my self to keep
them out of our Vessel, for none of them could be persuaded to come aboard me.

I brought him my Custom-house-Cocketts, for I had no Pass: The Moor aforesaid
carried them to the Captain, but soon after returned, and told me that would
not satisfy the Captain, unless the Master himself would come; I made answer
that I would not come, that I had done what I was obliged to by the Articles
'twixt England and Algiers: The boat a second time put away for their Ship, and
whilst they were hoisting in their boat, I made what sail I could, and was got
a mile or more from them again, entertaining better hopes than I was in the
night before; But as soon as the boat was in and stowed, the Moors made sail
and came up with me again, the Captain ordering to tell me, that if I refused
to come a board him, he would come aboard me with his Ship; with that he ranged
up my Weather quarter, I immediately put a stays, which put him into some
confussion, so that he was forced to put a stays also: He had then no Gun,
which I could perceive, I saw his Ports, and his Wast was Man-high: As I came
about I run under his stern, then bore away right before the Wind, he soon came
up with me, but not one shot pas'd all this while, he demanded of me why I
clapped a stays for to run a thwart his half; I answered that I doubted he was
not of Algier, he swore in English, to me that he was, else before this he
would have discovered himself, and withal he told me, that if I did not come
aboard, he would straight way sink me, and so he hoisted out his boat, in the
mean time I boar away, but his boat coming up made me bring to again and brace
a back; His boat then came aboard, I asked this Moor, who spoke English, what
ship of Algiers this was, he very readily without stammering told me, she was
called the Tagerene young Canary Commander, I immediately then went into his
boat; so soon as I came aboard, the Captain asked me why I was so hard of
belief, My distrust was such then that I prayed the Captain now that he had me
aboard in his power, to resolve me whether he were a Salle-man or not, he swore
to me again that he was of Algiers, and that I should not be wronged; He made
me sit down, and caused them to set Dates and Figgs before me: A little after
the Captain told me that he was made acquainted by his men that they saw two
Portugueses aboard my Ship, and that he would have them out, and then I should
be gone about my business, I told him I had none such aboard, but he would see
them two men, so two men were sent for, after that he told me there were three
more and them he must have, well to be short, at last he was suspicious that I
was a Portuguese also, and to convince me that I was one, I found my
entertainment presently withdrawn? Thus did this faithless Barbarian serve me,
until he had wheadled all my men aboard him except two, and then the valiant
Moors entered my Vessel with abundance of courage, heaving the two remaining
English over the head of the Vessel into the boat.

Thus were we all Stripped, the Vessel Plundered in a moment, which they did
resolve to have sunk, because they were too far at Sea distant from their own
coast, but Immediately we saw five sail bearing down upon us, which startled the
Moors, putting them into a great fright, obliging them to quit my Vessel with
abundance of Beaf and three Boxes of dry goods aboard, which their fear would
not give them leisure to rummage for: In some small time the five Vessels
discovered us, when they came within two Leagues of us, had they bore down
afterward with that resolution, that they threatened before, the Pirate would
never have stood to look them in the face, but alas like distracted fearful
game, every of the five Ships took a several course, and being now night they
all escaped.

After that we cruised about thirty Leagues to the West of the Northern Cape,
and so to the Burlings, but no nearer than Twenty Leagues to the shore, and
therefore I imagine there is more safety for small vessels bound that way, to
keep the shore as near as is possible, for I know certainly they never attempt
to come near, but endeavor as much as they can, to avoid the shore because our
Men of War use to careen at Lisbon.

I am likewise pretty well satisfied for that small time that I was amongst
them, (although it was too long for my profit) that no Salle-man will fight a
Ship of Ten Guns, which I found true by observation of a Countryman from
Bristol, whilst I was aboard: We came up with him and hailed him, and would
have had him put out his Boat, but he refused, and withal showed himself ready
in his own defense, upon which we were glad to leave him.

So that to satisfy all my Countrymen who follow my trade I dare confidently
affirm, that if I had a Ship of Ten Guns, and it should be my fortune to
encounter any of these Salle-rouges, (who all go under the notion of Algerines,
who are now at peace with England) I would encourage him to send his boat, by
acquainting him that our Master would come aboard and show his pass, (which is
the thing they aim at) And when the boat was come to my side, (any man of
reason may judge then whether she were from Salle or Algiers, but however I
would commit nothing should be judged a breach of the Peace, 'twixt England and
Algiers) I would heave in a Grapling and secure the men, all save two, whom I
would permit to return aboard and bring me a Christian, or else aver my Pass,
if they will not do that, I am then satisfied what he is, and think my self
obliged to desend my self from Slavery, but this I am very confident of, that
he will never stay to dispute the case afterward.

About a fortnight after I was taken, we met one Samuel Crampton who came from
Faro, and whom we soon took without any resistance. The week following we took
a small Ketch come from Cales, laden with Sherry and Raisies and bound for
Limrick, John Elliot Master.

The number of us Christians taken aboard the Three Prizes was Twenty five,
besides Twelve which were aboard the Pirate, in all Thirty seven; We who were
newly taken were kept in Irons in the Hold.

After the taking of these Three Vessels the Pirate made all the sail he could
for Salle to save the spring Tide, which flows at Salle and Mamora S S W about
Thirty Leagues: To the Northward of Salle, we met a Fleming who came from
Salle, and told our Commander that the Englishmen of War were at Tangier then,
attending Captain Nicholason, which caused us to bear directly for Salle and
fell in directly with the Castle, where were no Englishmen of War, according
to the Advice.

On the Bar of Salle there run a great Sea, which obliged us to come to an
Anchor near the Bar, where we rid Six hours; then were we poor Christians all
let loose from our Ironshackles, wherein we had been confined for Twenty days
preceding: the Captain sent the Boat, as near the Shore to the South of the
Bar, as possibly he could, to enquire what News, there they were acquainted
that they might safely come in the next high Water: whilst the Boat was gone a
Shore, the Moors, we observed, fell all fast a sleep, the Captain also, with
his Head over the Rail, upon the half-Deck seemed deeply engaged: This
opportunity me thought was very inviting, I made a proposal of it to my fellow
Slaves, and undertook to do the Captains business my self: The Christians were
forward enough to comply with the motion, and Eleven of the Twelve, (which were
Slaves retained in the Ship before our being taken) they also were willing, if
the Twelfth who was Steward in the Ship would have consented, but this sneaking
varlet proved recreant, and for fear of him the other Eleven turned also
Renegadoes to this Heroic and Christian resolution; I had a mind to have
dispatched this troubler of our peace out of the way first, but the fear that
his fellow Slaves would have severely resented it, restrained my resolution;
the Slaves Name was Will. Robinson, he professed himself a Christian in words,
but in deed we found more civility from the Moors than him.

At Four in the Afternoon, we weighed Anchor, and stood in for the Bar, we
struck Twice going over, but without any damage; it was upon the First day of
November, after we had helped to moor our Ship, at Night we were all carried
ashore, and conveyed to our Lodging, which was an old Stable, but without
Litter or Straw, having nothing save the bare dirty Ground for our Bed or
Pillow; the next Day we were all carried aboard the Ship to Unrigg her, and get
out her Ballast, which we did; about Four in the Afternoon, I was sent for
ashore to come to the Governor, who passed his sentence on us Three Masters,
that we should go to his House, and there remain, until we were sent for by the
King; we remained at his House Ten days, where our daily employment was to
Grind the Corn for the use of his Family; at length there came an Order for us,
and all the rest of the Christians to be carried to the King, whose Ordinary
and then Residence was at Machaness, a place which this present Emperor has
set his Fancy upon, and bestows most of his care, and employs all Christian
Slaves in Building there; it is distant from Salle about Seventy Miles, and
from Fez Thirty.

In our Journey thither, I cannot forget our Captains extraordinary civility, in
Accommodating us sometimes with Borricoes to ride on, so that in Two days and a
half we arrived thither: The First night we were not brought before our great
Master, but the following our Captain presented us before him, and withal some
Portuguese Plate, which was taken in Mr. Crampton's Vessel; as the Captain gave
it into his Hand, the surly Tyrant with a seeming scorn and disdain heaved it
against the Wall, which was the first Action I observed, and did a little
discover the temper of my new Patron Muley Ishmael Emperor of Morocco and Fez,
etc. He ordered us to be sent amongst the rest of our fellow Slaves; as we went
we were entertained with the civilities of the place, and welcomed by the
joyful acclamations and complements of the Moors kicking and slapping us all
along, which appeared very uncouth to me, who was but a Stranger, but that
Night my fellow Captives allayed my wonder, by acquainting me, that what had
past was nothing, it was only a suitable Prologue to all the Tragical sufferings
that Christians must endure there whilst they are Slaves, which were so
dreadful, that I could willingly, that very Night have ventured my Life to
endeavor an escape; they Painted out to me the Tyrannical humor of the
Emperor, both toward the Christians and Natives, in such Bloody Colors, viz.
how they had seen him Butcher many Thousands with his own hands, how that none
can be secure in his presence for that the varying of a look, a small spot in
the Garment, or any such inconsiderable circumstance, will raise such a caprice
in the Emperors Noddle, without any other provocation, as to endanger all the
Heads before him, and it is very rare if the company escape with One or Two
only Beheaded, or Lanced through the Body.

The Second day after my arrival thither, I saw him Lance Seven and twenty
Negroes one after another, and every Day after, until New-years-day, (when he
parted to Santa Cruz with his Army) I either saw or heard of his inhumane, but
yet, through custom, to him Natural Barbarities, Killing and Dragging, but this
latter is a piece of respect observed only to Minions and Favorites,
Vice-kings and Alcaids; yea his Women are not able by all their Charms to avoid
his Fury, but are more the objects of his implacable rage than any other
passion: I have been several times in the West Indies, and have seen and heard
of diverse Inhumanities and cruelties practiced there, I have also read in
Books, and have heard Learned men discourse of the Sicilian Tyrants and Roman
Emperors, but indeed I forget them all, they are not to be named in comparison
with this Monster of Africa, a composition of Gore and Dust, whom nothing can
atone but humane Sacrifices, and to be in whose court it is much more eligible
to be his Horse or his Mule, than to be his Privado or Wife of his bosom, from
whose greatest kindness my good God ever defend me, for his mercies are cruel:
Yea even Hamed Ben Haddu who was his Ambassador here in England Three years
ago, although he was received and entertained here with extraordinary civilities,
and carress'd every where by all the endearments of kindness and respect, and
although by his fineness and Moorish subtilty, he stole into the Inclinations of
the well-meaning and good natured English, so that he obtained the reputation
of Ingenuity and candor, Yet the Dog has returned to his Vomit, and by woeful
experiment, all my Countrymen, who come under his power, find him a harsh and
cruel Master, who managed his affairs here with deep dissimulation, and now
improves his knowledge of English affairs, to the detriment and ruin of all the
Kings Subjects, with whom he has to do; if it be his fortune to meet or pass by
any of them, his custom is (as all the English can attest) to salute them with
a devilish Curse to the best of my remembrance expressed thus, Alli Haztebuck, i.
e. God roast your Father: he is indeed reckoned a great Master in the art of
Dissimulation and Flattery, a qualification, which seems very requisite in a
Courtier of such a Barbarous Bloody Tyrant as his Master is.

But to proceed, my fellow Christians in the next place, showed me the staff of
their life there, i. e. their Bread, which was of Barley, but black, and withal
it stunk, the Corn being kept Seven years under Ground before used, one Days
allowance if sold, would yield only Nine Fluces, which amount to Three
Farthings; Flesh is cheap, both Mutton and Beef, but Money is scarce, Two pounds
and a half of Beef, are ordinarily sold for a Blankil, i. e. Two pence
halfpenny, and Two pounds of Mutton at the same rate; good white-Bread is also
plentiful, half as cheap as in England; but what is this to the Slaves who
have-not a Farthing, and not a bit is allowed us without Money; I am confident
there is many a Christian there, who has not tasted a morsel of Flesh in Five
Months time.

The Country is a pleasant Champion Country, very Fruitful, well Watered,
productive of all sorts of Fruit in plenty; we Christians who arrived last,
were excused for Two days from Labor, only we were instructed in our
deportments to our Negro-Taskmasters, who afterward gave us severe chastisment
for our mistakes and lapses: our Work and Daily Labor was continually Building
of Houses and Walls; the Materials and Method is very Foreign and will appear
strange to my Countrymen here; there are Boxes of Wood of dimensions according
to pleasure, these we fill with Earth powdered and Lime, and Gravel well beat
together and tempered with Water, and when full, we remove the Box according to
order, and withdraw the Box Planks, and leave this matter to dry, which then
will acquire an incredible hardness, and is very lasting, for we have seen
Walls of some Hundred years standing as we were informed, and all that time has
not been able to do them any prejudice.

The King himself (what the reason of his humor may be I never had the
curiosity to ask him) will sometimes vouchsafe to work in the Lime and Dirt for
an hour together, and will bolt out an encouraging word to the Slaves them,
viz. as I remember, Liferus, that is, God send you to your own Countries, but I
judge, he either does not speak from his Heart, or else he hopes God will not
answer the Prayers of such a wicked wretch; with this sort of Labor I made a
shift to pass away all the Winter, and indeed without a quible, I had no other
shift or shirt, only the Charity of my fellow Slaves, who were better provided,
accommodated me with a covering from the Cold, which else would have endangered
my life.

The Reader, I suppose, will not think it strange, if I was dissatisfied and
very weary of my condition, and therefore I did often rummage all my thoughts,
for some expedient to ease me of this accursed way, not of Living, but Starving
and Dying daily: My mind did often flatter me with the greatest possibility of
Liberty by running away, and so confident I was, that I discovered my
intentions to several Christians, especially to those of my near acquaintance,
who by no means could be induced to hear the difficulties and dangers that
attended such a resolution: In the mean time my Friends in England had taken
some care for my Ransom, and had given order to Mr Luddington, an English
Merchant in Barbary, to endeavor my relief if One hundred and fifty Pounds
would effect it, which Sum Mr. Luddington acquainted me, he was ready to
disburse, if I could cut, (that is, agree with my Patron for my Ransom) for
Six hundred or Seven hundred pieces of Eight: I proffered the said Sum, but it
would not be accepted; upon which I looked upon my condition as desperate, my
forlorn and languishing state of life without any hopes of Redemption, (which
only could support our Spirts in the midst of such great afflictions, and
Bondage to those upon whom God and Nature seems to have impressed characters of
Slavery to the rest of Mankind) appeared far worse than the terrors of a most
cruel Death, I set up then my fixed and unalterable resolution to escape
whatever fate attended it, leaving the event to providence; I had more than
conjecture, that present Death was to be the reward of my endeavors if I were
retaken, for Three Spaniards, who some Two Months before were taken, making
their escape, the King caused them to be brought before him, and with his own
hands proved their Butcher, and Executioner, which cruel proceedings did wholly
dishearten the poor Spirited Christians, and banished all such resolutions
quite out of their minds: At length I opened my mind to Mr. Baxter (who about a
Year and a half before, had made an unlucky attempt to run away, but being
brought back he had the Bastinado in such a sort that he could not work for a
Twelve Month, having Irons continually upon his Legs) but notwithstanding,
such was his love of Christian Liberty, that he freely told me, that he would
adventure with any fair opportunity; after I had him thus engaged by his
promise, I gave him no rest, until we had pitched upon a Day; we also took into
our Cabal and share of our Fortunes, Two Bristol-men, who were ready at an
hours warning, when we appointed.

There are at Machaness at present about Eight hundred Christians of all
Nations, Two hundred and sixty whereof are English, several of which have
tendered Money for their Ransom, some Seven hundred, some Five hundred pieces of
Eight, some more, some less, but the King still put them off with this, that he
would clear none particularly, but that they should go all together.

January the First, The King set forward toward Santa Cruz, with an Army of
about Sixty thousand men, designing to quel his Nephew, who had made a
formidable Insurrection against him, in that part of his Dominions: We
Christians could not Inform our selves of the certain proceedings of these
Armies, neither did we much care, fight Dog, fight Bear, but this we learnt,
that it will be Two or Three years before his return, and it is not to be
supposed that any particular Christian will be released until he return;
besides, there is no hopes to be laid upon the most solemn word and
protestation of this swarthy Infidel Muley Ismael, for, as I have been
informed, about Four or Five years ago, by an agreement with Colonel Kirk, all
the English slaves were to be set at liberty at the rate of Two hundred pieces
of Eight a head, and the bargain was so far struck, that the Christians were
got a Mile out of Town, But the accursed Jews, (the stench and pest of the
Nations of the Earth, Malicious to all Mankind and loathsome and abominable
wherever they come, who not only have the blood of the Savior of the World
lying upon their heads, but are accountable for the blood of many Thousands of
his Members which they daily shed) These wicked Enemies of Christianity,
brought back these poor Christians into the house of bondage thus, they
prossered the Emperor as much money as the King of England tendered for the
Christians Ransom, if so be he would only lend them for a while, to build a
City for the Jews, and then they should be restored to the King; The covetous
Tyrant soon closed with these advantageous terms, and the Chrians were turned
over to the Jews, who employed them Three years in building a City, but when
finished, see the just Judgment of God! The Jews were turned out, and forced to
give place to the Moors: Another remarkable story concerning the Jews I cannot
but insert upon this occasion: About Three years ago, Mr. Bowrey of Bristol
was, with Twenty sail more, taken by the Salle-men, Bowrey had a parcel of Soap
in his Ship, which then did belong to the King; Ben Haddu Ambassador in
England desired to buy this Soap of the King, but a Jew out bid him, and so had
the Soap, for which dealing the Ambassador kept a grudge in his mind against
the Jews, and was revenged on them, after this manner, whilst I was there. He
informed the King that the Jews had imposed upon him and cozened him of Fifty
thousand pieces of Eight in the matter of the Soap, upon which the King clapped
up Ten of the chief Jews in Prison, until they should either pay the said Sum,
or else restore the Soap, which it is to be supposed, has been fold in
Christendom Two years ago.

An Account of my Escape, Mr. Edmund Baxter, and others from Barbary.
AFter a serious consideration, finding that no proffers for my redemption
would be accepted, I committed the conduct of my proceedings to Almighty
providence resolving to make an Escape in company of Three more, Edmund Baxter,
Anthony Bail, and James Ingram.

On the 29th. of May, agreeing with our Guardian-Moors for a Blankil, (i. e.)
2d. ob. a piece, we had the liberty to be excused from work that day, we went
there fore to the Town of Machaness, and having but a small stock of cash about
us, viz. nine Blankils, we laid it out in Bread, and two small Bullocks
bladders, with a little Burdock to carry Water in.

About Three of the clock in the Afternoon we began our journey designing to go
as far as an Old house, called the Kings house, distant about Three miles from
Machaness, resolving to conceal our selves about that house until night, and
promising to our selves the greater security, because we knew some Christians
used commonly to work there, but proceeding in our journey, we discovered upon
a loaded Horse the Moor who lived at that house, which obliged us to quicken
our pace, and keep a head of him, for, if he should come up with us, he would
easily discover that we did not belong to the said house, We made have
therefore before him, and coming near the house we discovered about Twenty
Moors sitting there; which accident of being hemed in behind and before by
these our enemies, put us into a great fright, and had in all likely hood
spoiled our design, in the very entrance, if providence had not presented to
our view, on one side of the house, a parcel of Lime-kills, to which, without
the Moors observation we immediately struck up, where we absconded our selves by
lying flat upon our bellies; about half an hour after came two Moorish women
thither, to gather up some loose wood, we considering it very inconvenient to
show our selves fearful, lest we should be taken for Renagadoes, spoke to them,
but they returned us no answer, following their business, and taking us, as we
judged, either for Moors or Christians employed about the said Lime-kills so
we continued there without any further molestation, until night, when we
proceeded on our journey, traveling about Eighteen miles that night, we passed
by a great many Tents, whence the Dogs came out and barkt at us, and the Moors
also favv us, but said nothing, mistaking us for their Countrymen.

That night we crossed the great River, which runs down to Mamora, about
Eighteen miles distance from Machaness, and about a mile from the bank of the
River, we found a convenient bush, where we took up our lodging all the day
follovving, without any disturbance: At night we found our selves obliged to
return to the said River, to furnish us with Water, the littleness of our
vessel, which contained not above a Gallon, being a great hindrance in our
journey: We continued our progress Twelve miles that night, which proved very
tiresome by reason of the weeds and bushes, and the nights were not so long
as we vvish'd; just about Daybreak, we found a convenient bush near to a
great Valley, where we reposed our selves; as soon as the day broke clear, we
saw abundance of Cattle grasing in the bottom, with Moors, who looked after
them, but, by Gods providence, none came near us, so that we lay safe all that
day, being the last day of May.

At night we set forwards, keeping the Woods, where were no Moorish
Inhabitants, only wild beasts, the less savage and formidable, which we often
saw, but they never attempted to come near us, we traveled about Ten miles that
night, and then crossed a River, which supplied us with Water, whereof we were
in want; on the other side of the River, we observed the footsteps of a great
many Cattle, which rendered the place, as we thought, unsafe for us, we made
therefore a little further progress in the morning, to the top of the Hill,
where under a large Oak we found a bush convenient for our reception that day,
but within a little while we were disturb in our repose, observing the Cattle
to come grasing up the Hill, directly to that bush, with Moors at their heels,
with all have therefore we pact up our luggage and ran a mile further, without
being discovered, until we came to a Pear tree, furnished with long-grass a
round him, there we took up our quarters all that day, being the First of June.

The night following, we intended to proceed, but it pleased God, to strike me
lame with the Gout, so that I was not able to stand, I was forced therefore to
remain there all that night, and the day ensuing, which was a great hindrance
to my companions, and affliction to my self: The readiest expedient to remedy
my distemper, which I could think upon was this, we made a fire in a hole in
the ground, and I put my Foot into the hole to draw away the pain, having also
a Lancet with us, I endeavored to breath a Vein in my Foot, but I could not
effect it, for the Lancet would not enter, however, I found some ease by the
force of the fire: My company being sensible of the delay, which my distemper
occasioned, began to be moved, insomuch that they told me, that if I could not
march with them that night, they must hold themselves obliged to take leave of
me, which added a great affliction to my sorrow, insomuch as I was the Author
and first mover of this escape; That I might not therefore be forsaken by my
companions, and in compliance to their importunity, I resolved to strain my
outmost power.

The third of June at night I endeavored to go, but in great pain, so that we
could not proceed above Three miles, when I was forced to pray my Companions to
stay but that night, and I did not question, but by Gods blessing, to be able
to travel with them the next, they consented, and so we took up our lodging for
the remainder of that night, under another Pear Tree.

The fourth of June I kept baking my foot all the day in the Ground, till about
two in the Afternoon, in the mean while, I procured Mr. Baxter to make me a
wooden Leg, which accordingly he did, I persuaded them, then, to travel about
Three or Four miles that afternoon, which would a little ease the labor of the
night, they agreed, I traveled about Four miles with that Leg, and then rested
till night on the top of a high Hill, whence we saw a great plain valley before
us.

At night we shaped our course clear of the Tents, and traveled over the edge
of the plain, about Six miles; We past by several fields of corn, the Moors in
the mean time hallowing to frighten the wild beasts from them: Crossing of a
River that night, we saw and heard several Lions, some approached so near that
we could almost have touched them, but as soon as we struck fire, which we had
prepared for that very purpose, they presently vanished; when the light began
to display it self, we took our quarters for the next day, which was June the
Fifth; At night we continued our course, when I was still lame, which was a
great hindrance to my company, but we were loath to part, our bread also was
almost at an end, the consideration whereof obliged me to strain hard to get
Eight miles that night: By resting the next day I found my self to be something
better, but then to qualify my joy for this, Another companion Anthony Bail
began to sink and give over.

June the Sixth, We set onward, and measured Ten miles that night, when we came
to a great Swamp, there my pain renewing, I fain would have persuaded them to
stay but by no entreaties could persuade them, so resolving to part, we shared
our Bread, which came to two half Rusks a piece; I endeavored to allure my
weak wearied Brother to abide with me, comforting him with the expectation of
Gardens, where we two more easily than the company of Four, might provide for
our selves; He would not stay; Being pressed thus with the consideration of being
lest alone, I Resolved to put forward, when it pleased God, that my foot became
perfectly whole and clear of the Gout; That night we traveled over a high
barren Hill, where we fancied we heard the Suss and noise of the Sea, which
encouraged us to mend our pace until we met with a Garden, where we gathered
about a dozen of small Pumpkins, a very comfortable assistance to us, now that
our Bread was all spent, for some we eat raw, and some we roasted in the
ground, whereby we found our selves considerably refresht: That night we made
no more then Eight miles, for meeting with a great Oak which was blown down, we
thought it inconvenient to overslip such an advantageous retirement for the
next day, which we were the more desirous off, because we heard a great many
Moors, though we could not see them.

All the next day we lay still and with exceeding contentment we heard the
noise of the Sea, at night we put on and came to the shore, where we found
whereabout we then were, viz. to the Southward of Mamora, we directed our
Course then Northward for Two miles, when we could discern the Castle, but
knowing that we could not go to the Northward of the Castle, because the great
River goes directly up into the Country, we turned back about a mile, and
finding a convenient bush, we rested there all the next day, hearing and seeing
a great many Cattle, but none came near us.

June the Eighth, We gathered about half a Peck of Snailes, and caught a
Land-Tortois, which we roasted and eat heartily, that day also, we saw a Ship in
the Offing, when night was come, we made down toward the Castle, and before we
were aware we fell upon a Moor making a fire, which forced us to draw back, the
Moor not discerning us, we fetched then a compass, and by another way came down
to the Castle, there we found a strong watch, which did wholly discourage our
expectations of relief from that place, so we set up our Resolutions for Salle,
about Eighteen or Twenty miles to the Southward, to see what good could be done
there, But before we parted with Mamora, we made bold with a little Barley and
Guinny corn, growing under the Castle, of each whereof we gathered about a
quarter of a Peck, to serve our necessities, and then we betook our selves to
our former nights refuge, the Bush, and after having consulted how to steer our
course for Salle, the result whereof was a long the Seaside, we rested all the
next day without disturbance.

June the Ninth, We traveled along the Seaside, where we saw a great deal of
Rast-timber, we concluded therefore, seeing the Ship in the Offing, to make a
Raft, which accordingly we did, and put off with it, but it would not swim,
boyart with us all, we came therefore a shore, and cut all our Lashings,
leaving it to the mercy of the Sea: We traveled Five miles toward Salle that
night, fearing least by staying long thereabout we should be discovered, for
our footing and trayling of the Timber had made such an Impression in the sand
as if an Hundred men had been there; That night we took up our quarters in a
Fig Tree, about Seven miles short of Salle where was no Inhabitant.

June the Tenth at night, we made forward to Salle, in the Road, we sell upon a
parcel of Tents, where though the Dogs were ready to seize us, and the Moors
themselves called to us, We made no answer and traveled on, without any farther
trouble or danger, until we came to Salle, as soon as we came thither, we made
toward the Gardens, and gathered some Pumkins, and because night was far
spent, we retreated about a mile out of Town, to find some place which might
secure us from discovery; we pitched upon a Bush in a great Valley, wherein we
resolved to enclose our selves the day following: About Eleven of the clock of
that day, we espied a Boy with a Dog keeping of Sheep, but yet not forgeting
his game, which was hunting of Partridges; He beat the bush wherein we were
lodged, and threvv in Stones, and the Dog also did his part, barking and
coursing about the bush, buthy miracle as we thought, we were not espied, though
we discovered abundance of fear amongst our selves, for if we had been taken
notice of, we could not otherwise consult our own safety, than by the death of
that poor silly Lad.

The eleventh day being past, at night we made a descent to the River of Salle,
about a mile above the Town, where we found a Boat, but could not with all our
strength launch her: Anthony Bail and I who were the only swimmers in our
company, made over to the South Side of the River, to see what purchase we
could make there, we found indeed Three boats, but they were all aground, so
that we could do no good with them; But in searching about the new Ships,
(which Five in number are building there) we found two Oars, with which we
swam over to our consorts, and all together we went down by the Rivers side, to
the Harbors mouth, but we could meet with no boat to put our Oars in; We saw
two Dutchmen in the River, but they kept a diligent watch, which hindered us
from carrying away their boat; We concluded therefore to bury our Oars in the
sand at some remarkable place, and so we betook our selves to find out a
sanctuary for the day following; We found a Fig Tree full of leaves, in an
unfrequented place, as we thought, on the North-side of the River, yet within
call of the Ships, which then were a building? Under the Covert of this
little Tree, though surrounded with Enemies and dangers, we resolved to expect
the protection of the next day; The Reader may possibly judge this an instance
of a Romantic courage, and an effect rather of rash boldness than prudent
consideration; Truly, he is in the right, for we our selves were of the same
mind, about the middle of the next day, upon this occasion, a Moor who had
newly vvasht his clothes, directs his course directly to our Tree, and there
hangs up his Al hage to dry whilst he himself sat down not far off, to lovvse
himself, an't please you; if providence did hinder him from discerning us, I
assure you it was not for want of provocation, as we all confessed, and indeed
I never in my life was in such a trembling fit, as that lovvsie Rascal put me
into.

The Twelfth day of June being past, at night we came down again to the
River, to look after a boat, which we had observed was moored in the River,
half a mile higher than where we found the Oars, this, we who could swim
found and brought to our consorts, We padl'd her down the River close by the
Dutch men, who savv us, but said nothing, then we put a shore, and fetched our
Oars, we continued padling, until we had past a Frenchman, lying at the
Bars mouth, who plainly savv us, but said nothing; So soon as we had left him
behind us, we shipped out our Oars, and Rovving right into the Sea, our
course by the North-star was West-North-West: when we had Rovved Four Miles
or thereabout, we discerned a Ship at Anchor, which obliged us to alter our
course, and Row Northward, until we had past her, fearing least she might be
a Salle-Ship, and we had learned at Machaness that Two of them were a
cruizing at that time, and not yet come in, therefore it was, that in distrust
of this Ship, we altered our course; we Rovved about Two Leagues without
the Ship, and lay upon our Oars; when Day broke up clear, we savv the Ship
with her Sails loose, I then acquainted my Consorts, that in my judgment, if
the Ship were of Salle she would make in for the Bar at that time, because
the Tide and the Sea breeze were then both favorable, it being High-vvater at
Seven of the Clock, but if she were an English Man of War, as we incessantly
vvish'd, then we thought the Sea-breeze would make her stand off to Sea:
Notwithstanding our opinions were various, and we were doubtful what to do; at
length I persuaded my consorts, with much ado, to row in and make her hull,
then the Ship stood off, and at length saw us, we pulled aboard, and found her
to be the Lark-Friggot Captain Leighton Commander; after some Examination and
Discourse about the Methods and Means of our Escape, I propounded to the
Captain a design which had newly taken strong possession of my Fancy, it was
this, that if he would accommodate me with his Boat, and those belonging to the
other Two Men of War, which were in Company, I would undertake to Pilot them
in, and to burn what Ships were then at Mamora; The Captain immediately stood
to the Northward, and came up with the other Two Ships, which were the
Bonaventure and the Grayhound; The Admiral was then Sick at Cales, so Captain
Macdonald being Eldest Captain, we went aboard him, and sending for Mr.
Fairborne, who was then Captain under Captain Priestman, who was Sick as
abovesaid, they held a Council about those propositions which I had made, at
first they seemed unpracticable, by reason of many difficulties, but especially
of the Bar, which is worse than that of Salle; But then when upon Second
thoughts they considered the forwardness of Men, who but that very Day had
escapt a heavy Slavery, and yet were willing that very Night to engage in the
action, they concluded it both possible and feasible, so they entertained with
approbation what I had proposed; After which I immediately returned with
Captain Leighton aboard the Lark, and communicated the result of the Council
with my Comrade Mr. Baxter, who was heartily pleased with what was undertaken,
and willing to go along, so he was ordered to go in the Bonaventure's Boat, and
was very serviceable, and who was better acquianted with that Bar, than I was.
Immediately orders were given to shave some Deal-boards, and saw some
Tarr-barrels, and make ready with all expedition; by Seven at Night, all things
were in readiness, the Friggots were riding Two Leagues from Shore, orders were
given that the Boat in which I was, viz. the Gray-hound's, should go a head,
Commanded by Captain Macdonald, who behaved himself indeed with great Courage
and Resolution, and the rest had orders to follow us; there were Three Barges
in all, and one Yawl, the number of Men concerned in the action, was Forty two,
who all had strict charge upon pain of Death, not to seek after Plunder, which
was punctually observed. About Eight at Night we put off from the Ships, and
betwixt Nine and Ten, we fell a little to the Northward of the Bar, but by Mr.
Baxter's assistance, we quickly righted our selves, and found the Bar; there
was a great noise upon the Shore, all thereabout had taken the Alarm, which did
nothing discourage us, we proceeded lustily, without any concernment at their
hideous outcries, which when the Moors perceived, and that we advanced with
undaunted Resolutions, they thought it best to fly betimes and secure
themselves and their Castle; in the mean time we pursued our design toward the
Ships, aboard which, there being a great many Lights, we observed the Moors
looking over the sides of the first we came to, which was the bigger of the
Two, they called to us, to keep off, we answered them with about Twenty
Granado-shells, which soon drove them overboard; they had not far indeed to
escape, for the Castle Wall was within a Boats length of the Ship, so without
any difficulty we presently entered; one Moor we found aboard, who was presently
cut in pieces, another was shot in the head, endeavoring to escape upon the
Cable, we were not long in taking in our Shavings and Tarr-barrels, and so set
her on fire in several places, she being very apt to receive what we designed,
for there were several Barrels of Tar upon the Deck, and she was newly Tarr'd
as if on purpose; whilst we were setting her on fire, we heard a noise of some
people in the Hold, we opened the Skuttles, and thereby saved the lives of Four
Christians, Three Dutchmen and One French, who told us that the Ship on fire
was Admiral and belonged to Aly-Hackum, and the other which we soon after
served with the same sauce, had the Name of Plummage Cortibe, which was the
very Ship, which in October last took me Captive, I cannot deny that I was
possessed with an extraordinary satisfaction to see this Ship on fire, and I
could not but admire the wonderful providence of God, to whom alone Vengeance
belongs, in vindicating my cause, and making me an unwitting instrument of
revenge, for the injuries I received from the owners of this Vessel.

Such was the fierceness of the Flames, that we were forced to keep off from
the Ships sides, whereby we became obnoxious to the shot of the Moors, who
from the Walls of the Castle made a great firing upon us, both of small and
great Guns, but with little or no Execution, for our Men, by the light of the
great fire having them in perfect view upon the Walls, made smart returns upon
them, firing incessantly upon them, and with that eagerness, that they quite
neglected their Oars, so that if the Tide had not turned to Ebb, we should
have run a great risque, our Men were so full of joy, hooping and hallowing at
the sight of so desirable a Bon-fire, that they never minded the dangers they
might be subject to; we were therefore forced to row the Bonaventure's Yawl,
who had lost all her Oars. In all this Action we had but one Man mortally
wounded, and two or three more slightly hurt: after we had completed our
business, and absolutely destroyed these Ships, we returned out of the River,
over the Bar, and pulled aboard the Friggots, Captain Macdonald received us
kindly, and gratified us with the entertainment of his Ship very frankly,
aboard which we staid until we came to Cales, there we went ashore, designing a
passage for England with the first opportunity; Captain Macdonald gave us
Certificates of our service in the late Action, and then Mr. Baxter and I took
leave of him; we did not stay long at Cales, before we met with an opportunity
for England aboard Captain Atkins, who came from Leghorn and was bound for
London, who very willingly granted us passage with him, and gave us civil and
welcome entertainment, whom God reward and all other our Benefactors,
particularly (though to some Readers it may seems immaterial, yet when occasion
offers, not to remember, to all good Men will appear unthankful, and I had
rather be taxed with impertmence than ungratitude) Mr. Hodges, who bestowed
upon us Four pieces of Eight in our necessity, God return his Charity into his
own Bosom with blessing and increase, and honest Captain Gutteridge, who sent
a Barrel of Beaf and a Hundred weight of Bread, least we should lie too
chargeable upon Captain Atkins in our passage home, who the First day of July
1685. set Sail from Cadiz, and arrived in the Downs the 26th. of that Month.

Thus have I given a short and plain account of my Captivity and Escape, with
the circumstances that attended it, and though possibly my Style may appear rough
and unpolished, which the courteous Reader I hope will a little excuse,
expecting no other from a blunt Seaman, acquainted with nothing so much as
Dangers and Storms, yet I do profess I have Penned this Narrative with all the
sincerity and truth, that becomes a plain-dealing Englishman: My design and
aim in all (kind Countryman and courteous Reader) is, to excite with me thy
praises to our God the only deliverer, who has delivered me from a cruel and
severe Captivity, and withal to stir up thy grateful resentments, for the
happiness, peace and freedom, that thou enjoyest under so excellent and well
tempered a Government, but most especially to move thy pity for the
afflictions of Joseph, to excite thy compassionate regard to those poor
Countrymen now Languishing in misery and Irons, to endeavor their releasment
according to thy power, at least by importuning Heaven, that during their
Captivity God would support them with his Grace, to bear patiently their
afflictions, and to resist all Temptations until in his good appointed time, he
vouchsafe them a happy deliverance, Amen.

FINIS.

