A CAVEAT AGAINST Covetousness, OCCASIONED By some scandalous and pernicious
Fruit of it, in one amongst us, whose heart went after it.

Written for Admonition to others, BY CHARLES PHELPES.

1 Timothy 6. 9, 10. But they that will be rich fall into temptation, and a snare,
and many foolish, and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and
perdition; For the love of Money is the root of all evil, which while some
coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through
with many sorrows. Joh. 8. 7. He that is without sin among you, let him first
cast a stone at her. LONDON: Printed in the Year 1668.

TO THE READER In General, And especially to such as have heard the Father, and
been taught by him as the truth is in Jesus, and know that he is indeed the
Christ, the Savior of the World.
THe ensuing Treatise was at first intended only for mine own private use, and
the helpfulness of such as by the providence of God are committed to me to
bring up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord; and though I was urged by
the persuasion of some to make it public, yet it prevailed not with me,
considering mine own great weakness, and unmeetness, and that another had
intended, if God preserved him, and gave opportunity to have a blow at this
root of all evil, to wit, Covetousness, who was more abundantly sitted of God,
and prepared to every good word, and work, and faithful in the Lord; But now I
consented, and was willing to do that which formerly I knew not how to think
of; The Reasons which swayed me at last hereto, were

1. And principally, because the Person before referred to, who, in the latter
end of the Preface to his Treatise, Entitled, Fornication condemned, signified
his intention to discover the sinfulness of this Sin, I mean, my dearest
Brother, and most faithful Helper in the Lord, Thomas Moor Junior, was removed
and taken from the earth, and died in the Lord, before he had accomplished, or
begun to accomplish what (as to this particular) was upon his heart: His days
are past, his purposes broken off, even the thoughts of his heart, as Job 17.
11. he rests from his labors, and his works follow him, and shall be remembered
and recompensed in the resurrection of the Just; For the iniquity of our
Covetousness God was wroth, and smote us, in taking away that merciful man,
that man of kindness and godliness from amongst us. See and compare Isaiah 57.
1. with Verse 17. To him to live was Christ, and to die gain, and it is far
better with him that he is departed, and is with Christ, than to have continued
longer in the flesh; nevertheless to have abidden in the flesh had been more
needful for us that our rejoicing might have been more abundant in Christ
Jesus, and this mercy we might have enjoyed had our Conversation been as
becomes the Gospel of Christ, as Phil. 1. 21-27. He might have been restored
to us again, had our Conversation been without Covetousness. See Heb. 13. 5.
19. Our ways, and our doings have procured this severe testimony of
displeasure to our selves, this is our wickedness, because it is bitter, it
reaches even to the very heart; My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my very
heart, my heart makes a noise in me, I cannot hold my peace, because thou have
heard, O my Soul (in this stroke) the sound of the Trumpet, the Alarm of War.
Compare Jer. 4. 18-21. with Chapter 6. 13-15. Woe unto us that we have sinned;
that though we have sitten before God as his people, and heard his words, (yea
have been hearers, made a trade of it) and this his servant has been unto us
as a very lovely Song of one that has a pleasant Voice, and could play well on
an Instrument, for we heard his words, yet have not done them, our heart has
not been estranged from its lust, but has gone after its Covetousness, and
therefore God has begun to make us desolate, and to know (by his deprivation)
that a Prophet has been amongst us. Ezekiel. 33. 29-33. He is now taken from the
evil, and there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave,
where he is, and whither we are going; He has no more a portion for ever in
any thing that is done under the Sun, nor shall he return to perfect any thing
left undone. Now then that I might execute the Will of the Deceased (though
most unworthy) I have done what I have done.

2. Upon the former account, and in concurrence with him that is now removed, I
have committed this to public view, because I judge that the evil herein
warned of, is not only very hurtful and pernicious in it self, and provoking
to the eyes of Gods glory, (as I have endeavored to demonstrate) but also (as I
fear) very much inclined to, and entertained, not only by such as have a form
of godliness upon them, and deny the power thereof, but by such also as have
known, and believed the love that God has manifested to us, in sending his Son
to be the Savior of the World; Oh that their hearts were not too generally
inclined to it, yea that this spot, which is not the spot of Gods children,
were not in its fruits so easily discernable upon them, that it may be found
without secret search, so as that they teach the wicked ones their ways, and
strengthen the hands of evil doers. I have a little observed of late, and seen
somewhat of it (if I be not deceived, Oh that I may be mistaken in it) some
grievous, and sadning evidences of it in Gods pleasant plant; not only in the
great miscarriages of one, which occasioned the considering this place of
Scripture, but in others also; in some, leading them in stead of taking wrong,
and suffering themselves to be defrauded, to do wrong, and defraud, and that
their brethren, and others also, and that before the unbelievers, even in their
view and presence, causing them to open their mouths wide against the Name of
God, and his Doctrine, and stumbling and offending the weak, 1 Cor. 6. 1-9. In
others, hindering them from such a promoting the things of Christ, and
endeavoring the good of their brethren, in their word, as their hearts have
been set for, and inclined unto, because their expectations have not been
answered in the conveniences, and accommodations of the things of this present
world; In others, in shutting up the bowels of their compassions when opened,
and not remembering to show mercy, but even adding sorrow to sorrow, and
increasing affliction to the afflicted, Psalm. 109. 16. Job 6. 14-27. and 24.
21. In others, intangling them so with the affairs of this life, that they
cannot wait upon the Lord with his people without distraction, and so not
please him who has chosen them to be soldiers, 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4. I might add
more, and have spoken more particularly, but that I love not, on this subject,
to speak so openly; Oh tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of
Askelon, lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice; Now to this end that I
may be some way instrumental to to the awakening my self and others, to search,
and try our hearts and ways, even to search them as with a candle in the light
of Gods testimony, diligently and narrowly to search into them, that we may, if
this iniquity be in our hearts and hands, put it away; I have therefore been
willing to become a fool, Oh that I could truly say, for Christ's sake.

3. Because (as the consequent of the former) I am even afraid, lest Gods
judgments should be further poured forth upon us, even such, and of such a
nature, as in which he will turn the Songs of the Temple into howlings, and
send a famine of hearing the words of the Lord, (as is after said) I am
persuaded this iniquity retained and served, and the fruit thereof, in saying
to those that prophecy, Prophecy not to us right things, speak smooth things,
etc. has already provoked God to make breaches amongst us, and to order it in
his providence, that some of these faithful ones shall no more prophecy, that
others shall not take shame: and it seems to me, as if God were still
threatening to take away his tabernacle, as of a Garden, and to destroy his
places of the assembly; for the iniquity of our covetousness he is still hiding
himself, and is wroth, Micah 2. 2. 6-11. Oh that we may consider it, so as to
flee it, before the decree bring forth, and the day pass as the chaff, that yet
he may turn away his displeasure, and comfort us according to the days wherein
he has afflicted us; Or however we may be hid in the day of the Lords anger,
and he may be a light to us when we sit in darkness.

As to my own weakness, I acknowledge that the shame of my face does cover me,
and I have cause to cry out, My leanness, my leanness; but yet there is mercy
and grace with him to whom I should study to show my self approved; it should
be a small thing with me to be judged of men, or of man's day; its not he whom
man commends, is therefore approved, and no matter though men curse, if God
bless; Oh that I may have to do with him with whom is forgiveness, that he may
be feared; and that he would pardoning, and healing whatsoever he sees amiss in
me, prosper this work, is the desire of him who is

April 30. 1668. The most unworthy of the least of Gods mercies, and unskilful
in the word of his righteousness, Charles Phelpes.

A Caveat against Covetousness.
LUKE 12. 15. And he said unto them, Take beed and beware of Covetousness: For
a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses.
WHile our Savior in the foregoing part of the Chapter, was (as we may see)
instructing, and encouraging his disciples, not to be ashamed of the Testimony
of the Lord, but to be partakers of the sufferings of the Gospel, according to
the power of God, as 2. Tim. 1. 7, 8. One of the company said unto him, Master,
speak to my Brother that he divide the inheritance with me. Verse. 13. It seems
the person thus speaking had some good esteem of our Savior, by the Title he
gives him, and matter he commits to him; To which request our Savior answers.

1. Particularly to the man himself: And he said unto him; Man, who made me a
Judge, or a divider over you? He would not own, or exercise any such authority
as he was a Peace-preacher, and while in a mortal body; he would not take upon
him to divide the difference, or determine what appertained to one, or to the
other, though requested by one party; For his Kingdom was not of this world,
Joh. 18 36. Nor did he seek for, nor would accept of any worldly greatness,
while here; Yea when they would have come by force, and have made him king, he
departed again into a mountain alone, Joh. 6. 15. and instructed his disciples
that they should not seek for such worldly greatness, as the Kings of the earth
may lawfully have, and exercise. Math. 20. 25, 26. Luke 22. 24. 26. How unlike
to our Savior is he that pretends to be his Vicar, and would be accounted the
Head of the Church on earth, who not only judges of private matters when
desired by one party, and divides to others equally their rights; but converts
the revenues of others to himself, deposes Kings, and acquits their* Subjects
of their obedience to them, and disposes their kingdoms to others; Yea and
causes their lives to be taken away, and so exalts himself above all that is
called God, or that is worshiped. And how unsuitable to the instructions of our
Savior to his disciples, is the exercise of the Synagogue of Satan, the Mother
of harlots, and her Daughters; who inflict mulcts, and outward punishments on
those that transgress their law, and are more strict in punishing the breach of
them, then of his, who is the only head, and husband of his body the Church.

2. Our Savior gives answer to this man's desire more generally, and for
instruction to others in this 15. verse, And he said unto them, etc. And in
this he includes his disciples as directly spoken to, or however speaks in
their hearing, and that for their admonition also.

From the occasion of the words we may note,

1. In that this man now makes this request to our Savior, it may teach us;
That while men sit before Christ as his people, and are among those that hear
his word, yet their heart may be far removed from him, and from his teachings.
Isay. 29. 13. it may be wandering after it is covetousness. Ezekiel. 33. 31. 33.
While the outward man is presented before the Lord, and therewith a man
professedly waits upon him; Yet the heart, and desire may be set upon, and
wandering after other things, it may be led away with diverse lusts from the
mindfulness of what is declared; and thereby advantage is given to Satan to
steal away the word of the Lord; Yea he now especially watches for such an
advantage, and is very busy that he may take away that which was sown in the
heart, lest they should believe, and be saved; For the Gospel is the word of
faith, which would, were it retained, work faith, and so save them; faith
comes by hearing, and bearing of the word of God, Luke 8. 12. Great need have
we therefore to take heed how we hear; to keep our hearts with all keeping,
when such a price is put into our hands, lest what we have heard slip away, or
be taken from us.

2. In that this man adds this desire after those instructions, and admonitions
given by our Savior to his disciples, we may learn; That such is the
deceitfulness of that sin that dwells in us, that it will lead us to pervert
what is right, and so it becomes unprofitable to us; It appears that this
person was convinced by our Saviors discourse, that he was a good, and upright
man, and one to whom he might commit his matters in this particular, and from
whom he might expect what was just, and equal, and therefore he thus requests,
Master speak to my Brother. This he would not have committed to every one; but
perceiving he spoke the words of truth, and soberness (though not enough
setting his heart thereto) he pursues his own evil design, under pretense of
liking, and esteeming our Savior, and owning himself as his disciple; Thus also
those men who having seen our Saviors Miracle of the loaves, and were thereby
convinced, and confessed that he was of a truth that Prophet that should come
into the world; yet perverting what was right, in stead of receiving the law
from his mouth, they were seeking meat that perishes, and therefore would have
taken him by force, and made him King; that so having such a mighty one over
them, they might have been delivered from their enemies, and enjoyed outward
peace, fullness, and prosperity, and been the head of the nations round about
them, Joh. 6. 14. 15. See also, Joh. 6. 24-27. Even so at this time, as it was
then so it is now: many that are in some measure convinced of the goodness, and
truth of the glorious Gospel, and have some esteem of his disciples who walk in
Christ as they have received him, may yet carry on a selfish design; they may,
while they hear Christ's words, and frequent the assemblies of his people, seek
meat for their lusts, and be pursuing some by-end of their own.

3. In that the man thus vents forth his covetous desire, after our Savior had
thus spoken to his disciples, it may admonish us, not to condemn the Gospel, or
declarers of it, because still the heart of those that hear are inclined to
covetousness; For Christ may labor in vain, and spend his strength for naught,
and in vain, Isa. 49. 4. 5. And so may his servants also do, Gal. 4. 11. Phil.
2. 16. How many were there that heard our Savior, before he was delivered into
the hands of men (yea and many might hear him gladly) who yet received not his
grace, or received it in vain, and therefore they joined with those that
apprehended him, Math. 26. 55. This is an evil way, to condemn the Gospel of
Christ, or his disciples, because of the miscarriages of those that hear it, or
come amongst them; and walking herein, men condemn the generation of the just;
yea and Christ himself, and his Apostles: nor is this a good way to judge of
doctrines, viz. by the demeanours of those that hear them, but to bring all to
the light, to the Law, and to the Testimony, 1 John 4. 1-3. 6. Isa. 8. 20.
Those that hear the instructions that cause to err from the words of
knowledge, may have a form of godliness upon them, they may appear righteous
before men, as the Pharisees new, and old, and yet the leaven and doctrine they
embrace be hypocrisy; And on the other hand there may be many transgressions
found with those that hear the Gospel, and yet it is a doctrine according to
godliness; Yea there may be great miscarriages found with such as have formerly
obeyed from the heart the form of doctrine delivered to them, when the things
they have heard have been let slip, and yet still the Gospel is the Gospel of
God, preached according to his commandment; giving a faithful discovery of him
in Christ, and leading to him; and which he will own, and preserve from this
generation for ever: And if while we seek to be justified by Christ, through
faith in his blood, without the works of the law, we our selves are found
sinners, is Christ therefore the Minister of sin? God forbid, Gal. 2. 17. Or is
his Gospel a doctrine of unrighteousness, and ungodliness, because those that
believe it, believe it in vain? No: Far be it from us that we should blame it.
And yet this is the way, and manner of the world, yea and of the saints of the
world also, to lay the fault upon the Gospel of the grace of God, as preached
in the words that the Holy Ghost has taught, if any of those that hear it turn
aside to crooked paths, as if it were a doctrine of licentiousness, and opened
a gap to all profaneness and wickedness; such reproaches (it may seem) were
cast upon it, as preached by the Apostles, as if men might continue in sin,
either because grace had abounded, or that grace might abound, Romans 3. 5-8. and
6. 12. Though yet there is no doctrine does so much show the vileness of our
sins, and the vanity of all idols, as this, in the faithful declaration of it;
This shows the odious and provoking nature of our natural vileness, and
filthiness, and the abominableness of continuing therein after grace
vouchsafed, and the necessity of our being washed, without which no man shall
see the Lord, in witnessing of Christ, and showing that there was no other way
to purge sin away from before the presence of God, then by the abasement of the
Son of God; he must needs have suffered, and be raised again, or otherwise we
could not be brought back to God, nor could there have been any fountain opened
for our washing, but at this dear Cost, and that his end in giving himself for
us was, that he might deliver us from this present evil world according to the
will of God, and our Father. Oh how shall they that are dead to sin (this way)
live any longer therein; know ye not that so many of us as were Baptized into
Christ (washed into union and fellowship with him) were baptized into his death
(into the knowledge and acknowledgment of his death, in which we see the
greatness of his sufferings, that he might take away our sins, and become a
fountain through his blood for our washing, and cleansing, Romans 6. 2. 3. 1 Pet.
4. 1-3. Romans 8. 3. 4.) And yet mean time, they that reproach this worthy name,
as if it encouraged men to continue in sin; and especially such as deny the
grace of God in Christ to Manward, these new Pharisees, they overlook the
direct fruit of their damnable heresies, in which they deny, and teach men to
deny the Lord that bought them; I mean those Doctrines in which they teach that
Christ dyed not for all, nor by the grace of God tasted death for every man;
but only for some elect ones (as they say) who shall certainly be saved in
conclusion, and be overcome by an irresistible power; and as for the rest they
are reprobated, or at least past by, so as there is no true, and saving grace
vouchsafed to them, and therefore they must in the issue necessarily perish.
Do not these apprehensions received, and heartily digested, lead men thus to
reason? If I be elected, or of that elect number for whom Christ dyed, I shall
infallibly be saved, and brought in by an irresistible power, and till then I
cannot come in, and therefore till then I had as good walk according to the
sight of mine eyes, and imagination of mine heart, I shall have life in
conclusion; And if not, if I be reprobated, or past by, how then can I live?
surely this is the evil fruit of that root of rotteness; And yet as it was with
the Pharisees of old, who charged Christ with being a blasphemer, and what he
said with blasphemy, while they themselves were indeed such, and guilty
thereof; so it is now with these new ones; they fault the Gospel of Christ, as
preached by him, and the Apostles, as that which gives encouragement to walk
after the flesh, whilst, in truth that is the issue of their false doctrines;
this way of the old Pharisees was their folly, and yet their posterity, the new
ones, approve their sayings; such are to be pittyed, and prayed for, that their
eyes may be opened; for many of them have a zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge, Romans 10. 1, 2, 3. But this is their manner, when such as are hearers
of the Gospel miscarry: and woe to the world, because of offenses, it is a great
judgment to them, when God permits, and orders such stumbling blocks before a
people, and the Father, and the Sons fall together upon them, Jer. 6. 21. But
though Israel thus play the harlot, let not Judah offend, let them not have low
thoughts of the Testimony of Jesus, because there are such spots found on some
that join with them, as are not the spots of his people; but rather love his
law more abundantly, by how much the more others make it void, and so receive
it to purpose, that they may give none occasion of offense, but that men seeing
their good works, may glorisy their Father which is in Heaven, 1 Cor. 10. 32.
Math. 5. 14. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 11-18. and 3. 16.

4. In that our Savior gives this admonition not to the man only who made this
request, but to others also, we may learn; That when miscarriages are found
with one that hears the word, there is occasion given to warn others also, and
that all of us should (in stead of judging the law of liberty) take warning,
and beware of that evil root which brought forth such pernicious fruit in one
amongst us; Thus our Savior by occasion of the young man's departure from him,
as the issue of his Covetousness admonishes his disciples, Mark. 10. 17-24. see
also Math. 16. 22-27. Oh let us so cousider the transgressions of others as to
receive instruction, that we may fear, and do no more so presumptuously. The
fall, of Gods people in former times are therefore recorded, not that we should
imitate them, or boast against them, as if our mountain were so strong settled
that we could never be moved, but for our admonition, least we fall after the
same example of unbelief, Romans 11. 18-22. 1 Cor. 9. 27. and 10. 1-12. Heb. 4.
1-11. Be we not high-minded, but fear; For we have sin also dwelling in us, and
have sinned, and if we have been preserved from such gross evils as others have
been polluted with, it is by grace we are saved, and that excludes boasting and
high-mindedness every where; And let us be warned on fight of others evils to
beware of that which has occasioned their wanderings, for otherwise our evils
will be aggravated if when we see the falls of others, and the bitter fruit
thereof, we consider not our ways, so as to turn our feet to his testinonies,
Jer. 3. 7-11. Zeph. 3. 6-7.

5. In that our Savior on this occasion so largly instructs, and admonishes
this man and his disciples, etc. it shows that he knows how to bring good out
of evil, to cause the wrath of man to praise him, etc. Psalm. 76. 10. And to
make the miscarriage of those that hear him of blessed usefulness to
themselves, and others; This is not the fruit of their wandering, but of his
graciousness to man, and more abundant kindness, and pity to his little ones,
(who after tastes of his graciousness have back-slidden) while he is waiting
upon them, that he may be gracious to them; He needed not this man's venting
forth his covetous inclination to the occasioning these Instructions, for he
knew before what was in his heart, but he takes occasion thereby to magnify
the greatness and cordialness of his love; even as in our first departure from
God in Adam, he took occasion to show forth his grace toward us, so as that
where sin abounded, grace abounded much more, so he does still, while called to
day; he does permit men sometimes to fall, when they have hardened their hearts
against the reproofs of Instruction, and to reap somewhat of the fruit of their
former stiff-neckedness, that they may see what an evil and bitter thing it is
to forsake him; and yet brings light out of darkness, and is graciously
creating the fruit of his lips, Peace, Peace to him that is far off, and to him
that is nigh, and will heal them. So that such may say, Thanks be to God, they
were the servants of sin, but have now from the heart obeyed that form of
Doctrine delivered to them, Romans 6. 17. Thus he suffered Peter (when he would
not be admonished) to deny him, that he might, seeing somewhat of the evil
fruit of his confidence, be broken off therefrom, and have pride hidden from
him, and not trust again in his own strength. See also John 6. 30-60. and 20.
25-29. and 3. 4-21.

6. In that our Savior does not simply admonish of this evil desire of the man's
as vented forth, but of the root of it, he does instruct us, not only to cut
off the superfluous branches, but even to lay the Axe to the root of the tree,
James 1. 21. But to this more may be said hereafter.

In the words themselves we have,

1. An Admonition which our Savior gives; Take heed, and beware of
Covetousness. 2. A Motive, or Argument which he lays down, to seal home the
Admonition; For a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which
he possesses.
From the whole Verse we shall note,

1. That those that hear the Word need to be admonished to take heed, and
beware of Covetousness. 2. That they may take heed, and beware of it in the
light and strength of Gods grace. 3. That the consideration of this, that a
man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses, is
also proper, as viewed in the glorious Gospel, to move us to take heed, and
beware of it.
1. That those that hear the word had need to be admonished to take heed, and
beware of Covetousness.

That this may be of some usefulness to us, consider

1. What this Covetousness here admonished of, is. 2. What contained in the
admoniton, Take heed, and beware of it. 3. We shall demonstrate it; that they
need, and show wherefore they need to be admonished of it.
1. What this Covetousness here admonished of, is.

We shall first show what it is not.

1. It is not a serving God in those works of his providence he gives us to be
exercised in here under the Sun, and diligence therein; though in so doing we
may be serving our Covetous inclination; Yet we are not forbidden to exercise
our selves in any honest Trade, Way, or Employment, though in all our
conversations to beware of this iniquity: God appointed to man some exercise to
be exercised in while he was in the state of innocence, namely, to dress, and
to keep the Garden, Genesis 2. 15. And has since given a travel to men to be
exercised in, Exodus 20. 9. Eccl. 3. 10. And warnes of idleness, and
slothfulness, and shows the evil nature, and fruit of it; Yea and there are
commandments given by the Lord Jesus to the believers, that if any would not
work, neither should they cat, etc. Romans 12. 11. 2 These. 3. 10. Tit. 3. 14. Yea
and the Apostles, and their fellow-laborers did work, and so make themselves
an ensample to the beleivers to follow them, 1 Cor. 4. 11. 12. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 7-9.
And not only is such instruction, and example given to the believers in
general, but to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, how that so laboring (as
the apostle had done) they ought to support the weak, and c. Acts 20. 28-25.
Yea our blessed Savior has given us an example, who was not only the reputed
Son of a Carpenter, but a Carpenter also, Mark. 6. 3. Luke 2. 51.

2. Nor is it a desiring of him those things that are needful for our cheerful
seeking after, and glorifying him; in order thereto we may desire such meat,
drink, clothes, and such a prospering the work of our hands, as may conduce to
our hallowing of his name, and to such an end he has instructed us in that
doctrine of right prayer to say, Give us day by day our daily bread, Phil. 4.
6. Though yet in such desire also Covetousness is to be watched against in the
light of the Lord, and we to be submitted to God, and his infinite wisdom, and
faithfulness, who knows what is most conducible to such an end better than we
do; and therefore are we willed by the mercies of God to present our bodies to
him, to be ordered by him as he sees good, and taught to pray, Thy will be
done, etc. Give us this day our daily bread, Math. 6. 10, 11. Phil. 4. 5, 6, 7.
Pro. 30. 8, 9.

3. Nor is it all coveting that we are admonished of, or of all that which is
so called; we are instructed to Covet earnestly the best gifts, 1 Cor. 12. 31.
and 14. 39. There are also the lusts of the spirit, effected by spirit in the
Testimony of Jesus in the spirit of the believer, and so the spirit lusts
against the flesh, Gal. 5. 17. The new spirit and heart of the hearty believer,
from the discovery; and beholding of the excellency, and comeliness of Christ,
his love, and loveliness, and having tasted of his graciousness, as a new born
babe desires the sincere milk of the word; it earnestly desires more to know
Christ, win him, and be found in him, to be conformed to him, and clothed on
with the fruit of his righteousness; it pants after, and thirsts for God,
even the living God, and longs, and lusts for him, to see further his glory,
and power in the Sanctuary (in his Son, and in the assemblies of his hidden
ones) even as those that cannot be satisfied without wisdom, they (while
walking in the spirit) seek it as men seek silver; this the one thing they
desire, and for which they have counted, and do count all other things as loss,
and dung, in comparison thereof; and in persuing after it, and to the promoting
of it, nothing they suffer moves them, nor count they their lives dear to
themselves, that they may more know and be made partakers of Christ. Oh that we
were filled more with these lusts of the spirit, and were more coveting those
excellent things, that durable riches, and righteousness in Christ, Psalm. 27.
4. and 42. 1, 2. and 63. 1-8. Pro. 2. 2-6. and 8. 18. Gal. 5. 16, 17. Phil. 3.
8-10.

But the Covetousness here admonished of, is

An affection, and lust of the flesh, in which a man does love this world, and
the things thereof, and (not content with Gods provision, allowance, and gift)
does greedily desire after more of it, that he may be rich in, or toward
himself.

1. I say, it is an affection, and lust of the flesh, as distinguished from,
and opposed to the lusts of the spirit (as before) and so to show unto us
whence it springs, namely, from the flesh, the carnal mind, or wisdom of the
flesh, which is sometimes called Covetousness, and so opposed to Gods
testimonies, which is the wisdom from above, to show the nature of it, and that
it is the source, and fountain of this corrupt affection, and lust, Psalm. 119.
36. For from this corrupt fountain, this iniquity proceeds, even from that
wisdom which is not from above, it descends not, or comes not down from the
Father of light, but ascends out of our hearts, and is earthly (affecting, and
lusting after, and leading us to love, mind, and savor earthly things)
sensual (leading us to judge according to outward appearance, and to look upon,
and mind seen things which are temporal, and to live by sight, or sense, as
opposed to the living by faith) and Devilish (as being that which we received
from him and are therein like to him, leading us to aspire after an equality
with God, and to have a selfe-sufficiency in our own hands, and to that end to
worship and serve Satan, the god of this world, who beautifies, and commends
the things thereof;) Jam. 3. 15. Thus our Savior says; From within, out of the
heart of men (namely out of that corrupt understanding, and judgment that is in
him, as of him, received from, and poisoned by Satan, and strengthened by the
principles, and spirit of this world) proceed evil thoughts (of God, and of our
selves, and of the things of this world as if blessedness did consist in them;
and in our possessing abundance of them) and thence proceeds Covetousness,
Mark. 7. 21, 22. This carnal mind is enmity against God; (he says not, it has
enmity in it, nor only that it is an enemy to him, for then there might
possibly be a reconciling of it, that notwithstanding, but it is enmity it
self, made up, and composed of nothing else, so as it can never be reconciled)
it is not subject to the law of God, nor indeed can be, it may be purged out,
and destroyed, but can never be reformed, Romans 8. 7. It would persuade us there
is no God, Psalm. 14. 1. Or that he is not able, or faithful to give unto us in
his way what we stand in need of; and that though he has manifested his love
to us in Christ, and given him for a standing witness of it, that we might,
when we are in darkness, and see no light trust in the name of the Lord, yet
this insinuates to us, that he has a secret will contrary to his revealed, and
though he speak us fair, yet there are seven abominations in his heart; such
blasphemous thoughts of God issue from this fountain of enmity, this
Covetousness in the root; and herewith also, it sets a great Iustre upon the
things here below, as if true blessedness stood herein, and leads to bless the
Covetous whom the Lord abhors, Psalm. 10. 3. and to judge that if we had an
abundance of these things we should see no sorrow, yea to look upon it as an
undoubted evidence of God's peculiar love, and favor to us, Zech. 11. 5. and
from hence springs this hellish lust, and love to the things in the world,
which is like the root of it, and bears it is name; For as the wisdom of the
flesh is enmity, so is the love of the world also; and so the Apostle says;
know ye not that the friendship (or love) of the world is enmity with God? Jam.
4. 4. This is like unto, and the spawn of the carnal mind, and as the
consequent thereof leads us to labor to be rich; hence that, Pro. 23. 4. and
3. 5. It is our wisdom, and understanding that thus perverts us, and leads us
to covet greedily, and if riches be increased to trust in them, Ezekiel. 28. 4-6.

2. It is an affection to, and loving the world, and the things thereof; for
from our wisdom's beautifying these things the affections are placed upon them;
the eye of the soul fixedly viewing these things, affects the heart, and it is
set upon them, and therefore Covetousness is called the love of money, 1 Timothy
6. 10. And many times lovers of silver, is rendered Covetous: see Luke 16. 14. 1 Timothy 3. 3. 2 Timothy 3. 2. And this is put in, in this description of Covetousness
as a part of it, and immediate cause of the eager desire after more, that by
showing more is contained in it then a desire of more, some may be undecieved,
who are polluted herewith, and yet excuse themselves; For say some (who give
too much cause to others to suspect their hearts are polluted with this
iniquity, by their withholding more than is meet) we thank God, we are content
with what God has given to us, and gives us in serving him in his providence,
and do not desire another, we Covet no man's gold, silver, or apparel, we have
enough, and are content with our portion; to such it might be said

1. Though it were supposed that what they say is true, yet they may be
polluted with this evil, for the setting the heart on what they have, though
honestly come by this is Covetousness, Psalm. 62. 10. Jam. 4. 4. Our Savior
gives the admonition we are speaking to, when the man might be seeking only
his own; the Apostle instructs, and directs that such an one as might be chosen
into the office of a Bishop should not be not only greedy (...) of the filthy
lucre, which is the lust in Covetousness, but also not Covetous, viz, not a
lover of silver, 1 Timothy 3. 3. If any man love the world, the love of the Father
is not in him, 1 John 2. 15. so that did such speak true herein, and were their
desire, or lust so bounded, as that they coveted no more than what is theirs
honestly, yet if the heart be set upon that, and they give their loves thereto,
there is in this a treacherous departing from the Lord, the fountain of living
waters, and an adulterous going after vain things that cannot profit, and the
waters will overflow this lying hiding place; These are dwellers on the earth,
here being their treasure, and here their hearts also. And yet,

2. This is still further a lying refuge; For together with, and as the issue
of this love of money, there is a lusting after more, and though men's hearts
persuade them othewise, yet they are deceitful above all things, and he that
trusts therein is a fool, Jer. 17. 9. Prove. 28. 26. For when the heart
conceives such an excellency in riches, as the wisdom of the flesh persuades
him there is, it then has an eager desire after an enlargment of his treasure,
and though possibly the lust be not particularly set upon this, or that which
is our neighbors, yet generally the desire is wandering after the things of the
earth. Hence whereas the Apostle writing to Timothy uses two expressions to set
forth this iniquity, to wit, greediness of filthy lucre, and Covetousness, he
uses but the former, writing to Titus on a like occasion, see and compare 1 Timothy 3. 3. with Tit. 1. 7. to signify that the love of silver ends in a
greediness to more; hence also the Apostle John when he admonishes, not to love
the world, nor the things thereof, he adds, For whatsoever is in the world, the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, etc. is not of the Father; to signify
that the lust is a concomitant, and consequent of the love of it, 1 John 2. 15.
16. So the Apostle Paul when he says, they that will be rich fall into
temptation; to demonstrate it he says, For the love of money is the root of
all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10. And this leads us to the next branch of the
description, viz.

3. It is a lust of the flesh, in which a man (not content with Gods provision,
allowance, and gift) does greedily desire after more; and this some give as the
whole description of it, namely, a desire of more, and though (as has been
seen) more is in it, yet this is also a branch of it; From the wisdom of the
flesh which beautifies the things of this world, and leads us to think there is
a real excellency in them, the heart following after it is inclined hereto, and
enamored hereon, and hence, and together herewith there is an unsatisfied
desire after more, a greedy coveting all the day long; hence Covetousness is
called the lust of the eyes, even of the eyes of the soul, the mind, 1 John 2.
16. with Ephesians. 2. 3. Thus it is said of the king of Babylon (whose dominion was
very large, so as he might have been content yet) He keeps not at home, but
inlargeth his desire as Hell (or the grave that says not, it is enough, Pro.
30. 16.) and is as death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathers to him all
nations, and heapunto him all people, Hab. 2. 5. In which is showed to us the
nature of this lust; And while the heart goes after it, such is it is
unsatisfiedness that it breaks all bounds; such a man is not content with Gods
provision, though he has prepared all things for us in his Son, and made such
provision in his great, and precious promises, that in exercising our selves to
godliness, he will give us what is needful thereto, the Lord will be our
Shepherd therefore we shall not want; yet here being no sensual satisfaction,
there is a continued craving, as if this were nothing; Yea though he has given
us allowance to seek of him day by day our daily bread, who has also power to
forgive us our sins that might cause him to withhold it from us, and to seek it
in such works of his providence as he gives us to be exercised in, that we
might take our own portion, and give to others, so as in all doing it to his
glory; Yea and though he gives to all flesh their food, and does men good --
filling their hearts with food, and gladness; yet as not contented with all
this, there is still a crying, Give, give, a desire after the forbidden fruit,
as if nothing else would make happy, and in the eating of this we should be as
Gods, and have a self-sufficiency in our own hands; hence Covetousness is
opposed to a being content with such things as we have, Heb. 13. 5. Thus it was
with Ahah; though he governed the kingdom of Israel, and therefore had large
possessions, yet because Naboth would not give the inheritance of his Fathers
to him, he was heavy, and displeased, as if all he had was nothing, 1 King. 21.
2-4. Yea thus it was with the first man Adam, though God had given a world of
creatures to him and given allowance to eat of every tree of the garden, the
tree of knowledge of good and evil only excepted; yet listening to the lie of
the tempter, and conceiving, in eating of that tree, he should be
self-sufficient, he conceived a lust hereto, as if it were best, because not
allowed; and did eat of the forbidden fruit; and this is still the nature of
this iniquity, a man is like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest; always
desiring, and craving for the possessing of an abundance, and thinking, Oh
could I but attain to so much money, or so much by the year, then I should be
contented, and is even sick till the desire be accomplished (as Amnon was for
his sister Tamar, 2 Samuel 13. 2-4.) and yet if he attain thereto, that which was
at first the end of his desire is now but a means to a further, and he as much
unsatisfied as before, as was Amnon when his former lust was satisfied, 2 Samuel
13. 15. And it cannot be otherwise while the heart is inclined to it is
covetousness, because there is no rest to the soul in these things, all that
which is not bread is unsatisfying, Isa. 55. 2. He that loves silver shall not
be satisfied with silver, nor he that loves abundance with increase, Eccl. 5.
10. Pro. 21. 26. He may indeed resolve with the rich man in the Parable (which
our Savior immediately joins to this admonition, and instruction) that he will
say to his soul (when he has so much in his hand as he proposes to himself,)
Soul take thy rest, eat, drink, and be merry; but as he never came at it, so
more generally it is with him that lays up treasure for himself, and is not
rich toward God, Luke 12. 16-21. He never arrives at that rest he proposes to
himself in these things, his Soul shall not dwell at ease; For these things are
not of the Father, not the rest he has prepared for our weary spirits, Christ
only is that, and in taking his yoke upon us we shall find it, Isa. 28. 12.
and 55. 1, 2. Math. 11. 28, 29. Hence our Savior when he is admonishing of this
iniquity of Covetousness, and showing the unprofitableness of it, says, What
shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world, and loose his own Soul?
Math. 16. 26. He may herein secretly intimate, that a man following his own
wisdom has a will, and lust for this, even to have all the world in his own
possession, as it was with that proud King of Babylon (as before) yet if he had
it, it would not so fill his heart, as to satiate his desire, but such is the
nature of this disease of the Soul, that (like the Dropsy, the more they have,
the more they crave; and had such a man the whole world (which Satan may
promise to give him (as he did our Savior) to gain worship from him) yet he
would still desire (with him) that there were another world to conquer, and
possess. And as this is the nature of this evil, so that he proposes to himself
in it, is

4. That he may be rich in, or toward himself, that he may be self-sufficient,
as opposed to the being rich toward God; this is the end of his greedy, and
Covetous desire, that he may heap up for himself; A man may (as before is said)
with Gods allowance desire of him to give us food convenient, and to bless the
work of our hands, so as herein submitting to God, to this end, that we may be
accommodated to seek after the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof,
that we may more know, and glorify it, and be rich toward God, in dispensing
according to our capacities, as he has given us instruction, and
encouragement, but now the end of this greedy desire is, that he may lay up for
himself treasure on earth, where moth, and rust corrupt, and where thieves
break through, and steal, of which we are admonished, Matthew. 6. 23. We are not
forbidden to lay up treasure for our selves, but are allowed, instructed, and
encouraged to provide our selves baggs which wax not old, a treasure in the
heavens that fails not, to lay up for our selves treasure in heaven, and that
in giving to them that stand in need, as the love of Christ constraines, to do
good to all, but especially to to the household of faith, as we have
opportunity, with this assureance, that our labor of love shall not be in vain
in the Lord; And thus doing we shall lay up for our selves in store a good
foundation (not for the present to build on, or that this should now be the
foundation of our faith, and hope, and matter of our feeding, and ground of our
rejoicing; no, the bread which he gives, and which believers feed on, is the
flesh of Christ which he has given for the life of the world, Joh. 6. 51. The
sheep, as those that know not themselves thereby, nor have this as the
foundation they are built on, they shall say, Lord when saw we thee an hungered,
and fed thee? etc. Math. 25. 37-40. Though Christ rejoices in them, as produced
by his grace, taking away the mixtures, and they shall be rewarded, but) for
the time to come, 1 Timothy 6. 19. But this laying up for our selves consists
notwith this covetousness, it proposes no such end in it is inordinate desire,
it knows not how to be subject to the doctrine of God, and it is instructions,
nor indeed can it be, it is afraid to trust God, and leads a man to think that
what he possesses is safer, and securer, then in the hands of God, and that
whatever is thus parted with is lost for ever; it is indeed a casting our bread
upon the waters, and there may be no recompensing of it by those to whom it is
given, but after many days they shall find it, that do it for Christ's sake,
even now, as is good, and when evils are upon the earth, Eccl. 11. 1, 2. But
however in the resurrection of the just, Luke 14. 14. But alas covetousness had
rather have some good security here, than Gods word, it thinks he is
unfaithful, or unable, and hence the end of his desire whose heart goes after
it, is to lay up treasures for themselves, and theirs here, that they may be
rich toward themselves, so as they may not need by a daily exercise of faith
to go out of themselves, to seek their daily bread of God. Thus the Prophet
declares the end of this evil covetousness, Heb. 2. 9. We to him that coveteth
an evil covetousness, that he may set his nest on high, that he may be
delivered from the power of evil; This is his end, that he may set his nest on
high, either that they may be lifted up in station, and condition above the
common sort of men, and have respect, and reverence given unto them, that men
may bow the knee before them, Isa. 24. 21. And thus usually they are lifted up
when riches increase, even to the disdaining, and despising those that have not
what they have, and hiding themselves from their own flesh, (as to doing them
good, and as persons ashamed to have any familiarity with them, unless it may
tend to the promoting their design) and vexed, and discontented, if they have
not such honor, and reverence given to them as they look for, Esther 3. 1-6.
and 5. 9. 14.

2. Or also, and rather, by setting the nest on high, may be meant, a being
advanced in order to their living, and faring deliciously, and enjoying
security, and so they would set their nest on high, to this further end, that
they might be delivered from the power of evil, Jer. 22. 23. and 49. 16. Obad.
4. That they may be delivered from all evil, and afflictions, that is, that
they may be delivered in times of famine: the rich man's wealth is his strong
Tower; He thinks he shall be provided for, whosoever wants; He has goods laid
up for many years; And so when God is ordering sicknesses, and diseases, he
thinks to secure himself, either by removing his habitation, and changing the
air, which he may do, that he may escape the infection, and disease; and if it
be upon him, yet he has wherewith he may furnish himself with the best, and
most skilful Physicians, and so may meet with recovery again. Or if wars arise,
and God send the sword to the place where he lives; he can remove his dwelling
into another place, or country, or if he fall into the danger, his riches will
be a ransom for him, his gift will make room for him: Or if through following
his covetousness he commit such an iniquity of shedding of blood, Adultery,
etc. as deserves to be punished by the Judges, yet his greatness is such, that
he is above the lash of the Law, or can easily by his bribes pervert judgment,
and blind the eyes of the wise, that they shall not find him guilty; To this
end he coveteth greedily, that he may be delivered from the power of evil.
Hence the admonition, when God's judgments were threatened to be executed upon
his people; let not the rich man trust in his riches, Jer. 9. 17-23. The rich
man's wealth is his high Tower, and a strong wall in his own conceit, Pro. 18.
10, 11. This is covetousness as to it is principle, nature, and end.

2. What is contained in the admonition, Take heed, and beware of Covetousness.

1. This is contained, or however supposed, in order thereto, see, view, and
consider what it is, and the evil, and bitter nature and fruit of it, that so
we may further beware of it; for how shall we beware of that we are ignorant
of? that the Soul be without knowledge it is not good, safe, or profitable;
hence as our Savior when he admonishes his disciples to beware of false
prophets, in order thereto, he gives them this rule to know them by, by their
fruits ye shall know them, (namely by the fruit of their lips, their doctrines,
and by the fruit and effect of those doctrines, in which they might perceive
they tend to corrupt from the simplicity in Christ.) Math. 7. 15. 16. Implying
they could not beware of them unless they knew them; so may we say in this
case, we shall not flee from this dangerous evil, unless in some measure we
see, and perceive what, and of what nature it is, like that, Jer. 2. 19. Know,
and see that it is an evil, and bitter thing, etc. And that we may see it, so
as to avoid it, let us not lean to our own understanding, Pro. 3. 5. Or consult
with the principles, and spirit of this world, or the leaven of the Pharisees
which is hypocrisy, and will more transform us into this iniquity of which
they are so guilty; But that we may see, and take heed of it, let us take beed
according to Gods word, Psalm. 119. 9. The commandment is a lamp, and the Law
light, etc. To discover to us, and preserve us from what is evil, Pro. 6. 23.
24. Such is the deceitfulness of our wisdom that it will color over this
iniquity, as if it were our duty to follow it; persuading us it is a wise, and
circumspect care, and looking after the main, and that we are worse than
insidels if we lay not up for our selves treasures here on earth. But all
things that are reproved are made manifest by the light, etc. This gives a
faithful, and impartial discovery of it in the cross of Christ, and there shows
the vileness of it, and abominableness of inclining the heart thereto, after
the grace of God has been bringing salvation to us, that we might in his thus
rouzing of us, awake, and stand up from this dead work; and whosoever looks into
this perfect law of liberty, and continues, shall be preserved from it, and be
blessed in his deed; Oh house of Jacob, walk ye in the light of the Lord, Isa.
2. 5. Ephesians. 5. 12-14. Jam. 1. 23-25.

2. There is further contained in this admonition, an owning, and confessing
it is vileness as discovered, and a departing from it, and not coming near to
it, a withdrawing from it as from that which is very dangerous, and pernicious;
so much is imported in the admonition. And in that he gives it in two
expressions he may hereby note the exceeding vileness of it, how highly soever
men esteem it, to the end we might remove far from it. Indeed (as we have seen)
it is needful hereto in the glass of the Gospel to behold, and view it, but this
is not all; For he that is an hearer of the word, and not a doer, has this
great advantage, and price put into his hand, he beholds himself, lusts, and
ways, and not liking the discovery of the word, he goes his way, hates the
light, and comes not continually to it, and then forgets what manner of man he
was; now he may think himself to be in a good condition, and free from that
which the glass discovered him to be guilty of, Jam. 1. 23. 24. Joh. 3. 20. But
this is required of us in the light, and strength of his grace, to flee from
it, as from the face of a serpent. And indeed this admonition thus doubled, is
seldom, or never used, but here in admonishing of this way of iniquity, and
elsewhere in admonishing of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy,
and which prepares men for it; as Math. 16. 6. Mark. 8 15. Possibly to denote
this sin to be more abundant sinful, and dangerous (as may be after shown) that
we may avoid it. And so take heed, and beware of it, that is, 1. Of this
affection, and lust of the flesh, and so of the root of it, the wisdom of the
flesh, and leaven of the pharisees, abstain from this fleshly lust, 1 Pet. 2.
11. Otherwise it will harm us, and break forth into practice; For can a man
carry fire in his bosom, and not be burnt? Our Savior here does not simply warn
of this man's covetous desire, as vented forth, but of the root of it, to
instruct us to take heed to our selves that our hearts be not defiled and
overcharged herewith; obey it not in the lust, see it be ye kept, or preserved
from inclination to it in your hearts; and so have no fellowship with it, ask
not counsel at this stock, or the root of it, cease from thine own wisdom; seek
not thy direction, and guidance from this in any matter; Pro. 23. 4. Psalm. 119.
36. Ephesians. 5. 3-5. 11. Yea, flee from it, 1 Timothy 6. 9-11. Hasten from it with
that eagerness, and diligence, as the covetous man is pursuing it; haste,
escape from it for your life, as those that know the end thereof is everlasting
death. And hate it, Exodus 18. 21. Pro. 28. 16. Abhor it, not as an ordinary
enemy, but as an implacable, and irreconciliable one, and therefore so deal
with it, mortify it, put it to death, Romans 8. 13. Col. 3. 5, Yea, look upon it
as enmity it self against God, that can never be reconciled.

2. And let your conversation in all your actings toward God and men be
without it, Heb. 13. 5. Take heed, and beware of exercising your selves in
covetous practices, 2 Pet. 2. 14. And from these we shall more easily abstain,
and lay apart the superfluity of naughtiness, as it flows forth, and shoots
out it is superfluous branches, if this filthyness in the root, affection, and
lust of it be abstained from, Jam. 1. 21.

3. In this admonition as thus doubled, may be signified, a readiness, and
inclination, even in those that hear the word, and are disciples of Christ, to
have their hearts inclined hereto; hence this with other lusts called their
members on the earth, and they so often admonished of it, Ephesians. 5. 3-5. Col. 3. 5.
And as this may be intimated to us in the admonition as thus pressed upon them,
that even believers have sin dwelling in them, and the lust, and affections
thereof to be crucified, and abstained from in the name of the Lord, so also it
may show unto us one reason of our need to recieve, and drink down this
admonition; for if we had not the root of it in us, or might not be defiled
herewith, then there were no need to take heed, and beware of it; But we shall
add other demonstrations.

3. We now come to give some demonstrations, that those that hear the word, and
are disciples of Christ need to be admonished of this iniquity, and to show
wherefore they need it.

Demonstration 1. Such need to be warned of, and to beware of this iniquity;
because when the heart goes after it, it deprives, and bereaves the soul of
good, as Eccles. 4. 8. And that both of getting good, and doing good.

1. This covetousness gone after, deprives the foul of getting good, when a
price is put into the hand of such an one as is inclined thereto, he is so
prevailed over by this affection, and lust, that he has no heart thereto. And
that 1. sometimes it has such dominion over a man, that it causes him to
neglect, or not come to, and wait at the posts of Wisdoms doors, when he is
invited thereto by Wisdoms servants; then (like those in the Parable) they
begin to make excuse; one has bought a piece of ground, and he must needs go
see it: (there was a necessity for this, this must be done, or otherwise he
might be blamed of idleness, and carelessness by others,) And another had bought
five yoke of oxen, and these are to be proved; and a third had married a wife;
and therefore he could not come; (he must now take care for the things of the
world, and provide for the charge that usually follows such a condition, that
he may have for his wife, and children, and to lay up for them, Luke 14. 16
20.) See how this lust pursued and followed, led the professed Church to
reason, Mal. 3. 14. 15. They said, it was vain to serve God (to frequent the
assemblies of his people, to speak often one to another of the name of the
Lord, or to hear it spoken of. Compare it with ver. 16.) and what profit is it
that we have kept his observations; though great is the gain of godliness, yet
because it appeared not so, but now the times were evil, they might expose
themselves to the hatred of men, and come to loose all (for they that wrought
wickedness were set up) therefore though they had kept his observations, yet
now because it stands not with their outward advantage, they are thus reasoning
with unprofitable talk; and so how many are there now, that have gladly heard
the gospel of our salvation; who because of their love to this present world,
and lest they should loose all, have turned away their ears from the truth,
and forsaken the assemblies of God's peculiar people, and are turned to fables,
and vain things that cannot profit, which is lamentable to consider, Ezekiel. 19.
12. 14. Math. 19. 21, 22. Heb. 10. 25. Or

2. Though this iniquity have not such dominion over them as quite to withdraw
them from the assemblies of Gods people, but that they whose hearts are
inclined thereto come, and sit before him as his people; yet this covetousness
withholds* good things from them, and bereaves the soul of good, and that

1. Sometimes by minding the things here below, and having been unsober in their
exercise about them, the outward man is so unfitted, and they so surprised with
sleepiness, and heaviness, that they hear little, or nothing that is spoken;
either their thoughtfulness, and carefulness, about what they shall eat, what
they shall drink, and wherewith they shall be clothed, or how they shall
increase, and heap up more for themselves, hinders them, so that their heart
takes no rest in the night, as Eccles. 2. 23. and 5. 12. Or rising early, and
over-working themselves, not watching to sobriety, thereby the body is so
tired, and unfitted, that either they are asleep, or though their eyes are
open, yet the heart is asleep, it seizes on them like an armed man. Threfore
the Apostle, when he admonishes the believers not to sleep as do others, he
adds, but let us watch, and be sober, 1 These. 5. 6. as implying that if we
watch not in the light of the Lord against evil, and for good, and be not sober
in our use of, and exercise about things here below, we shall be disposed to
sleep as do others, and deprive our souls of good; For he that sleeps in
harvest (when an opportunity is put into his hand for gathering for the winter,
for receiving, and laying up knowledge, and hearing for now, and hereafter,
such an one) is a son that causes shame, Pro. 10. 5. Or 2. if it have not such
prevalency over them to the so unfitting the outward man, yet while this
iniquity is retained, and served against the light, and instructions of the
grace of God, it will deprive, and bereave the soul of good, and that either

1. Through their delight in, and love to the things of this world, the heart is
so taken up with this as it is treasure, that it is far removed from him, and
from his word, so as it becomes unprofitable to them: when any one hears the
word of the kingdom, and understands it not (considers it not, or sets not his
heart thereto) then comes the wicked one, and catches away that which was
sown in his heart, Math. 13. 19. Yea this will so seize upon one when the heart
follows it, that though the outward man be waking enough, yet a man may be so
unfitted hereby, that he hears nothing, or immediately what is heard* is let
slip (as I my self have often perceived, and speak as one faulty in this thing)
so that if he were presently asked what has been spoken, he could not tell,
and should he go about to answer, would cause shame to himself, Mark. 8. 17.
18. the cares of this world (which are the fruit of covetousness, do so
overcharge the heart, so greatly burden it, that the man is made altogether
unmeet for any thing that is good, Luke 21. 34-36. Or

2. Though men are diligent in hearing, and attending at the posts of wisdoms
doors, yet this affection, and lust followed, leads to pervert what is right,
and so to turn our table into a snare, as it was with them, in Joh. 6. as
before is said. It so deprives of understanding, as to move a man always in
hearing to be seeking meat for his lust, and so to be wresting what he hears,
as that he may, through his own wisdom, which is enmity against God's word, seek
to strengthen himself, and make provision for this lust of the flesh: Thus it
was here in this Luke 12. While our Savior was admonishing his disciples in the
hearing of the multitude of saving their lives, and strengthening them against
the fear of parting with them, and so consequently of parting with every thing
for his sake; the man, as overlooking the scope, and end of our Saviors words,
and only conceiving that he was a good man, vents forth his covetous desire to
him; there was not the least thing, in the instructions, and admonitions given,
to encourage hereto, yea they were altogether against covetousness; and yet so
brutish will this lust make a man, as to turn that which might have been for
his welfare into a snare unto him; Thus we might see in many things; when a man
hears the Gospel of Christ faithfully, and without hidden things of Dishonesty
preached; in which is shown to us the greatness, and strength of God's love, as
manifested in Christ, and his loathness, that men should perish, and how his
grace has abounded where sin abounded; this covetousness being inclined to,
will now lead a man to strengthen himself in his evil way, and secretly thus to
reason; Seeing he is so gracious, and so cordial a lover of mankind, I shall
have peace though I walk after the imagination of mine own heart; I may
continue in this my sin, and God will be merciful to me notwithstanding; Hence
the Apostle after he had bin showing how God commends his love to us in that
while we were yet sinners Christ died for us, and the freeness, and largness of
his grace in this gift of grace, that it exceeded the offense of the first man,
etc. Romans 5. He then, to show how that wisdom in us, that covetousness in the
root, would pervert this, adds; what say we then, shall we continue in sin that
grace may abound? God forbid, Romans 6. 1-3. so when a man with the instructions
of the grace of God is admonishing of sloathfulness in business; and showing
how unsuitable it is to the grace of God, and those commandments given us by the
Lord Jesus, and examples set before us for our imitation, to be idle, and that,
such as will not work shall not eat: now this covetousness, perverting what is
right, will both lead a man as with respect to himself, to be unsober in his
exercise about the things here below, and to work, that he may lay up treasures
for himself here on earth, and suppose this to be godliness, and a virtue,
because opposite to the former vice, though indeed it is another extreme, of
which we are warned, Math. 6. 19. Ephesians. 4. 28. Or else it will lead him as with
respect to others to be over quick-sighted, and say others are idle, and will
not work, and such should not eat, the Apostle has so commanded, and pretend^^
this to be their duty to withhold from them, when they are serving their
covetousness; hence the Apostle, when he had warned of idleness, and commanded
with quietness to work, and eat their own bread; he adds; But ye brethren, be
not weary of well doing; as intimating, that the flesh would be ready to
pervert this, and lead a man to withhold more than is meet, 2 These. 3. 10-13.
And so when people are low, and in straits, and come to hear the tidings of the
freeness of God's grace in Christ, and what this will work in them that receive
it with the heart; how this will frame them to be giving all the day long, to
give to him that asks, according to our ability, etc. Oh says this
covetousness, this is a blessed doctrine indeed, and these are the people we
will cleave to, and follow with; while, mean time, their heart goes after
their covetousness, and they professedly follow Christ for the loaves sake, and
are seeking meat for their lusts, and never consider, how this grace comes to
save them, and in bringing salvation, moves, and strengthens, that denying
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, etc.

3. Or else it will cause a man to take offense at the light because of it is
reproving, and discovering quality, and secretly to depart from it; so as not
so as not so to receive the love of the truth as to be saved thereby; it will
cause a man to hate reproof; so that, though such may sit before God's
servants, as his people, and hear their words* and show much love: Yea the
Ministers of Christ (in their speakings) may be as a very lovely song of one
that has a pleasant voice, and they hear their words, yet they do them not,
because their heart goes after their covetousness, Ezekiel. 33. 31. 32. This will
lead to hate the light, when it discovers their deeds to be evil, and to hate
those that are faithful reprovers, as those before spoken of: Son of man, says
the Lord, the children of they people are talking against thee by the walls,
and in the doors of the houses (namely, privately, and secretly, so as the
prophet might not know it, till God revealed it to him,) and yet they say, Come
I pray you, and hear what is the word that comes forth from the Lord Ezekiel.
33. 30, 31. Joh. 3. 19, 20. So the Prophet Jeremy also signifies, and bewailes.
To whom (says he) shall I speak, and give warning, that they may hear; behold
their ear is uncircumcised and they cannot hear (not hear in hearing, not
endure sound doctrine) behold the word of the Lord is a reproach to them, they
have no delight in it; Whence was this? For from the least of them even to the
greatest of them, every one is given to covetousness, Jer. 6. 10-13. Yea so
brutish will this make a man, when given to it, as even openly to reject,
despise, and seek to destroy the word of the Lord, when it strikes against it,
and shows the evil nature, and fruit of it; Or that God will so proceed in his
judgments, as to strip them of the objects of this lust: See what Jehoiakims
wickedness was, when he heard the roll read, which Jeremy had received from the
Lords mouth, and saw others cut it, and cast it into the fire; yet he was not
afraid; Yea though some made intercession that he would not burn it, yet he
would not hear; Whence proceeded this open wickedness? surely from hence; Thine
eyes, and thine heart (says God to him) are not but for thy covetousness, and
therefore he could not endure to hear of the King of Babylons coming to destroy
the nation. Compare Jer. 36. 23. 29. with Chap. 22. 17. This also was the cause
of their wise men's, Priests, and Prophets rejecting the word of the Lord, Jer.
8. 9, 10. Hence they are said to be such as fear God, who hate covetousness,
Exodus 18. 21. And however certain it is, that though men have received the word
of the kingdom in some measure to purpose, yet going out, these thorns, the
cares of this world, and deceitfulness of riches, and lust of other things
entering in, choke the word, and it, and so the man, becomes unfruitful, Math.
13. 22. Mark. 4. 18, 19. Luke 8. 14. And this leads to the next.

2. It bereaves, and hinders the soul of good, namely of doing good, and so
consequently of being further made partakers of it, and enjoying it; For if we
be wise, we shall be wise for our selves, and so 1. it hinders from doing good,
with this worlds good, which he is putting into our hands, that according to
what we have, we might do good to all men, and especially to the household of
faith, and in doing which, as moved, and instructed by the grace of God, we
might in some measure adorn the doctrine of God our Savior; and so either 1. it
will shut up the bowels of our compassion when opened, that we shall not be
faithful, as is required of stewards: God's end in giving to us the things of
this world is, that we should according to our ability do good therewith in our
life time, Eccl. 3. 12. And hence I conceive they are called another man's, Luke
16. 13. Not only because they pass from one to another, and no man can be sure
of them, but as they received them from others (for they brought nothing into
the world with them) so it is certain, they shall carry nothing out with them:
But also because he is intrusting men with the things of this life as stewards,
who must give an account hereof to him; he is putting them into their hands,
that according as he is instructing, and moving them they should dispense to
others, and those that are rich might be rich in good works, ready to
communicate to the needs of others; even as it is with stewards, that which is
committed to them is not that they should lay it up for themselves only, but
that according to the instruction of their Lords, they might take their own
portions, and dispense thereof to others of their fellow servants in the
family; so he is giving these things into our hands, that we might herewith
make to our selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, with this
uncertain riches: But now this Covetousness retained and served, shuts up the
bowels of our compassions, when God is opening them on sight of our brothers
need. Thus it was with the rich man, he had an opportunity to have made Lazarus
his friend, with this Mammon of unrighteousness, but neglected it; and this our
Savior adds, after he had been instructing to faithfulness in disposing what is
committed to us, and admonishing of covetousness, as intimating, this was the
root of it, Luke 16. 9-25- This also was the cause of the great evil of the
fool mentioned in the parable, in this, Luke 12. when his ground brought forth
plentifully, he thus reasons with himself; what shall I do because I have no
room where to bestow my fruits? (had he observed the instructions of the grace
of God, he should not have been at a loss for this, for the poor are always
with us, that we might do good to them, and refresh their bowels, in relieving
their necessities, this he never thought of, but) he said, This will I do, I
will pull down my barn, and build greater, and there will I bestow all my
fruits, and my goods, etc. This man God calls fool, because he thought not of
laying up his treasure better, or in a better place, even in heaven, and this
was the issue of his covetousness; and hence it is immediately joined to the
admonition we are speaking to, Luke 12. 15-20. And such a fool is every one
that lays up treasures for himself, and is not rich toward God, ver. 21. 2.
Or if it have not such dominion over us as quite to shut up the bowels of our
compassion, but we are dispensing to others; yet still this covetousness
consulted with, and yielded to, will hinder, and deprive us of good, and that
either

1. By causing us to do what we do niggardly, and sparingly, and so not as a
matter of bounty, but of covetousness, 2 Cor. 9. 5, 6. And to do what we do
grudgingly, as that which is a grievous thing, and makes us sad, and sorrowful
to part with any thing; or at best to do it of necessity, because we must do
it, it is our duty to do it, and so do it according to the oldness of the
letter, and not with a cheerful, willing, and prepared mind, and then it is
not accepted, but a dead work, and for which there is no reward. Compare 2 Cor.
9. 7. and 8. 12. with 1* Cor. 9. 16, 17. Indeed the doing what we do out of
necessity, and because it is our duty simply, this is of high account with some
men, who desire to be teachers of the law, and know not what they say, nor
whereof they affirm; and therefore the great motive they use to press others
forward to any good work is, Because it is men's duty to do it; and so these
leaders of the people (who as they are too like the Pharisees in being opposers
of the grace of God to sinners, so in this that they are covetous) teach men to
err in every work of their hand; but such a doing only, is unacceptable with
God, for he loves a cheerful giver; And to this, I say, this evil root leads
men, to do things of necessity, and therewith also sparingly, and to withhold
in their givings more than is meet (as Pro. 11. 24.) and keeps them from
abounding in the work of the Lord; hence the Apostle when he gives us
commandments by the Lord Jesus to those things in which liberality, and
cheerfulness is to exercised, he warnes of this iniquity, Heb. 13. 1-7. Let
(says he) brotherly love continue (even that peculiar manner of love with
which they are to be loved, and which leads us to do good to them, especially
who are of the household of faith, otherwise we shall love in word, and in
tongue, not in deed, and in truth, 1 John 3. 17, 18. Jam. 2. 14-17.) Be not
forgetful to entertain strangers, etc. (to take them in, Math. 25. 35. Lodge
them, and use hospitality toward them, 1 Timothy 5. 10. Job. 31, 32.) Remember
them that are in bonds (especially for the Gospel, and so remember them as that
brotherly love may continue in the exercise of it toward them, in coming unto
them, and visiting them, giving meat to them that are hungry, etc. Math. 25.
35, 36.) Remember them who have the rule over you, (not only in reaping their
spiritual things, but in dispensing to them of our carnal things, etc. 1 Cor.
9. 11. Gal. 6. 6-10.) Now that we may thus love in truth, and walk in the
exercise of love, he does between these instructions, insert this admonition;
let your conversation be without covetousness, as sinifying that otherwise we
shall not do, or do negligently, and grudgingly what his grace requires of us:

2. Or else, in showing love, this lust followed will lead us to seek after
filthy lucre, and so to the enriching our selves; to love them that love us, to
do good, and lend, hoping for somewhat again, and then what thanks shall we
have, or good shall we do; Luke 6. 32-35. Hence the Apostle when he instructs
to walk in love, adds; But covetousness let it not be once named amongst you,
Ephesians 5. 1-3. implying, that if this be not watched against in the light of the
Lord, it will lead us in walking in love to be aiming at our own advantage, or
providing for the present time, or time to come, when we may possibly fall into
want also; or else to do it out of a desire of vainglory, that we may have
praise of men, Mat. 6. 2-4.

2. It hinders and deprives the soul of good, with reference to, and in their
speakings to others, in which they should speak as the oracles of God (both as
to the matter, in speaking as they speak to every thing, and as to the manner,
in so speaking as they instruct, and move us, namely that abstaining from
fleshly lust, they have their conversation honest, chaste to the design of
Christ) that God in all things may be glorified by Jesus Christ; and so 1. it
sometimes keeps those that believe on Christ from confessing him, Luke 9. 59,
60. and especially in times of tribulation, and persecution for Christ's sake;
Oh how will this covetousness inclined to persuade men to favor themselves,
and to keep their mouths as with a bridle when there is danger, for fear of
loosing their liberties, and goods, and bringing upon themselves shame,
reproach, and poverty; insinuating this to be the greatest folly that can be;
this will thrust sore at men, that they may conceal the words of the Holy One;
and therefore also our Savior here may give this admonition so generally as to
include his disciples, that they should take heed, and beware of covetousness,
when he had been instructing them to hold forth the word of life; and therein
to partake of the afflictions of the Gospel; lest otherwise they should be
ashamed of the Testimony of Christ. This may be included in the cause of the
Rulers not confessing him, who believed on him; lest they should be put out of
the synagogue, and the reby be deprived of the advantage, and honor that
hitherto they had received, Job. 12. 42. This made Demas forsake the Apostle,
because he loved this present world, 2 Timothy 4. 10. And so the Apostle says,
while some have coveted after money, they have erred from the faith, (both from
their holding fast the profession of it, and so persisting from the faith it
self, or from the believing of it, 1 Timothy 6. 10. Or else 2. if such seem to
hold on their former way, and pretend to seek the good of men in their
confession of Christ, yet retaining a secretinclination to this hurtful root,
it will pervert them in their way, and render them unfruitful, and
unsuccessful; hence the Apostle, in his instructing Timothy, and directing him
in his choice of those that are meet to go before others in the word of the
Lord, tells him, that such an one must not be greedy of filthy lucre, not
covetous, 1 Timothy 3. 3. Tit. 1. 7. So he says of Deacons also, 1 Timothy 3 8.
signifying that such an one as is given to this evil is unmeet for this
service; For either it will lead men to speak such things as are not meet, and
so to corrupt the word of God, as to suit men's humors, and teach things they
ought not, for this filthy lucres sake, Tit. 1. 11. when there is hope of
profit, to hate their brethren in their heart, and not to rebuke them, but
suffer sin upon them, lest by dealing plainly and faithfully, they fail of
their expectation, which was too usual with Priests and Prophets formerly; For
(says the Prophet) every one from the least to the greatest is given to
covetousness, and (from hence) from the Prophet even* to the Priest, every one
deals falsely; for they have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people
slightly, saying, peace, peace, when there is no peace, Jer. 6. 13, 14. and 8.
10, 11. In which (I conceive) the Prophet declares the iniquity both of priests
and people; the people they were given to it, and could not endure sound
doctrine; and the heart of Priests and Prophets was given generally to it, and
therefore that they might bear rule and the people might put into their mouths,
they suited their humors and sowed pillos under their elbows, and so daubed
them up with untemper'd mortar, 2 Pet. 2. 3. And oh that none of the spiritual
Priesthood were thus polluted with this iniquity, that they were not too much
overlooking the evils of such as from whom they hope to receive gain, so as not
to deal faithfully with them, in warning of them; the Apostle when he says, I
ceased not to warn every one, etc. adds I have coveted no man's gold, etc.
Implying, that if he had, this might have kept him from dealing faithfully,
Act. 20. 31-33. Or toward such as are poor, it will lead them to deal with such
in proud wrath, to be too quick-sighted in beholding their moats, and to be too
sharply reproving them, or unseemlily backbiting them as guilty of many evils,
when as were they in them that might answer their covetous desire, they would
scarcely be taken notice of; too much like those, Mica. 3. 5. He that puts not
into their mouths, they even prepare war against him, and however this iniquity
being yielded to, and suffered to bring forth fruit, will render a man
unprofitable in their service, for it will provoke God to withdraw, and
withhold the presence of his spirit from them, so as that though they be in
pain, and labor to bring forth, they shall work no deliverance; For though the
covetous blesses himself, yet the Lord abhors him, Psalm. 10. 3. Isa. 57. 15.
He will not have fellowship with them, such shall not stand in his sight as
owned, and approved by him; and therefore what fitness soever otherwise they
might have, and how meet soever they may think themselves to be for instructing
others; Yet they will not prosper, while they hold fast this deceit, and come
not to the fountain to be washed from it; yea while they in preaching the word
go about to reprove others for being polluted with this iniquity, and they
themselves are not washed from it, men will secretly loath what ever they say,
and are even strengthued in their evil ways, and take occasion to speak evil
many times of the way of truth, while they say to others, they shall not covet,
or steal, and yet they themselves take liberty to do it themselves, by occasion
hereof, the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles, as Romans 2. 19-24.
Hence the Apostle renders this as a reason of their successfulness, and that
their entrance was not in vain, For (says he) we used not at any time a cloak
of covetousness, God is witness, 1 These. 2. 1-5. Therefore this iniquity is to
be fled from, and hated, because it deprives and bereaves the soul of good.

Demon. 2. This covetousness, the love of money, is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 10. Therefore to be abstained from, and mortified; all evil springs
from it, as from it is root; though there may be other roots also, yet this is
expressly said so to be; and so it is the root of ungodliness, and
unrighteonsness, or worldly lusts.

1. It is the root of ungodliness. The first commandment is, Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc. Math. 22. 37. But this served leads
us to hate him; For no man can serve two masters, he will love the one and hate
the other, etc. Luke 16. 13, 14. Now covetousness being a love of this world,
it necessarily supposes, and leads to an hatred of God, while it is served;
hence the Apostle says, If any man love the world, the love of the Father is
not in him, 1 John 2. 15. that is, God's love toward us in Christ dwells not
richly in such an one; and also the love of the Father, namely, love to, and of
him with all the heart, is not in such an one, 1 John 5. 3. and so

1. It leads us to set up some other object, and thing before us as God, yea
covetousness is said to be idolatry, Col. 3. 5. And the covetous man an
idolater, Ephesians. 5. 5. The heart of such an one secretly depart from the Lord,
and gives that honor to money, that is only due to Jesus Christ, and God in
him, Jer. 17. 5. It leads to bowing down to it, and to be trusting in it, as
that which will protect from the power of evil; hence that instruction; Charge
them that are rich, that they trust not in uncertain riches; 1 Timothy 6. 17. And
so to expect help from this in the time of trouble, Psalm. 49. 6. Hab. 2. 9. And
as those that remember the name of the Lord make their boast of him, so these
in their riches, (or if they have them not, yet conceive such an exellency in
them, that they would boast in them if they had them) and even bless
themselves; the covetous blesses himself, and abhors God, Psalm. 10. 3.
Zech. 11. 5. yea their hearts may be so lifted up when riches are increased,
that they may say they are God, Ezekiel* 28. 2-9. And so set their mouths against
the heavens, etc. Psalm. 73. 3-9.

2. It leads men to worship God by some other medium than Jesus Christ, as
declared in the Testimony, who is the only way of approach to God, and either
voluntarily to serve other things, or God by other things, that they may enjoy
plenty of all things, and it may go well with them, as it was with them, Jer.
44. 15-19. Or which is of the same nature, to worship God by men's precepts, and
be the servants of men in their spirits, and consciences, and by observing
these to think God will accept them; yea and to come by their riches as the way
to God, Zech. 11. 5. Or else unwillingly they will conform to men, and worship,
and have their fear taught by their traditions rather than to be exposed to the
danger of loosing the object of their hearts delight, and desire, and so will
many times comply with men in their superstitions, worshippings of images, etc.
even to the wounding of their consciences, that they may secure their substance
to themselves; and so it is true, whether willingly, or unwillingly, all the
world wonders after the beast, and all the inhabiters of the earth have been
made drunk with the wine of the fornication of the whore; such one way or other
shall be defiled with women (the whore, or her daughters) so as to partake of
their pollutions, either saying, a consederacy, or fearing their fear, Rev. 13.
3, 4. and 14. 4. and 17. 2. 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10.

3. It leads to take God's name in vain, and that by swering cursing, and so
prosaining his name, Judge. 17. 2. Yea and by forswearing, breaking vows, and
promises made to him, and of which he is witness, when such an one has been
swearing to his own hurt, or vowing and promising such things as stand, or
prove in conclusion, cross to their greedy design. Thus Zedekiah and the people
polluted God's name, in that, when they had made a vow; and covenant to give
libety to the servants, they broke it, and it may seem this was the cause of
it; because the keeping it consisted not with their profit, Jer. 34. 8-16. Far
from the least to the greatest every one was given to covetousness; and indeed
often times this leads to breach of covenant, and promise, even when the
promise made has tended to their more free, and profitable seeking the kingdom
of God, yet now they cannot keep it, they pretend, because it will be of great
hurt, and prejudice to them; they have bought a piece of ground, or have a farm
in their hands, and they must needs go (they have a necessity, or a necessity
lies upon them so to do) and see it, look after, and improve it, and therefore
they desire, and hope they shall be excused, Luke 14. 18. But shall he prosper
that does such things? Yea more generally this leads to take his name in vain,
and recieve his grace in vain, while, though men call themselves of the holy
city, and cry the temple of the Lord are we, yea and some of them may have been
brought nigh to him by the blood of Jesus, and served him in his temple, yet
they run with others to the same excess of riot, in surfeiting, and drunkeness,
or in chambring, and wantonness, etc. and have fellowship with men in their
unfruitful works of darkness; Oh how do such cause the name of God, and his
doctrine to be blasphemed! Pro. 30. 9. How does it open the mouths of men (not
against this covetousness the root hereof, but) against the glorious Gospel, as
if it were a ministry of ungodliness? how are the profane ones gladded, to see
that those who formerly had escaped the pollutions of the world through the
knowledge of the Lord and Savior, and were separate from them; that now they
are turned with the dog to his vomit, and that such can keep company with them,
and swear, and drink; yea and sometimes be drunk also? this is a sport to them,
and they are strengthened in their wickedness, and ready to say, it is in vain
to serve God; and yet to this, in times of temtation especially, will
covetousness lead one, Ephesians. 5. 16-18. They that will be rich (that have a
design, and resolution so to be) fall into temptation, and a snare, (into the
fear of man, in which they are entangled, and fettered that they dare do
nothing that may offend them, Pro. 29. 25.) and (thence) into many foolish, and
hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction, and perdition, 1 Timothy 6. 9. This
will lead men into foolish lusts, even into such as seem not to stand with
their design, such as drunkenness, in which they spend that they love so
dearly; yet their having fellowship with men herein, tending to their getting,
or keeping what they have, by gaining, and securing the favor of the world to
them; hence it ultimatly tends to their design.

4. It leads to profane God's rest, to count Jesus Christ, who is the rest (in
whom God has taken up his rest, and well-pleasedness, and the rest he has
prepared for our weary spirits, and the refreshing, Heb. 4. 3, 4. Isa. 28. 12.)
a common, and profane thing, and insufficient, to satiate our souls, and
therefore leads to take up rest, and seek satisfaction in that which is not
bread, and therefore will not satisfy; thus the fool in the parable resolves;
I will say to my soul, take thy rest, etc. Luke 12. 19. though he never came at
it, nor will this satisfy, and therefore it is a vain conversation here to be
seeking it. Yea and it leads to profane his holy day (that time he has set
apart for a solemn waiting upon him, and thereto ceasing from our own works, to
signify to us, that it is he that does sanctify us, and that, in ceasing from
our own works, and by faith entering into his rest, Exodus 31. 13. 17.) I say it
leads to profane it, not only by saying, when will the sabbath be gone, that
we may set forth wheat? as counting that a wearisome time as it was with them,
Amos. 8. 5. but more grossly; either by over-working themselves, and their
servants in the six days, that they are meet for no hallowing his day; or
employing them in doing their ordinary servile work, to the depriving them of
waiting upon him, and provoking Gods wrath, Neh. 13. 15-22. Jer. 17. 21-27.
Isa. 58. 3. 7. 13.

2. And so also, this is the root of unrighteousness, or worldly lusts, and
contrary to our loving our neighbor as our selves, as the grace of God does
instruct, yea and as he is thereby working it in us; and the righteousness of
the law shall be fulfilled in them who are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after
the flesh, but after the spirit, even the righteous affections, and services
thereof, not by our own wisdom, and strength in observing the law as a law of
works, and so looking on it as our duty, but in ceasing from our own works, and
entering into God's rest, and through the spirit waiting for the hope of
righteousness by faith, Romans 8 4. Gal. 5, 6. 16. 21, 22. To this love of our
neighbor, covetousness is contrary, Romans 13. 9. And so it leads

1. To dishonor Parents, whether natural, or civil, or those that by God's
providence are set over us in that stead; and not to give them that honor,
reverence, or obedience which is due to them, and to be given them in the Lord,
even in the acknowledgment, and fear of him, and for the Lords sake, in
reverence to his wisdom, and faithfulness, who has set them in such a station
of command, and authority, and us in the place of subjection. This will lead us
to withhold from natural parents that honor due to them, in which is included a
requiting them, in providing for them, and maintaining them when in straits,
and brought to poverty: Thus the Pharisees who were covetous, they honored not
their parents, yea and taught others to transgress the command of God, and
pretended godliness in thus transgressing. God commanded (says our Savior)
saying, honor thy Father, and Mother, etc. But ye say, whosoever shall say to
his Father, or Mother it is a gift, by whatsoever thou may be profited, (or
it is Corban) a thing devoted and set apart for religious, and pious uses
(possibly for the maintenance of such teachers, or such Pharisaical Ministers)
he shall be free from the obligation of Gods law; or is obliged to keep his
former vow, and so cannot honor his Father, etc. Math. 15. 3-6. Mark. 7. 9-12.
And this leads to rebel against authorities, and rulers set over us, and so to
resist the ordinance of God, that men may set their nest on high, while yet
they may pretend Godliness for so doing, 2 Timothy 3. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 11-17. And it
leads others who would be accounted the most free from rebellion, to dishonor,
or not to honor principalities, and powers, when their profit lies at stake.
The grace of God instructs to render to all their due, tribute to whom tribute,
custom to whom custom, etc. Now how many are there, yea and of those also who
repute themselves, and would be reputed the best subjects, and most loyal to
the higher powers, who yet would withhold from them what by Law or Custom is
due to them, and defraud them thereof; yea many times steal their Customs; and
if they are in such places as they can ease themselves of that which of right
they ought to pay, they will rather lay it upon others shoulder; and however it
is not of ou^ conscience, but for wrath they do what they do, and the root
thereof is the love of money, Romans 13. 1-7. Tit. 3. 1-3. It Is a rare thing to
be found, that a man will out of conscience toward God give to the authorities
what appertains to them, when they can by any means avoid it, and cleverly come
off, nor will this be done, unless covetousness be abstained from; so far will
covetous persons be from imitating our Savior, who would pay what he was not
obliged to, lest he should offend; that on the other hand, they will seek to
keep, and hold what they are engaged to pay from those in power.

2. So also it leads to murder, or kill another, and to those things which are
included in, and lead to the murdering our neighbor, such as anger, wrath,
etc. when it is without cause, or exceeds the due bounds, as to the measure, or
continuance thereof, as our Savior signifies, Math. 5. 21-23. How will this
iniquity followed lead men to have an evil eye at, and envy the good, and
prosperity of another, Pro. 28. 22. And to be angry with, and hate those that
are faithful reprovers, Amos. 5. 10-12. Or secretly to wish, and desire the
death, and removal of such, by whom they may be enriched; yea and actually to
seek their destruction by whom they may increase to themselves, and satisfy
their covetous desire; This led Judas to betray his Master; Jezabel, and Ahab
to conspire, and compass the death of Naboth; Yea and it leads those in power
to murder the innocent, and those that are quiet in the land; hence the Lord
says to Jehoiakim; thine eyes, and thine heart are not but for thy
covetousness, and (as the fruit hereof) to shed innocent blood, Jer. 22. 17.
Ezekiel. 22. 13-17. Yea how does this lead them that have the faith of our Lord
Jesus, to have it with respect of persons; and so to despise, slight, and
undervalue the poor, and in their assemblies to bid them to set at their
footstool (while they show great respect to such as have gay apparel,
especially if they have but any hope of advantage from them) and herein they
are guilty of murder, Jam. 2. 1-11. And to hate such as rebuke them faithfully,
especially if they are poor in this world; and he that hates his brother is a
murderer, 1 John 3 15. Yea whence come wars, and fightings amongst us, strifes,
contentions, confusions, and every evil work, come they not from this love to,
and friendship of the world? See Jam. 4. 1-4. and so from that wisdom from
beneath, which is covetousness in the root, Jam. 3. 14-16. These all are joined
with this iniquity, Romans 1. 29, 30.

3. So it leads unto, and is the root of Adultery, Fornication, and such
filthyness of the flesh as should not once be named amongst saints. Indeed as
covetousness is more largly taken, so this filthyness is included in it, it
being such an iniquity as in which men, or women not content with God's
allowance, and gift, covet after some such person as is forbidden him of God,
and that which leads to this iniquity is called, coveting our neighbors wife,
etc. He has allowed every man, according to his instructions, to have his own
wife, and every woman her own husband, but this lust insinuates to us that
stolen waters are sweet, and that that only will give satisfaction which is
the forbidden fruit, and so persuades that evil is good, and good evil; it is
persuading that the unlawful enjoyment of such, or such a person will give rest
to us, not because it will do so in conclusion, for when their lusts are
satisfied, they are as far from having what they proposed to themselves as
before; and whereas they conceited the having fellowship with such an one as is
forbidden of God would tend much to their contentment, and therefore they covet
greedily, and are even sick of this carnal love, yet it proves contrary to
their expectation, and they are as far from rest as ever: Yea the object of
their love, and lust, many times comes to be subject of their hatred: As in the
case of Amnon. He loved his fair sister Tamar, and he was so vexed that he fell
sick for her, as thinking it hard for him to do any thing to her; but when
through the subtlety of his friend he had accomplished his desire, he hated her
exceedingly (though she was fair, and a kings daughter, and he had so
passionatly lusted after her before) so that the hatred wherewith he hated her,
was greater than the love wherewith he had loved her, 2 Samuel 13. 1-4. 15. And
as covetousness is more strictly taken for a love of, and desire after riches,
so it is that which leads persons that are capable, to the committing of this
sin of uncleanness; hence the admonition of having our conversation without
covetousness, is immediately subjoyned, after the Apostle said, Wheremongers
and adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13. 4, 5. As if he would signify, that the
having our conversation with covetousness will apt, and lead to that
uncleanness: so they that are friends, or lovers of the world are called
Adulterers, and Adulteresses, Jam. 4. 4. Possibly, not only because hereby
their hearts are departing from the Lord, and so they commit spiritual
adultery, but also to signify that the love of the world leads to outward and
bodily adultery. Now this love of money is the root of this evil either
indirectly, or more directly.

1. Indirectly, as when it leads into such paths as occasion men's committing
such iniquity, as when persons in marrying marry not according to the
instructions of the grace of God, and are unequally yoked, and join themselves
with such as they cannot love, as is meet in that relation; hence having no
delight in their own yoke-fellows, they even expose themselves, and their
yoke-fellows to any temptation, and are many times taken in this snare of the
Devil; how many are there that pretended love to, and are married with such as
they secretly loath, or however have no delight in, because their heart is
inclined to it is covetousness, and they thus fit themselves for this filthiness
of the flesh. Hence the Apostle when he asserts the honorableness of marryage,
and condemns whoredom, he adds, let your conversation be without covetousness,
Heb. 13. 4, 5. Or when men, or women, live not with each other according to
knowledge, but absent themselves one from another, and defraud one another too
long for filthy lucres sake, they lay open themselves, and their relation many
times to the lusts of others, and which ever person offends, not only is that
party guilty of the sin which commits it actually, but the other who thus
occasioned it, he, or she, causes the other to commit adultery; like that,
Math. 5. 32. Or when more generally, persons aim at advantage, that they may
have better trading, and engage others to them, or have the favor of the world,
and be continued in the camp, and looked upon as such as are of the world's
confederacy, and no dissenters from them, oh how powerful will this be to
betray them to this lust, especially when the days are evil, and men generally
make a mock of this sin, and practice it, or when the times are like spoken of,
Hos. 7. 3 4 7.

2. Directly, many times this is the root of Adultery, etc. in men and women:
though most frequently in the latter: sometimes men, when poor, and in straits,
not exercising themselves to the Law of the Lord, nor observing its
instructions, commit lewdness with women that may maintain them, that they may
see no want, and so, though not very ordinarily, whores give gifts to their
lovers (as Ezekiel. 16. 33, 34. Where, though spiritual fornication be directly
spoken of, yet there is respect had to this bodily, and we may be instructed
what the adultresses exercise is at some times.) But most frequently women
expose themselves to the lusts of men for filthy lucre sake; hence so often
there is mention made of the hire of an harlot, Genesis 38. 16. 17. Pro. 6. 26.
and 29. 3. Hos. 9. 1. Mica. 1. 7. Yea this covetousness sometimes prevails over
women to the committing this iniquity, when their lust to this uncleanness is
not otherwise so great, or they are not inordinately inclined to it; and
especially when they have not in some measure learnt to be content with the
condition they are in, but are persons of appetite; that love the best meat,
and drink, and to pamper themselves therewith, such are in very great danger,
when God brings them into poverty, to be led captive by the lusts of such men
as can answer their covetous inclination, and to bow down themselves unto them,
that they may be accommodated according to their desire; and this branch of
covetousness, this desire to fare deliciously, and to please our appetites, as
it leads to whoredom, and adultery, that they may have money to spend upon this
lust; so also the more they please their appetite in the best meat, and drink,
the more hereby they inrage the lust of uncleanness; hence they are joined
together, 1 Pet. 4. 3. and chambering, and wantonness set as the consequent of
surfeiting and drunkenness, Romans 13. 13. and they said to defile the flesh, who
feed themselves without fear, Jude 8. 11. good therefore it is to receive that
admonition, Pro. 23. 1-3. And however, though there be not a strong inclination
to faring deliciously, yet still the love of money will prevail, if served, to
lead to satisfy the base lusts of men, if persons have any inclination
thereto, and are poor, when strongly importuned, with assurance, or hope of
some considerable advantage, and when they have opportunity, and God permits
them for their former hardening their hearts against the reproves of his
instruction.

4. So it leads to steal from, and wrong another: and by stealing, and robbing
is not meant only those gross acts which the law lays hold on, and which is so
shameful amongst men; but any such like thing in which another is injured of
what appertains to him, as Ezekiel. 18. 10. If he beget a son that is a robber, a
shedder of blood, and that does the like to any of these things: hence even
Lawmakers (who did not break secretly into other houses, and so steal as the
law might take hold of them, yea they had a law for what they did, yet) are
said, to take away the right from the poor, that widows might be their prey,
and that they may rob the fatherless, Isa. 10 1, 2. So the princes of Judah are
said to be rebellious, and companions of thieves (and to show wherein, it is
added) every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards, they judge not the
fatherless, Isa. 1. 23. And so generally herein may be included the going
beyond, or defrauding another in any matter, of which we are warned, 1 These. 4.
6. And more particularly, the detaining the wages of him that is hired, Levit.
19. 13. Or grinding the faces of the poor in beating them down follow for their
work that they cannot subsist, Mal. 3. 5. which is looked upon as good
husbandry, and justified by men; and oh that it were not used, and justified by
believers: And selling too dear, and buying too cheap, and using extortion in
taking excessive gain, and increase, and using false weights, and measures,
making the ephah (or measures) small, and the shekel (or price) great, and
falsifying the balances by deceit that they may buy the poor for silver, and
the needy for a pair of shoes, and sell the refu^e of the wheat, all which are
abominable, and provoking to God, Amos 8. 4-7. All these, and the like to these
things are the fruit of this evil root. So it is said of those that practice
evil because it is in the power of their hands; they covet fields, and (from
thence) take them by violence, etc. so they oppress a man and his house, Mica.
2. 2. So it is said of Jehoiakim; Thine eyes and thine heart are not but for
thy covetousness, and for oppression, and for violence to do it, Jer. 22. 17.
Hence covetous and extortioners are joined together, 1 Cor. 5. 10. And thieves
and covetous, 1 Cor. 6. 10. Yea this leads actually to steal, Josh. 7. 11. 21.
And this stealing and extortion is a direct fruit of it.

5. Yea it leads men to bear false witness against their neighbors, and so to
take away their good names from them, yea and many times their lives also, when
this present world is loved, and the things thereof promised, or men have hope,
and assurance to enrich themselves thereby, or to secure what they have, how
often, for this cause, do false witnesses rise up against men, and against the
congregation of God's poor; and lay to their charge things that they knew not.
Hence the persons who are described to be covetous, are said to be false
accusers, 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3. Hence the Baptist, when he exhorts the soldiers to
accuse no man falsely, he adds, and be content with your wages, otherwise having
their conversation with covetousness, it would lead them to bring false
accusation against men, Luke 3. 14. This idolatry of covetousness was that (it
may seem) which caused Doeg to devise mischief like a razour, and lie, and bear
false witness against the priests of the Lord, which procured their being cut
off, Psalm. 52. 2-7.

6. And the last commandment is that we have been showing to be the root of all
evil, and an immediate fruit of loving the world, effected by listening to, and
walking after the carnal mind, and wisdom of the flesh, as we have before seen.

Demon. 3. Though this iniquity deprives and bereaves the soul of good, and is
the root of all evil, yet it is a well favored iniquity (as Nah. 3. 4.) and
that which is in great request amongst men; many of the evils it leads to, and
of which it is the root, are shameful amongst men, and such as they will not
seriously plead for, or seek to justify though they may walk in them, and
serve them, until they have so long hardened their hearts against the
instructions of wisdom, and it is reproofs, that they are become past feeling,
and so commit all manner of filthiness with greediness; such as murder,
adultery, drunkenness, etc. But now this affection, and lust of the flesh, this
covetousness is in great repute amongst men; and the laboring to be rich, and
laying up for our selves here on earth which is included in it, is that for
which men will commend us; When thou do well to thy self, men will praise
thee, Psalm. 49. 18. This is that which is highly esteemed amongst men (as our
Savior may signify in that expression, Luke 16. 14, 15.) though yet it is an
abomination in the fight of God. And though all lusts are called the lusts of
the flesh, both because they spring from the carnal mind, or wisdom of the
flesh; and because they are contrary to the spirit, and the lust thereof; yet
when the Apostle distinguishes, and branches them forth, he calls some the
desires of the flesh, as surfeiting, drunkeness, adultery, etc. And some the
desires of the mind, and under this head of lusts this iniquity is contained,
Ephesians. 2. 3. And therefore is called the lust of the eye, 1 John 2. 16. Not
only, nor so much of the outward eye, though that also may conduce thereto,
and affect the heart, but of the eye of the soul, and so of the mind, because
this springs from that, and is more suited to the wisdom, and understanding of
men, as corrupted by the poison of Satan's temptation, which leads them to think
that riches are very excellent, and will render us happy in the enjoyment of
them; hence we are admonished to cease from our own wisdom, that we may not
labor to be rich (as before) Pro. 23. 4. Now then the more appearance of wisdom
there is in it, the more highly will men esteem it, for vain man would be (and
be accounted) wise; though he be born like a wild asses colt, Job. 11. 12. And
also, as this iniquity being a desire of the mind is therefore well accounted
of amongst men, so in serving of it, and laboring to be rich, especially if men
find the life of their hands, and that they lust after, and labor for in any
abundance, together herewith they meet with other desires of the mind, which
the understanding of a man leads him to seek after, and highly to prize in the
enjoyment; these being usually concomitants of this iniquity; As to say, the
wisdom of this world (which is science falsely so called, and only seeming
wisdom) this also is a desire of the mind, and that men thirst after; now the
covetous man, being rich also, seldom wants the repute of a wise man amongst
men, if he have but any considerable parts, either natural, or acquired; his
being rich gains him the esteem of being wise, when the wisdom of the poor is
despised, Eccl. 9. 16. And however he is wise in his own conceit, Pro 28. 11.
Yea and hereby he has greater advantage also, by accompanying himself with
great ones, and such as are in repute for wisdom, whose crown in their riches,
Pro. 14. 24. and otherwise to seek after the satisfying this desire of the
mind. And so honor in this world, and the praise of men, is a desire of the
mind, and who, like the covetous rich man, is counted worthy of this; men bless
the covetous, and every o^^ bows before them, and the poor use entreaties to
them (while they answer roughly)* and are even servants to them, Pro. 18. 23.
and 22. 7. riches and honor usually go together. And so the friendship of this
world is a desire of the mind, and that which men think adds much to their
happiness, and security; and therefore they desire to have many joined to them
in some strict tie of affection, and to say a confederacy with them, and
therefore to match into, and be allied unto great families, and personages,
that they may take deep root in the earth; Now wealth makes many friends, and
every one is a lover of him that has it; the poor is hated of his neighbor,
but many are the lovers of the rich, Pro: 14. 20. and 19. 4. and hence because
there is such a meeting together of other desires of the mind in the object of
this lust, therefore it is so amiable in the eyes of men, and men are so
pursuing this iniquity with great greediness, for in finding the object of this
lust, they shall have the friendship of this world, praise of men, and honor
amongst men; be accounted wise, and well accomplished persons, and what not.

Yea, and not only is this lust so well thought of amongst men generally; but
the Saints of the world also are secretly pursueing, and magnifying it, because
it will consist, and stand together with an appearance of devotion, godliness,
and righteousness, and so more gross lusts which this leads to, will not. Men
may seek to establish a righteousness to themselves, which is also a desire of
the mind, and yet be given to covetousness; yea and be esteemed religious by
others, while yet they are greatly polluted with this iniquity. Hence our
Savior says of the Pharisees, that they were covetous: (and therefore they
derided him when he said, no servant can serve two Masters, God, and Mammon; as
thinking this was a foolish assertion of our Savior, and that both might stand
together well enough*) Luke 16, 13, 14. And yet they were the straitest Sect of
the religion of the Jews, Act. 26. 5. and were frequent in fasting, and prayer,
(exceeding herein, it may seem, Christ's disciples, Luke 5. 33.) they kept the
Sabbaths, and were zealous in, and for the observance of them (and condemned
our Savior as being one that did not keep them, Joh. 9. 16.) and frequented
Synagogues, and appeared righteous before men, being like whited sepulchers
that appear beautiful outwardly; their covetousness did stand with this show
of righteousness, so as they appeared righteous unto men; though within they
were full of hypocrisy, and iniquity, yet this took not away their esteem
among the people, Math. 23. 25-28. Yea though they devoured widows houses, yet
for a pretense they made long prayers, Math. 23. 14. and so might be thought in
their thus swallowing up the poor to do it only in piety, and godliness, and
that the Church might be honored, and provided for, and this disposed to pious
uses, as also they pretended when they honored not their parents, as is said.
Math. 15. 4-6. so the Apostle tells us, That in the last days perilous times
should come; For men should have a form of Godliness, and deny the power
thereof, namely, either deny the mystery of Godliness, that God was manifest in
the flesh; and so deny Jesus to be the Christ; or deny the preaching of the
Cross in the words which the Holy Ghost has taught it: or else deny the force,
and efficacy of it upon them, and receive not the love of the truth so as to be
saved thereby; now of these he says, they are lovers of their own selves,
covetous, 2 Timothy-3. 2. 5* they minded earthly things, and yet had a form of
Godliness. And according as was foretold by the Apostle, so doubtless it is in
our days; many that appear very zealous, and religious persons, and that do, as
the Pharisees did, esteem themselves better than others; yet their heart goes
after their covetousness; and these new Pharisees fill up, if not exceed, the
measure of their Fathers; evil men, and seducers waxing worse, and worse, as
was foretold; and such suppose gain to be Godliness; namely, the seeking after
that, and what conduces thereto, to be a right, and strait worshipping of God,
1 Timothy 6. 5. and thus it was in former times, those who were given to this
iniquity were well spoken of, and cried up, and followed, while the true
Prophets were hated, and persecuted. Compare Luke 6. 26. with Jer. 8. 8-10. and
6. 13. Isa. 56. 10. 11. Yea and as this iniquity consists with a form of
Godliness, so also it leads men, yea and the leaders also who are given to it,
to cry peace, peace, to them who are guilty of it, and to flatter them as if
they were in a safe condition, and that their covetousness is nothing else but
a provident care, and circumspection, and looking after the main, Joh. 12. 5,
6. and their laying up for themselves treasures on earth is nothing but their
duty, and providing for their families, which whosoever does not is worse than an
infidel; and so men are strengthened in their wickedness, that none that listen
to them, return from their iniquity, Jer. 6. 13, 14. and 8, 8-11. Yea and by
means of the former considerations it appears, that it is a very hidden
iniquity, it is so covered over either with a cloak of Godliness, as it was
with the Pharisees, Math. 15. 4-6. and 23. 14. or with a cloak of
righteousness, and honesty, as with men generally, that it is a very difficult
thing to discern, and discover it; it so seeks to shroud it self under
Godliness, and honesty, to both which it is an enemy (as before) that until it
break forth into many of its fruits, or some gross ones, it is very hard so to
see it, as to fasten a reproof on it; and so much the Apostle may signify, when
he says: Neither used we at any time flattering words, as ye know; (they might
be competent judges of that,) Nor a cloak of covetousness, God is witness;
(here he appeals not to them, for this might have been so hidden, they might
not have discerned it, but to God which tries the heart, who only knows the
truth of it, and discovers it by his word which is quick and powerful, Heb. 4
12, 13.) 1 Thessalonians. 2. 5.

Now then by how much the more this iniquity is so highly esteemed of amongst
men, and such an one as in which other desires of the mind are infolded, and so
exceeding grateful: Yea and it so consisting with a form of Godliness also, and
being so generally inclined unto, and served by the Saints of the world, and
they ready to cry peace, peace, to those that are polluted with it; and having
such a large, and comely cloak to cover it self with, that it can hardly be
discerned by so much the more we have all the greater need to be admonished to
take heed, and beware of it; it being such a well favored iniquity in the eyes
of men, and of those that seem religious also. And as those seducers that come
to corrupt from the simplicity that is in Christ are the more dangerous, the
more specious they are in the outside of them, and therefore are we so often
admonished of them, Math. 7. 14. 2 Cor. 11. 12-15. so these iniquities that are
so closely covered over with other names, and looked upon as virtues, and so
highly esteemed amongst men, are therefore the more carefully to be avoided by
us, lest we deceive our own selves.

Demon. 4. The disciples of Christ need to be admonished of this iniquity also,
because how ever specious it is amongst men, yet it is an abomination in the
sight of God, and does greatly provoke his wrath, and for serving this
iniquity, the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience, namely, it
comes continually upon them, while men continue it it, and are not washed from
it, Ephesians. 5. 5. Col. 3. 5. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and
smote him, says the high, and holy one, Isa. 57. 17. And so

1. He is wroth for this, and smites with the rod of his mouth, Psalm. 110. 2.
Isa. 11. 4. even with reproves, and sharp rebukes in his word, and the
faithful declaration thereof; He will reprove them, and set their iniquity in
order before them, as Psalm. 50. 21. So as even to wound them, and gall their
spirits; and so he is said to hew by his Prophets, to slay with the words of
his mouth, Hos. 6 5. and though this be to a gracious end, as are all his
doings while called to day, yet it is an effect of his wrath, or anger, for
men's holding fast deceit, and refusing to return; and very grievous to him that
forsakes the way, Pro. 15. 10. The word of God (in it is reproving, and
discovering efficacy) is quick, and powerful, and sharper than a two-edged
sword, Heb 4. 12. it even wound; the spirit of a man, when he seals home his
rebukes in sharpness upon any one, so as he only can heal it again, by
creating the fruit of his lips in his Testimony, peace, peace, etc. Isa. 57.
18, 19. when he chides, and chides sharply, he even breaks the heart, that he
may open men's ears to his discipline; though he is slow to anger, and therefore
to chide; and plenteous in mercy, and therefore will not always chide, no
retain anger for ever, but revive the heart of the contrite ones, that the
spirit may not fail before him, Psalm. 103. 8, 9. Isa. 57. 15.

2. And if men's uncircumcised hearts are not humbled, and they turn not at his
reproofs, he will still, and further smite with his hand, or order great
testimonies of displeasure, and that in laying afflictions upon men, yea and
upon nations, for being given to, and serving this iniquity; and still it is
more provoking in his peculiar people, his pleasant plant, that they should
defile themselves herewith; hence believers are admonished with such an one as
is called a brother, and is covetous, not to eat; and yet they might eat with a
covetous one of this world, 1 Cor. 5. 10, 11. on such still his wrath comes, in
laying afflictions upon their loins, and even withdrawing or withholding his
manifested nighness, and the light of his countenance from them, and so
ordering still, and further to them, wrath with their sickness; Eccl. 5. 17.
and so he hides him and is wroth; and this is a great aggravation of men's
afflictions, of theirs especially, who know how satisfying, and reviving the
light of his countenance is, Isa. 57. 17. Psalm. 10. 1. Yea by continuing
herein, he may be provoked to order, and send furious rebukes upon those
nations on whom his name is called; such as sword, famine, pestilence, etc. so
the Prophet says, I am full of the fury of the Lord, I am weary with holding
it in, I will pour it upon the children abroad, etc. and their houses shall be
turned to others with their fields, etc. For I will stretch out my hand upon
the inhabitants of the land, says the Lord, Why so? for from the least of them
even to the greatest of them, every one is given to covetousness, Jer. 6.
11-13. etc. and 8. 10-13. He would recompense their way upon their heads in
those judgments; As they had been keeping all for themselves; so he would give
it all into the hand of their enemies, and as they had not served the Lord in
the abundance of all things; so now they should serve their enemies in the want
of all things, Deuteronomy. 28. 47, 48. Yea for this and the direct fruits of it he
permits, and orders them to be oppressed by those that are over them, Mica. 2.
1-4. and 3. 1-4. Yea for this he may be provoked, and will take away his
Prophets, righteous, and merciful ones, and turn the songs of the Temple into
howlings, send a famine, even of hearing the words of the Lord, and though men
fast, and pray, not hear, but cover himself with a cloud that their prayer
should not pass through, Isa. 57. 1, 17. with c. 58. 3, 4. etc. and 59. 1, 2,
3. Ezekiel. 33. 31-33 Amos. 8 3-12* Mica. 2. 1, 2-6. and therein write men's sin
upon their punishment, that as they have not dealt their bread to the hungry,
nor given drink to the thirsty, so he will withhold the bread of life from
them, and the fair Virgins, and young men shall faint for thirst, Am. 8. 11-13.
Yea in following after this, he may permit some to fall into such fruits of it
as to be cut off untimely, and be punished by the Judges, and dye shameful
deaths in the open sight of others for their admonition, Josh. 7. 21-25. and
yet be so punished in this world, as to have all their punishment here, that
they may not be condemned hereafter. Yea his wrath may so come upon men for
persisting herein against the light, and admonitions of his grace, as to give
them up to a reprobate mind, to do those things that are not convenient,
because they have been filled with all unrighteousness, covetousness; Romans 1.
28, 29. to worship the beast who opens his mouth in blasphemies against God,
Rev. 13. 8. to finish iniquity, and so fall into desperation, Act. 1. 18. And
however the day of the Lord shall come on all them that dwell on the earth as a
snare, eitheir in particularly taking them away by death, as it did upon this
man, who assured himself of much rest, and happiness, and that he was laid in
many years; thou fool, says God, this night shall thy soul be taken from thee,
Luke 12. 20-21. or however generally when God shall send us Jesus again, to
destroy them that destroy the Earth; then the inhabiters of the Earth shall be
taken in the snare, and they shall not escape, Isa. 24. 17, 18. Luke 21. 34,
35. 1 These. 5. 3.

3. And further, and for ever the wrath of God shall come, and comes upon such
as abide herein, and are not washed in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
spirit of our God; no covetous man, who is an idolater ^ath any inheritance in
the Kingdom of Christ, and of God, Ephesians. 5. 5. no such an one, as such, and
unless his name be changed in Heaven, shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, 1
Cor. 6. 10. But they drink of the wrath of God which will be poured out without
mixture into the Cup of his Indignation, and shall be tormented with fire, and
brimstone in the presence of the Holy Angels, and of the Lamb, Rev. 14. 6-11.
they are now numbered with, and reckoned amongst Idolaters, Adulterers,
effeminate, etc. yea covetousness is the root of these, as is in part shown,
and they shall have their portion with them in Hell fire, where their worm
dies not, and their fire is not quenched; Oh that we may not deceive our
selves, but know, that now God abhorres the covetous, Psalm. 10. 3. and will
hereafter in flaming fire take vengeance on them that know not God, and that
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus; now consider this ye that forget God,
lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.

Having thus according to my weakness spoken to the instruction, I shall add
somewhat by way of usefulness. And so

1* From what has been said in showing the evil, and deceitful nature, and
bitter fruit of this iniquity, I have in some measure been made sensible of my
need of crying to God, with the Prophet, who, after he had said, O Lord the
hope of Israel, all that forsake thee shall perish, and they that depart from
me, shall be written in the Earth (where their hearts have been) because they
have forsaken the Lord the Fountain of living waters; adds, Heal me, O Lord,
and I shall be healed, etc. Jer. 17. 13, 14. it may seem, he was made sensible
of his own miscarriage, and that he needed Gods mercy in forgiving, and
cleansing him; or otherwise he might have been reputed guilty of the like
transgression; which procures such wrath: or as the Prophet David, when he had
been imprecating, and prophesying, that such should be ashamed which transgress
without cause; cries out to God; Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies, etc.
remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions, but according to thy
mercy remember thou me, for thy goodness sake; Psalm. 25, 3-7. as signifying
that if God had marked iniquities against him, he could not stand as justified
before him; so may I say also; For thy names sake pardon mine iniquity (of this
nature) for it is great; hide away thy face from my sins (which have sprung
from this root) and blot out all my transgressions; create in me a clean heart,
O God, and renew a right spirit within me.

2. In that this iniquity is so exceeding sinful, and provoking; it may show
unto us, that what is highly esteemed among men is an abomination in the fight
of God; for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with him; this will lead to
account lesser sins to be great ones; and those which are very dangerous to be
but small ones, if not virtues: Men have generally an high esteem of the
desires of the mind (as before is shown) of the wisdom, riches, honors of this
world, and praise of men; and establishing a righteousness to themselves, etc.
As if these might be sought after commendably; yea, and they are in request
amongst appearing zealous ones, and oh that God's pleasant plant were not too
much polluted with these; and particularly with this covetousness, and so bring
forth fruit to themselves, in setting their affections on things below, and
coveting greedily after more, that they may lay up here on earth for
themselves, and theirs; and so withholding from their poor brethren, and
sometimes by their cruelty occasioning, and hastening the death of some; surely
such is the deceitfulness of sin, and especially of these desires of the mind,
which the judgment, and wisdom of a man, as it defiled, leads him to seek
after, that it would persuade us, that it is nothing to serve such an
inclination: Yea many that hate the fruit of this iniquity, love the root, and
persuade themselves there is little, or no hurt in it; They think indeed
drunkenness, uncleanness, etc. are abominable, as indeed they are; but
covetousness is but a little moat: like the scribes, and Pharisees, those
foolish, and blind guids, who said, whosoever shall swear by the temple, it is
nothing, but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple, he is a debtor,
etc. Math. 23. 16-19. lightly esteeming the greatest evils, and pronouncing
them guilty that committed the less; so how many Pharisaical persons are there
that are so appearingly holy, that if others in following this root of iniquity
have fallen into some of the gross lusts of the flesh, as Adultery, etc. Oh how
do they abominate those gross evils, and can hardly come to see persons
polluted herewith, lest they should be defiled, and yet as much given to
covetousness as the former: they can say, with the Pharisee, God we thank thee,
we are not as others, adulterers, etc. and yet be guilty of this, which is as,
and more dangerous, Compare Luke 18. 11. with 16. 14. they can severely condemn
lesser sins (as sometimes David did, when Nathan used the Parable to him) and
yet be guilty of greater themselves, and take no notice thereof, 2 Samuel 12. 17.
Oh the deceitfulness of man's heart!

3. Seeing covetousness is such an evil, and bitter thing, let us examine our
selves, and search, and try our hearts, and ways in the glass of the law of
liberty; He that does truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be made
manifest; therein let us scearch our selves.

If any should say, God, I thank thee I am not guilty of it, for it is the root
of all evil, and I am not guilty of fornication, or adultery, or of such, and
such gross evils, as others are, and therefore need not this admonition, To
such an one I would say

1. That though it be, as indeed it is the root of all evil, yet it so appears
not, or brings not forth all it is evil fruits in every one that is highly
guilty of it; The Pharisees were covetous, and derided our Savior for saying,
no man can serve two masters, and yet they might not commit open, and gross
idolatry, nor are they taxed with it, nor reproved for it, though that also is
the fruit of it; under the law a man might have the leprosy, and yet not have
all the signs of it, for they were diverse, Lev. 13. For though a man's heart
goes after his covetousness, yet he may not be strongly inclined to some of
it is fruits, nor be under the power of inticements to some evils, as others may
be; and sin, and Satan usually sets upon us where we are weakest.

2. I may say to such an one, as the Apostle James does; He that said, do not
commit adultery, said also, do not kill; now if thou commit no adultery, yet if
thou kill, thou art become a transgressour, and so may be deeply guilty of
this iniquity, Jam. 2. 11. have not thou who thus justifiest thy self, despised
the poor, and in assemblies bid them stand there, or disrespected them? this is
murder, Jam. 2. 1-10. Have not thou out of love to the things of this present
world, forborne to feed the hungry, and cloth the naked, when thou had it in
the power of thine hand to do it, and on sight of thy brothers needs have had
the bowels of thy compassion opened? this the charge against those on Christ's
left hand, and who shall go into everlasting fire, Math. 25. 41. 46. have thou
not out of love to the things of this world consumed what thou had put into
thine hand upon thy lusts, in pampering thy self, and faring deliciously every
day, and so received, and enjoyed thy good things, and thy poor brother mean
time received his evil? This the iniquity of the rich man in the Parable which
our Savior speak after the affirming the Pharisees were covetous, and his
reproving them, Luke 16. have thou not been angry with thy brother, (yea and
with the light also) when he has been faithfully reproving, and admonishing
thee of this evil, and counted them most thy friends, who have hated thee, and
not rebuk't thee; and secretly hated the faithful reprovers, and spoke against
him; and He that hates his brother is a manslayer, 1 John 3. 15-18. Ezekiel. 33.
30-32. has not the end of thy labor been to enrich thy self, and to lay up
treasures here on earth, and not to give to him that needs? and when thou
have found the life of thine hand have thou not been secretly rejoicing
therein, and lifting up thy self above thy poor brethren, yea and departing
from the Lord, and from the assemblies of God's people; for fear of being
taken, and loosing all? have thou not when a special opportunity has been put
into thine hand for getting silver, and a choice advantage at the same time
given thee for getting wisdom, thought there was a necessity to embrace the
former, though with a neglect of the latter? have thou not in giving given
sparingly, and grudgingly, and so as of covetousness, and minded another, and
walked by his example, when he might give according to ability, and though thou
had much more in thine hand, yet would do but as he did, as one afraid to
exceed, and as if thou had parted with thy life when thou gave any thing?
in thus diligently searching in the light of the glorious Gospel, thou may
see how little reason thou have to acquit thy self, yea that thou have cause
enough to say God be merciful to me a sinner.

3. To such a boaster I might further say, that God might withhold thee from
thus sinning, and not suffer thee to touch another (as Genesis 20. 6.) and so it
might be, not so much thy intigrity as effected by the grace of God received,
and retained in the midst of thine heart, which wrought in thee an hatred, and
abhorrence of this iniquity thou clearest thy self of; as a being forcibly
restrained therefrom, or prevented by God in his providence, when thou had
had inclination enough thereto in following thy covetousness; Thou know, it
may be, and art privy to the wickedness of thine heart in often lusting after
some one forbidden of God; for filthy lucres sake, and so have committed
adultery in thy heart, though thou have not actually had such unclean
fellowship with such an one; it may be with thee in this case, as it was with
David in another; he did purpose and was resolved to have avenged himself, but
God withheld him, and kept him from shedding blood, and avenging himself; and
this he thankfully acknowledges; not by clearing himself as having no intention
so to do, but in confessing his rashness, and so giving glory to God; 1 Samuel
25. 26-34. Yea or I might say, that thou have been strongly inclined to
uncleanness by thy love of money, yet other lusts warring in thy members have
kept thee from bringing forth this fruit of it; As thou may ^^ together with
being covetous, greatly desireous of vain glory, and loving the praise of men,
and afraid of shame; or thou may have been kept back by fear of punishments;
and then little reason to boast herein, Jam. 4. 1.

4. To such an one I shall only further add (if this sin have not left the
party thus pleading) that though thou have pursued this iniquity of
covetousness, and have not been guilty of the filthiness of the flesh hitherto;
Yet be not high-minded, but fear; For in following thy covetous inclination,
thou may proceed from evil to evil, and at last commit, and provoke God to
leave thee to the committing that which now thou may loath; Judas was a thief
some time before he endeavored to betray his Master: And Hazael could say at
one time, is thy servant a dog that he should do great thing? as one greatly
abominating it, and thinking it would render him most vile; and yet afterward
he did what formerly he seemed so much to loath, 2. King. 8. 13, 14. 1 Samuel 28.
8, 9. Thou may not yet have been tried with hunger, and thirst, and want, and
straits, as another, or been so strongly tempted to uncleanness, in many
respects, and what these if ordered to thee, would occasion, while thou art
inclined to thy covetousness, thou know not; and therefore though at present
thou art not guilty; Yea, though through the grace of God thou art convinced of
the evil, and provoking nature of adultery, etc. yet it is a blessed thing to
fear always, and to be jealous of thy self, that thou may be tempted, and
overcome of the temptation when tempted, as others have been; Agur was an holy
man, and yet as one sensible of his readiness to halt, when tried, says, and
prays; Give me neither poverty, nor riches, etc. lest (on the one hand) I be
full, and deny thee, and say who is the Lord (as Pharaoh, Exodus 5. 2.) or (on
the other) lest I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in vain (in
walking in uncleanness, or any evil lust for providing for himself.) Prove. 30.
7-9. Oh were we but alike sensible of our own vileness, and readiness to halt,
when tried; we should be more jealous of our selves, and if this iniquity of
covetousness be in our hands put it far away; and this leads to another use.

4. Seeing this covetousness is so hurtful, deceitful, and provoking an evil;
Let us all be warned to take heed, and beware of it, that our hearts be not
inclined hereto; yea pray to him who is able to save us, that he would incline
our hearts to his testimonies, and not to covetousness, etc. Psalm. 119. 36, 37.
This admonition is here by our Savior given generally to a great multitude, and
to his disciples, and it is proper to be given in, and with the Gospel to all
that hear the word; and therefore meet to be received by all: some admonitions
may not properly be given to all, because they are not capable of offending in
such cases; As, not to trust in uncertain riches, which is included in this
iniquity, or which this leads to, is given to the rich in this world; but to
the poor it cannot so properly be given, 1 Timothy 6. 17. and so some may not need
to be warned to take heed of actual adultery, etc. For they may be so weakened,
as that that sin may have left them; or otherwise made incapable; but now any
person may be inclined to covetousness, from the least to the greatest; from
the youngest who have the use of understanding, to the oldest; from the poorest
to the richest; and let none think, that because of any attainements, they may
slight this warning; For the Holy Ghost gives it to all that are in Christ,
not only to little children, and young men, but to Fathers also, and so to the
most experienced believers, and who have been instruments of begetting others
through the Gospel; To them all is this admonition given, love not the world,
nor the things in the world; if any man love the world, the love of the Father
is not him, 1 John 2. 12-15. Oh let us not murmr here against; but be
thankful that we may through his grace receive it, and take heed, and beware of
it; and that we may do so, follows to be showed in the next instruction, viz.

2. That they that hear the word may take heed, and beware of covetousness, in
the light, and strength of God's grace.

So much is signified in this admonition given by our Savior, for he looks not
to reap where he has not sown, though wicked servants so charge him, Math. 25
24-26. his yoke is easy, and his burden light, and his commandments are not
grievous, Math. 11. 30. 1 John 5 3. and therefore he does not only warn of
what is evil, but he prevents men with the light, and power of his grace in due
time, that men might arise from dead things; The grace of God does not simply
teach men to deny ungodliness, but that men might receive and obey it is
teachings, it seasonably brings salvation to all men (especially in this
appearance of it, in which it is more brightly manifested than formerly) it
brings some discovery of that great salvation wrought, and completed for us in
Christ, and therewith saving strength also, to enable us, that denying
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we may live soberly, etc. Tit. 2. 11, 12. and
otherwise we cannot flee from what is reproved, for we have no sufficiency of
our selves, as of our selves to think any thing that is good.

We shall therefore together show, that those that hear the word may take heed
of this iniquity; and by what means in general we say, the Gospel of Christ is
the power of God to salvation to every one that believes, Romans 1. 16. the law
opens no door of repentance, but says, cursed is every one that continues not
in all things written in the book of the law to do them, Gal. 3. 10. But now
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 13. and the
declaration hereof is the great instrument God makes use of for delivering us
from every path of the destroyer, Psalm. 17. 4. and 119. 9.

The Law of the Lord (of or concerning him who is Lord of all) is perfect
(complete, entire) converting the soul, both at first, and so continually, it
is converting the soul, whether men are converted by it, or no, Psalm. 19. 7.
with this the Apostle was sent to open men's eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God; Act. 26. 17. 18-22. 23.
There are in this Gospel contained great, and glorious arguments that we may be
delivered from this present evil world, and these are powerful to this end,
because Christ by his spirit is present therewith even to the end of the world,
and so with his servants in their faithful declaring it, without hidden things
of dishonesty, so that while Paul plants, and Apollo waters, God sails not to
give increase, whether m^n receive it, or no, 1 Cor. 3. 5-7. and they that
receive this testimony of Jesus with the heart, and keep it in believing
remembrance, shall prove it to be the power of God; hence the Apostle says to
the Corinthians (who were some of them covetous) ye are washed, etc. in the
name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6. 10, 11. 2 Pet.
2. 20. and 1. 1. 18, 19.

Now then to this end that we may take heed, and beware of covetousness, and to
show we may do so, we shall a little particularly consider what is contained in
this testimony of Jesus in each of the three branches for our helpfulness; viz.
in what he has done, and is become; in what he is now doing, and in what he
will do hereafter.

1. In this Testimony of Jesus in what he has done, and is become, is showed
to us, that Jesus Christ the Word, who was with God, and was God, was made
flesh for sinful mankind, and laid hold of the seed of Abraham, and Adam, in
that body which the Father prepared for him, whereby his ear was opened, and he
fitted to do the will of God, in being further abased for us, and doing what
was needful to our being brought back to God; in order whereto, he had the
trespasses of the world (even the guilt of all those trespasses which
occasioned the first breath, and enmity between God, and mankind) imputed to
him; For God made him who knew no sin, to be sin for us, 2. Cor. 5. 19-21. He
bare our sins in his own body to (and on) the tree, and God therefore went to
law with him, He was wounded for our transgressions, bruised for our iniquites;
he by the grace of God tasted death for every man, Heb. 2. 9. He was delivered
for our offenses, and is raised again for our justification; and such the
vertuousness, and preciousness of his personal abasement, and sufferings, in
the virtues whereof he is taken from prison, and judgment, that he has
redeemed us in himself from the curse of the law, purged away our sins from
before the presence of God, slain the enmity that was between God and us, taken
out of the way all that was contrary to us, abolished our death, and spoiled
principalities, and powers, and made a show of them openly triumphing over them
in himself; and so has made peace for us by the blood of his Cross, Gal. 3.
13. Isa. 53. 5, 6. Ephesians. 2. 14-16. Col. 2. 14, 15. 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. And has
recovered, restored, and brought back our loss into himself, so that there is
compleatness for us in him; he has not only taken away, and removed the guilt
of our first sin, and sinfulness from before the presence of God; but having
offered himself a spotless sacrifice to the Father throug the eternal Spirit
has obtained power to make reconciliation for the sins of the people, which
are condemnable according to the rule of the glorious Gospel, Heb. 7. 27. and
2. 17. through this man is preached to us the forgiveness of sins, Act. 13. 37,
38. and he has restored our nature in himself to perfect innocence, integrity,
and righteousness, and is filled with all the fullness of grace, and truth, Joh.
1. 14-17. and has obtained eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12. and
confirmed a new Testament of great, and precious promises of all things that
pertain to life, and godliness, and an everlasting covenant, 2 Cor. 1. 20. Heb.
13. 20. So that he is become a rich, and full fountain in which there is
pardon, peace, righteousness, spirit, promises, eternal life. 1 John 5. 10, 11.
Yea all things are delivered to him of the Father, Math. 11. 27. all things are
here ready a feast of fat things prepared for all people, Isa. 25. 6. All
things that the Father has is his, Joh. 16. 15. and he in our nature, and for
us is glorified with the Fathers own self with the glory he had with him before
the world was, Joh. 17. 5. The Father has so loved the Son, because he laid
down his life; that he might take it up again, that he has given all things
into his hand, Joh. 3. 35* with chap. 10. 17, 18. made him both Lord, and
Christ, the last Adam, the quickening spirit, the Lord, the fountain of living
waters, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption; he is
beautiful, and glorious, excellent, and comely for our escaping; he is the
foundation God has laid in Zion, the fountain of forgiveness, grace, and
spirit; God has given him glory that our faith, and hope might be in God; and
this perfection is in him for every man, and it was the work of the Apostles,
and is of those that so walk as they have them for an ensample to warn every
man, and teach every man in all wisdom, that they may present every man perfect
in Christ Jesus, that they may show all men where compleatness is prepared for
them, even durable riches, and righteousness, that they may not be at a loss,
or put upon it to seek bread, rest, peace, and feeding in desolate places, but
may know assuredly by the light of this Testimony, that he is the rest for the
weary, and he the refreshing, 1 Cor. 15. 45. Isa. 4. 2. Col. 1. 28, 29. Isa.
28. 12-16.

Now then in this first, great, and fundamental branch of the Gospel is showed
to us that we may take heed and beware of iniquity in General, and so of this
of covetousness; For in what is said we may see and learn

1. That there is forgiveness with him. For

1. We are not now necessarily under the guilt, and dominion of our sins, for
as is said, he is raised for our justification, who dyed for our sins, and this
so virtuous that as all have sinned, and are come short of the glory of God, so
they are justified freely by Gods grace through the redemption that is in
Jesus; and this true before he is set forth to be a propitiation through faith
in his blood, Romans 3. 23-25. He has so satisfied God's justice, fulfilled his
truth, appeased his wrath, answered his law, and so paid our debt; that now the
wrath of God does not abide on any man simply, because our first Father has
sinned, and we in him, or because we are naturally, and unavoidably polluted,
and defiled in our own persons, as we come to have a being from him, and so are
necessarily inclined to pride, covetousness, etc. This is not the condemnation,
that we are by nature, and first birth darkness; but that light is vouchsafed,
and men love darkness rather than light, etc. Joh. 3. 19. The judgment of this
world was executed upon, and suffered by Jesus Christ, so that no man is
condemned because he has sinned in the first Adam simply, and comes forth from
him necessarily polluted; but there is a door of repentance opened, and all the
ends of the Earth called to look to him, and be saved, Isa. 45. 22. Nor shall
any man perish for ever in that first death, but be all raised again by the man
Christ Jesus; and shall not then be judged according to that first rule of
judgment, Joh. 5. 22-27. And this, because Jesus Christ by the grace of God
tasted death for every man, and is raised again from the dead; and indeed
otherwise we are yet in our sins, and must so abide for ever (for no man can
redeem his brother, Psalm. 49. 7.) and all faith preaching, and hope is in vain,
1 Cor. 15. 14-17. if there were any one man for whom Christ has not by the
grace of God tasted death, it were impossible for such an one to flee from
covetousness, and in vain to warn him so to do; The house of Israel were
reasoning rightly, if there had been any ground for their so saying; If (say
they) our transgressions, and our sins be upon us, and we pine away in them,
how can we then live? how can we turn to God from Idols to serve the living,
and true God? it is impossible, Ezekiel. 33. 10. So may we say; if men's sins be
upon them which they are naturally, and necessarily guilty of, and polluted
with, there is then no hope, the case is desperate; But what he said to them
when they were so reasoning, As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in
the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way, and live, Verse.
11. is generally true concerning mankind, while he is calling to them; and of
the truth of this he has given his Son for a witness, in that he appointed
him, and he was manifested to take away our sins, and in him is no sin, 1. Joh.
3. 5. As the first offense was unto all men to condemnation, so the
righteousness of the last Adam was to all men to justification of life, in an
answerable sense, Romans 5. 18* he once in the end of the world appeared to put
away sin by the sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9. 26. and by virtue, and as the
effect thereof, he has delivered us in himself from the power of our enemies;
Now (says he) is the judgment of this world (namely when his soul was
troubled) now shall the Prince of this world be cast out (namely, from being
the Prince of the world, as he was necessarily according to the curse of the
law,) And I, if I be lifted up from the Earth, will draw all men unto me,
(namely from under the judgment of the world, and dominion of the Prince of
the world) Joh. 12. 27, 31, 32. Joh. 17. 2. Math. 12. 28, 29. Now then herein
is further evidenced, that man may lay a part all filthiness, and so this of
covetousness, in that, that snare of Satan is broken, and we are in Christ
delivered, without which we had been necessarily bondslaves to him, and led
captive by him at his pleasure, being shut out, and banished from God; But he
has delivered us in himself, out of the hands of our enemies, that we might
serve him without fear, in righteousness, and holiness before him, etc. Luke 1.
73-75. Psalm. 98. 1-4. Col. 2. 15. Oh that men would praise the Lord for his
goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men; For he has
broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron in sunder, Psalm. 107. 15,
16. He has broken down the middle wall of partition between God and us; has
taken out of the way all that was in the way contrary to us, nailing it to his
Cross; and having spoiled principalities, and powers, he made a show of them
openly triumphing over them in himself, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. Col. 2. 14, 15. Psalm.
47. 1-5, 6. and 68. 18.

2. Herein is also shown, that Jesus Christ has not only purged away the
guilt of that first sin, and sinfulness from before the presence of God; but
also that he has obtained power into himself to make reconciliation for the
sins of the people, which they are guilty of upon a new account, and which
deserve new wrath, even the wrath to come; he has not only received gifts in
the man for men (as they come to have a being from Adam) but for the rebellious
also (that are disobedient, and gainsaying to the Gospel, compare Isa. 65. 2.
with Romans 10. 21.) that the Lord God might dwell among them, Psalm. 68. 18.
without which they could not possibly be made an habitation for him. He offered
up sacrifice, first for his own sins (which were imputed to him, and accepted
by him as his to answer for) and then for the peoples; and this he did (not
often, as the former Highpriests, he needed not to do it daily, but) once,
when he offered up himself, Heb. 7. 27. and 10, 11, 12. He has not only made
peace for us by the blood of his Cross; But he is our peace, Ephesians. 2. 14. the
propitiation for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2. 2. and the
propitiatory, and Mercy-seat, and so set forth in the word of faith, Romans 3.
25. and as in our types of old, the Mercy-seat was put above, and so did cover
the ark in which was the two tables of the covenant, whereby our sinfulness,
and vileness is discovered, Exodus 25. 21, 22. even so Jesus Christ he is the
true Mercy-seat, the covering for our personal sins, in which we also
transgress the law; and for which otherwise we should speedily be cut off;
without this also we could not lay apart any thing that is evil; For there is
no man that sins not, who can say he has made his heart clean, or that he
is pure from his iniquity, and so particularly from this iniquity of
covetousness; now were there not this provision made for us in, and through the
blood of Jesus, were there not forgiveness of those sins in which we sin
against the grace of God bringing salvation there could be no opportunity for
us to come to be washed, or to seek deliverance therefrom, and so God could not
be worshipped by us: If thou Lord should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall
stand? but there is forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared, Psalm.
130. 3, 4. Herein the grace of God, and gift by grace does exceed the first
offense; For the judgment was by one (offense) to condemnation; but the free
gift is of many offenses unto justification, Romans 5. 16. not only to
justification and discharge from that first offense, but from many offenses in
which men sin after the similitude of Adams transgression; and in Christ God is
become a God gracious, and merciful to sinners, a God of pardon, Neh. 9. 17.
forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin; who can righteously heal men,
and forgive their iniquity of covetousness; whose name, and power is great for
pardoning great iniquities, Numb. 14. 17-19. Psalm. 25. 11. with whom there is
plenteous redemption in Christ Jesus, through his blood, the forgiveness of
sins, according to the riches of his grace, for thieves, covetous ones,
rebellious transgressors, backsliders, while the day of grace, and patience is
continued to them, Psalm. 130. 7. Ephesians. 1. 7. 1 Cor. 6. 10, 11. And also through
this man, who is raised from the dead, and saw not corruption, is preached to
us the forgiveness of our sins, without some discovery whereof, no man could be
encouraged in believing to confess his sins, Act. 13. 37, 38. Psalm. 130. 3, 4.
Jer. 3. 12, 13. 22. and 31. 19. Joel. 2. 13. Romans 2. 4. Isa. 55. 1-6, 7. Act.
5. 30, 31.

2. In this first, and fundamental branch of the Testimony is declared to us
the vileness of our sins, which needed such a mighty one to be abased for us,
as was the Son of God, and the vanity of our idols; for none of these could be
a meet sacrifice to be offered up to God; We were not redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver, and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ; thousands
of rams, and ten thousand rivers of oil would not have satisfied for the sin of
the World, or have made peace, they profited not in this day of wrath, for if
they could, Christ has dyed in vain, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Gal. 2. 21. it was
necessary that he that was in the form of God, should take on him our nature,
and become obedient to death; or otherwise we must have pined away in our
iniquities, and have been for ever expelled from the presence of God; hence it
was the Apostles manner, and custom to open, and allege, that Christ must
needs have suffered, and risen again, Act. 17. 3. this then shows that we are
debtors but not to the World, that we should love it, or the things thereof;
Was it crucified for us? Or were we baptized into the name of it that we should
set our hearts, and affections on it? What engagement has it laid upon us that
we should forsake the Lord, the fountain of living waters, and lust after, and
hew to our selves broken cisterns that can hold no water? has this redeemed us
from the curse of the law, or did it contribute any thing thereto? Was this the
means by which Christ made peace for us, or needed he, or possessed he a great
share of this, that he might do the will of God in order to our recovery? look
we into, and continue looking into the perfect law of liberty, and this will be
powerful to strengthen us to mortify our members, which are on the earth. Thus
the Apostle sound it; God forbid that I should glory save in the cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified to me, Gal. 6. 14. it was
herein rendered as a dead, vile, unprofitable thing to him, as that in which he
could take no delight; in the preaching of this Cross it appears, that without
bloodshedding there was no remission to be obtained, no peace to be made but by
the blood of his Cross, no victory to be gotten over our enemies but through
death; how then shall we give our loves unto, or set our hearts upon such vain
things that have not profited us? And especially how shall they that have been
baptized into Christ, and thereto were baptized into his death (instructed, and
washed into the knowledge thereof, in which they see the emptiness of all
idols, and that these things are not of the Father, but are of the world, how
shall they) set their affections on things on the earth, or mind earthly things?

3. In this also is showed unto us a rich, and complete provision of all things
treasured up in the person of our Jesus, obtained by his blood, which are
infinitely better than what naturally we are desiring, and that which in the
enjoyment will give rest to us; in which also he is showing the emptiness of
all other things: For the holy Spirit in glorifying Christ, therein shows to
us, that all flesh is grass, and the goodliness thereof, the glory of man to be
as the flower of grass; the grass withers, and the flower thereof falls
away; riches are not for ever, but the word of the Lord endures for ever. Isa.
40. 6. 8. 1 Pet. 1. 18-24, 25. Here are exceeding better treasures provided for
us, and laid up in a sure hand, and in seeking them with the whole heart we
shall bemade partakers of them: In him are unsearchable riches; Ephesians. 3. 9. All
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2. 3. riches, and honor are with him,
yea dureable riches, and righteousness, Pro. 8. 18. in seeking after him the
almighty shall be our gold, and we shall have silver of strength, Job. 22. 25.
God has given us (mankind) eternal life, and this life is in his Son, 1 John
5. 10, 11. This is that treasure to be desired, which is in the dwelling of the
wise, in the secret place of the most high, Pro. 21. 20. The Merchandise
whereof is better than the Merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than
fine gold, etc. Pro. 3. 13. 15. and 8. 19. How much better is it to get wisdom
than gold? etc. Pro. 16. 16. Man knows not the price thereof, Job. 28. 12-20.
What would it profit a man if he had the whole world in a day of wrath, would
this save him? would this procure the forgiveness of his sins? will this give
peace, or make a man partaker of the favor of God, and fellowship with him?
will it obtain his love? no, if a man would give all the substance of his house
for love, it would utterly be contemned, Cant. 8. 7. Pro. 11. 4. Zeph. 1. 18.
their silver, and their gold shall not be able to deliver in the day of the
Lords Wrath; they shall not satisfy their souls, nor fill their bowels, Ezekiel.
7. 19. But God has freely provided better things for us; in which is shown,
that those uncertain riches have no glory as compared with the glory of this
durable riches in Christ, this man who has made peace for us, and is our
peace, is more precious than fine gold, than the golden wedge of Ophir, Isa.
13. 12. He is so in himself, and to them that believe he is precious; this is
that treasure hid in a field, the which when a man has found he hides, and
for joy thereof goes, and sells all that he has, and buys that field;
counts all as dung, that he may win him, and be found in him, Math. 13. 44-46.
Phil. 3. 7-9. How powerful would the consideration hereof be to engage to set
our affections on things above, and not on things on the earth, Col. 3. 1, 2.
Considering also, that as there is such an excellency in those riches which the
Lamb has worthily received, because he was slain, Rev. 5. 12. so he is
possessed of them for us, even for us mankind; hence all are called upon to
come to the Waters, even every one that thirsts; not only those that are
gracious thirsters, and who thirst after more from the tastes they have forehad
of the graciousness of the Lord; but such also as are seeking refreshing where
it is not; and so are reproved for laboring for what is not bread, and spending
their money for what profits not, Isa. 55. 1-6, 7. Yea our Savior on this
ground, because all things are delivered to him of the Father invites all that
labor, and are heavy laden to come to him, and he would give them rest; in
which he signifies that they were such as had not yet rest though they labored
for it; and therefore they were not laboring for it, or seeking it where it
was, and yet he graciously calls them, Math. 11. 27, 28. and instructs those
that were laboring for the meat that perishes, to labor for that which indures
to eternal life, Joh. 6. 27. as intimating this meat was prepared for them, and
indeed the bread which he gives is his flesh which he has given for the life
of the world, Joh. 6. 51. so that also in seeking after this he will give it
unto them; Pro. 2. 1-6. As he has obtained all into himself that are excellent
for mankind, so he has given unto us assurance in his great, and precious
promises confirmed by his blood that every one that asks shall receive, Math.
7. 7, 8. and such encouragement he has not given us, that in laboring to be
rich, he will grant our desire herein; yea in mercy he may so disappoint, and
befool us, that we may not find the life of our hands; But if any lack wisdom,
let him ask it of God who gives liberally to all men, and upbraids not, and it
shall be given him, Jam. 1. 5. were this provision in Christ never so
satisfying, and enriching (as it is infinitely so) yet while men are ignorant
that it is prepared for them before they come, and whether they come, or no,
and sure to be had in seeking after it, they content themselves with their
husks rather than to run at such an uncertainty for such things as are not
seen; and that message which comes to men by the hand of a fool cutteth off the
feet, Pro. 26. 6. it hinders them, and takes off their affections, and pursuit
after the things that are so infinitely worthy, and more to be desired than
gold, yea than much fine gold; while fools (who consent not, or come not up, to
wholesome words, even the words of our Lord and Savior, 1 Timothy 6. 4, 5. and so
know not whether Christ has dyed for those they declare their message to, or
whether God loves them, or there be any better things certainly prepared for
them in Christ before they seek, and whether they seek, or no, and so, sure to
be had in seeking) do yet exhort men to labor to know whether Christ dyed for
them, to labor for that meat which indureth to eternal life, to get an interest
in Christ, to labor to repent, and turn to God. The things that are not seen,
though excellent, yet are such as men naturally have no delight in, or desire
after; and therefore the Holy Ghost, not only commends them to us as those
things that are principal, and most desirable; but also, assures men that all
things are ready for them; the bread is prepared, and wine mingled, Math. 22. 4
8. Pro. 9. 1-5. Isa. 55. 1 4-6. and affirms that those that follow lying
vanities forsake their own mercies, loose their own souls, deny the Lord that
bought them, Jona. 2. 8. Math. 16. 26. 2 Pet. 2. 1. and that in coming to
Christ, as God is drawing them, they shall not be ashamed of their hope: That
so men may be encouraged upon principles of certainty, and truth to seek the
Lord while he may be found: it was the confideration that there was bread
enough in his Fathers house, and to spare, that made the Prodigal resolve to
return to him, and no longer expose himself to perish with hunger, Luke 15. 17,
18. This branch of the Testimony of Jesus the Apostle delivered first of all
unto the Corinthians, while they were some of them thieves, covetous, etc. to
wit, that Christ dyed for their sins, and was buried, and rose again the third
day, etc. to redeem them from this iniquity; and it was powerful, for by it
they were saved, etc. Compare, 1 Cor 6. 10. 11. with Chap. 15. 1-3. Yea

4. He has made such provision in his great and precious promises which are
all confirmed in the blood of Christ, and sure to all the seed, forgiving to us
whatsoever is good for us in, and to to our seeking after him, as is powerful,
as viewed in the Cross of Christ, to preserve us from covetousness: Jesus
Christ who was for a little while made lower than the Angels, that he might by
the grace of God taste death for every man: is now crowned with glory, and
honor; and he has not only received all spiritual blessings in Heavenly
things, such as pardon, righteousness, wisdom, eternal life; but God has
given him dominion over the works of his hands, and has put all things under
his feet, though yet we see not all things put under him; This was contained in
the loss of the first public man, that having sinned, he deprived himself of
the glory of God, and so of that dominion which God gave him over the works of
his hands; but now Jesus Christ has restored that which he took not away,
Psalm. 8. 4-8. with Heb. 2. 7, 8. The Earth is the Lord Christ's, and the
fullness thereof, Psalm. 24. 1. with 1 Cor. 10. 21-26. All power is given to him
in Heaven, and in Earth, Math. 28. 18. Indeed this is not gloriously manifested
now, as it shall be hereafter, but we by faith may know that God has put all
things under his feet, Ephesians. 1. 21, 22. All that the Father has is his, Joh.
16. 15. and he, as thus furnished, has given us assurance in his promises that
in seeking him we shall have of these things what he sees needful, and good for
us; which promises are so ratified, and sealed by his blood, that there is no
reason, or room left for us, while walking in the light of the Lord, to call
into question his faithfulness in performing, see how the Holy Ghost sets this
before us to preserve from covetousness, and from the practice of those that
exercise themselves thereto: Our Savior when he warns his disciples of taking
thought for their life, or body, he gives this instruction and promise to them,
seek ye first (in, and unto all things) the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all these things (namely, what you shall eat, what you shall
drink, and wherewith you shall be clothed) shall be added to you, Math. 6.
24-34. so the Apostle says, Let your conversation be without covetousness, and
be content with such things as you have (namely as you have, prepared in
Christ, in whom all things are yours, even the world, life, things present,
etc. 1 Cor. 3. 21-23. and which you have assured to you in his promises, and he
is giving to you in his way.) For he has said, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee; so that we may boldly say, the Lord is my helper, etc. Heb. 13.
5, 6. Psalm. 34 8-10. Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him,
upon them that hope in his mercy, to deliver their soul from death, and to
keeps them alive in famine, Psalm. 33. 18, 19. see also Psalm. 37. 3, 4, 19. and
84. 10, 11.

He has not promised us meat for our lust, or that he will give unto us such
accommodations as our natural spirit is desiring, and craving, that may be
hurtful for us; but what ever he sees we need to our seeking him he will not
withhold. Yea he may bring his people into many straits, so that they may be in
hunger, and thirst, in fastings, in cold, and nakedness, for the trial of their
faith; and that they may learn to live the life they live in the flesh by the
faith of the Son of God, who loved us, and gave himself for us: But he will
cause all things to work together for good to them that love God, who are the
called according to purpose, Romans 8. 28-32-37 39. Yea and he that gave his Son
in due time to dye for us ungodly ones, while without strength, will in due
time, and seasonably be mindful of his covenant, in giving meat to them that
fear him, till they have finished their course, Psalm. 111. 4, 5. Oh what
powerful arguments are contained, and what complete encouragement is given to
us in this word of the beginning of Christ, to strengthen us to receive this
admonition, viz, To take heed, and beware of covetousness.

2. That men may take heed, and beware of covetousness while called to day, is
manifest, in what Jesus Christ is now doing in his present work, and office
whereto the Father has appointed him; and that both in what he does to us from
Heaven in the name of the Father; and in what he does for us in Heaven with the
Father, in both which he is the Savior of all men, especially of them that
believe. And so

1. Jesus Christ who has made peace for us by his blood, and is our peace; in
whom dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, is appointed, and hereby
fitted to be, and is the great Apostle by whom God has spoken to us in these
last days, and by whom he still speaks in his Testimony by his Spirit to our
spirits, that we might know the things freely prepared for us, and given us in
himself, that through the knowledge of it we might be redeemed from the Earth;
he is the great peace-preacher, preventing every man in due time with some
discoveries of his goodness; and especially us, amongst whom the Scriptures in
the records thereof are preserved; He is the true light that lights every man
that comes into the world; and more advantage does he give to us, upon whom
his name is called, in opening our blind eyes in due time, and turning us to
God from Idols, and so saving us from our sins; For to this end has God
appointed him to be the light, that he might save us; for thus he says, I have
given thee for a light of the Gentiles, that (by this means) thou ma^st be for
salvation to the ends of the Earth, Act. 13. 47. The grace of God that brings
salvation to all men has appeared, teaching us, that denying ungodliness, and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, etc. Tit. 2. 11, 12. it brings salvation
to all men in due season, not finds it in men beforehand; and it is saving, not
only it has such a tendency in it, but also there is saving strength
accompanying it, to strengthen men to receive it in it is appearance, and
therewith to deny worldly lusts, etc. Otherwise how glorious soever the things
be which Christ has wrought, and obtained into himself for us, men cannot take
heed, and beware of any thing reproved; For man is born like a wild Asses colt,
the way of peace they know not; they have no wisdom in them; they cannot know
those things which belong to their peace, for they are spiritually discerned;
nor can they see the iniquity of covetousness, but may think it to be
godliness; every man by his knowledge is brutish; and thence they have no
freedom of will to choose life, and refuse death; no affection to, or desire
after things that are above; But God has put his spirit upon his Son, and has
given him for a light of the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes, etc. Isa. 42.
1-6. 7. and 49. 6-9. and good, and upright (faithful to him that appointed him)
is the Lord; therefore will he teach sinners in the way, Psalm. 25. 8. so that
when men are walking in the iniquity of their covetousness to the provoking God
to wrath, and to smite them, etc. he (to recover them therefrom) creates the
fruits of his lips, peace, peace, to him that is far off, Isa. 57. 17-19. he
makes known his words to the worst of sinners, and particularly to those that
are greedy of gain, and therewith reproving them, Pro. 1. 19-23. upon whom does
not his light arise? Job. 25. 3. The Holy Spirit does convince the world of
sin, because they believe not on Christ; that is, he does both reprove, and
fault them; and not only so, but convince them, and evidence to them, that
this is their great sin, and the cause of all other sins, for which the wrath
of God abides on them, and so of their covetousness; and the argument whereby
he thus convinces them, it is, by glorifying Christ, and taking of his things,
and showing to them; Job. 16. 8-15. That is to say, to the convincing them of
their sinfulness, he shows to men, that Christ has dyed for them, and is risen
again, and has received all fullness, and compleatness into himself for them,
that they might run unto Jesus Christ with a relinquishing all other things,
Isa. 55. 1-5. All things that are reproved are made manifest by the light;
wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleep, arise from the dead, (namely from
dead persons, and things, and particularly from all filthiness of the flesh,
and from this bitter root of covetousness of which the Apostle had been
admonishing) and Christ shall give thee light, Ephesians. 5. 3-5-14.

And to those that turn at his reproofs, and receive the Testimony God has
given of his Son, he is pouring forth his spirit to them, and making known his
words; He is giving to them the Spirit of wisdom (to make them wise, to
inlighten the eyes of their understanding) and revelation (to reveal Christ
further to them, that they may count what has been fore gainful to them as
loss for Christ; Yea, that they might still count all things as loss and dung
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, that they may win him, Phil. 3.
7-9. He is rendering his blood so precious before them, in showing the peace
thereby made, the victory thereby gotten, the righteousness thereby completed,
the eternal redemption thereby obtained; the new Testament, and everlasting
covenant thereby sealed, and confirmed, that he is thereby still, and further
powerfully redeeming them from their vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Rev.
5. 9. with chap. 14. 3, 4. He gives himself unto them, and with himself all
things, to deliver them from this present evil world, 1 Cor. 3. 21-23. Gal. 1.
4. and thus is he deading them to the things here below; crucifying them to the
world, Romans 6. 2, 3. Gal. 6. 14. raising their affections to things above, Col.
2. 9-12. with 3. 1, 2. strengthening them to have their conversation in Heaven,
their minds, hearts, and affections there, and they set to promote the things
thereof, even while they may, according to the instructions of his grace, be
exercised as to the outward man in the work of their Callings, and assuring
them he will never forsake them, in having their conversation without
covetousness.

2. He is also the great, and only Mediator between God and Men, making
intercession for transgressors, that they might be saved from their sins, and
so from this iniquity of their covetousness, and come to the knowledge of the
truth, 1 Timothy 2. 4, 5. otherwise men that have added rebellion unto their sin,
could have no opportunity for being washed without which they shall have no
part with Christ; but now through his daily presenting himself in the virtues
of his sacrifice offered once for all, patience, and forbearance is exercised,
and space of repentance vouchsafed to rebellions ones, that the Lord God may
dwell amongst them; and all this day of his patience he is vouchsafing means,
and stretching out his hand to them that are greedy of gain, that they in
hearing his words, might turn at his reproof, Psalm. 68. 18. Prove. 1. 19-23. 24.
Isa. 65. 2. Rev. 2. 20, 21. He is the Lamb of God, that takes away (in his
present mediation) the sins of the world, Joh. 1. 29. and is the propitiation
for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2. 2. He is praying, Father, forgive
them, as Luke 23. 34. Lord, let it alone this year also, till I shall dig about
it, and dung it, Luc. 13. 7, 8. and while he thus intercedes, the Father hears
him, and it is an acceptable time, 2 Cor. 6. 1, 2. the long-suffering of the
Lord is, and is to be accounted salvation; his end herein being that men might
come to repentance, and be saved, Isa. 53. 10-12. 2 Pet. 3. 9. 15. Act. 14. 17.
2 Cor. 5. 15.

And in an especial manner he is mediating for those that come God by him, and
is therefore able to save them to the uttermost, Heb. 7. 25. without which, he
were not able; he is the Mediator of the new Testament that by means of death
for the redemption of the transgressions under the first Testament, they which
are called might receive the promise of the eternal inheritance, Heb. 9. 15. he
is taking away, and so covering their sins, that God may be patient to them,
while they continue in them, that they may have space vouchsafed to come to the
fountain prepared, and opened, for washing, and cleansing, and that the spirit
of wisdom, and revelation in the knowledge of Christ may be given to them
continually, that through that knowledge they might flee from the pollutions of
the world; and in confessing their sins, and turning to him, he is forgiving
them in Heaven, and making them partakers of the forgiveness of their sins, and
so mediating the new Testament in his blood, that they may be cared for; to the
end they may seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness; he is their
Advocate (who is also the daily, and standing propitiation for their sins) to
teach them what to pray for as they ought, and how to pray, to hear their
prayers, to grant their requests, and fulfill the desires of their heart; to
manage their matters, to wash, and cleanse them in his blood, to subdue their
iniquities, fight their battles, supply their wants, and perfect what concerns
them; He is a Sun, and shield, and will give grace, and glory; and no good
thing will be withhold from them that walk uprightly, Joh. 2. 1, 2. Psalm. 84.
11, 12.

3. To this end, that those that hear the word may be doers of it, and so take
heed, and beware of covetousness, he is setting before us the things to come at
the appearing of Christ, and in his kingdom; and these are proposed to, and set
before men generally in the scriptures of truth; and of great usefulness to
those that believe the Testimony of Jesus; and are looking to the end from the
beginning, to strengthen them to have their conversation without carefulness
and covetousness; As to say

1. He has prepared a kingdom for them that receive his grace to purpose, even
to the saving of their souls; He will raise them again that sleep in Jesus
first, and change the surviving believers, and they together shall appear in
glory, when Christ who is our life shall appear in his glory; they are now
kings, and priests unto God, and shall reign on the earth, Rev. 5. 10. and 20.
4-6. the kingdom, and dominion, and greatness of the kingdom under the whole
heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the most high, Dan. 7.
27. they shall sit with Christ in his throne, Rev. 3. 21. judge the world, 1
Cor. 6. 2. inherit the earth, Psalm. 37. 9-11. have power over the nations, and
rule them with a rod of iron, Rev. 2. 26, 27. and then completely bear the
Image of the Heavenly in their bodies, which shall be fashioned into the
likeness of his glorious body; In their spirits, enjoying the harvest of all
blessing, of which they have now but a first fruits. In that dominion, and rule
that shall be given them when he shall make new heavens, and a new earth, 1
Cor. 15. 49. in being Christ's they are Abraham's seed, and heirs according to
promise, and so heirs of the world to come, Romans 4. 13. Heb. 2. 5. and shall
enjoy the heavenly Canaan, which was given to Abraham, and his seed by an
everlasting covenant; the which he has not yet possessed; God gave him none
inheritance in it, no not so much as to set his foot on, yet he promised he
would give it to him for a possession, and to his seed after him, Act. 7* 5.
and faithful is he that has promised, who also will do it; This everlasting
covenant being confirmed by the blood of Jesus, who is brought again from the
dead, and alive for evermore, being the great shepherd of the sheep, and
Mediator of the new Testament -- that the called may recieve the promise of the
eternal inheritance, Heb. 9. 14. and 13. 20. and blessed is he that believes;
for there shall be a performance of the things that are spoken. Christ himself
as raised from the dead, being the foundation and ground of it; and he as given
to us in the Gospel, and by faith received is that in which God makes with us,
and gives us assureance of the everlasting covenant, Isa. 55. 3. with Act. 13.
^4.

Now this blessed hope which is declared to us in the word of the truth of the
Gospel, is very powerful, as viewed in the Cross of Christ, to deliver us from
this present evil world; we are saved by hope from our sins, and so from
loving, and lusting after this World. Hence frequently the Holy Ghost sets this
before us, to take off our hearts from the things here below, and that we might
be without carefulness, and covetousness. Thus our Savior in this Luke 12.
takes occasion from the miscarriages of this man who desired him to speak to
his brother to divide the inheritance with him, to warn his disciples of taking
thought for their life what they shall eat, etc. And to seal home that
admonition, says; Fear not little flock, For it is your Fathers good pleasure
to give you the kingdom, (therefore) sell that you have and give alms, etc.
Luke 12. 22-32-35. so the Apostle says, When Christ our life shall appear,
then shall ye also appear with him in glory; Mortify therefore your members
that are upon the earth -- covetousness which is idolatry; Col. 3. 4, 5. He
that has his hope in Christ, that when he shall appear we shall be like him,
etc. purifieth himself as he is pure. As Christ is pure in his work, washing,
and cleansing from desires of being now manifested, and from minding, and
affecting the things of the world, so such an one purifieth himself, daily, and
continually he goes on so to do, 1 John 3. 1-3. how forcible was this blessed
hope with the holy men in former times, to redeem them from the earth,; they
saw the promises afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them
(kissed, and closed with them, as very desirable, and lovely) and (as the
effect, and consequent thereof) confessed that they were strangers, and
pilgrims on the earth, etc. Heb. 11. 13. 16. And by faith Moses preferred the
reproach of Christ before the treasures of Egypt, and refused to be called the
son of Pharaohs daughter; For he had respect to the recompense of reward, Heb.
11* 24-26. and if this had such efficacy on them, when they saw the promises
afar off, would it not now rather crucify us to the world, and the World to
us, were we looking to those things not seen? considering, that the promise God
made to the Fathers he has fulfilled, in that he has raised Christ from the
dead, in whom all the promises of God are yea, and amen, Act. 13. 32, 33. 2
Cor. 1. 20. would it not make us willing to go forth unto him without the camp,
bearing his reproach; For we have here no continuing City, but (have good
reason to) seek one to come, Heb. 13. 13, 14. Yea and especially now the grace
of God does instruct, and move us to have our conversation without
covetousness, For the end of all things is at hand, 1 Pet 4. 7. the time is
short, it remains that both they that have wives be as if they bad none, (as
with respect to covetousness, and carefulness, in laying up for themselves, and
theirs here on earth) and they that weep (for any loss, deprivation, or
disappointment in God's providence ordered to them) as though they wept not;
and they that rejoice (for any gain advantage, or increase) as though they
rejoiced not; and they that buy (that they may have some visible maintenance
secured to them) as though they possessed not, etc. For the fashion of this
world passes away, 1 Cor. 7. 29-32. Wherefore gird we up the loins of our
mind (from wandering in our desires after the things on the earth, or setting
our hearts upon them) be sober, and hope to the end, for the grace that is to
be brought at the revelation of Jesus Christ; For yet a little while, and he
that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, now the just shall live by
faith, 1 Pet. 1. 13. Heb. 10. 37. 38* 2 Per. 3. 11-14.

2. And that we may take heed, and beware of covetousness, consider the terror
of the Lord, against those that continue therein, as declared in the Gospel.

The Lord will be terrible unto them, such as such shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God; let no man deceive us with vain words; for because of this the
wrath of God comes continually upon the children of disobedience to the
glorious Gospel which comes to redeem and deliver from the earth, and from
having fellowship with men in this unfruitful work, 1 Cor. 6. 10, 11. Ephesians. 5.
5-7. Col. 3. 5, 6. The day of the Lord will come as a snare on all them that
dwell on the face of the whole earth, Luke 21. 34, 35. The Lord will be very
terrible to such in that day of wrath; in that day shall a man cast his idols
of silver, and his idols of gold, which they made each one for himself, to
worship to the Moles, and to the Batts, to go into the clefts of the rocks, and
into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of
his Majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the earth, Isa. 2. 16. 21. Oh
let us not by following lying vanities forsake our own mercies; what will it
profit a man to gain the whole world, and loose his own soul? these are
idolaters, and as such they shall be punished, their worm dies not, in that
lake into which they shall be cast, and their fire is not quenched. Were it not
infinitely better for us now to receive the love of the truth that we may be
saved from our iniquities, and idols, than expose our selves to the wrath to
come? Oh who knows the power of it? what shall a man then give in exchange
for his soul? than a great ransom cannot deliver; will he esteem thy riches,
no not gold, nor all the forces of strength; Job. 36. 18, 19. these profit not
in a day of wrath. Oh how dreadful will it then be, when the Son of man shall
say, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, propared for the Devil, and his
angels? For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye
gave me no drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye
clothed me not; sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not, Math. 25. 41-43.
He says not, your heart was so given to your covetousness, you so loved the
world, and the things thereof, that you defrauded me, and took away from me
wrongfully what was mine; you were not content with that portion of earthly
things that was in your own possession, but you coveted mine, and took it away
by violence, and extortion, and so exposed me to hunger, thirst, cold, and
nakedness; no, this was not directly laid to their charge, though this is
strongly supposed to be a more grievous iniquity; but that for which they are
sentenced to everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, it is, that
they did not cast their bread upon the waters; they withheld more than was
meet, and now it tends to this great poverty; they are now left destitute of
his favor, and for ever separated from him, and doomed to the vengeance of
eternal fire; now when his poor servants that formerly enjoyed their evil
things are comforted, those who formerly enjoyed their good things are
tormented, and shall be so for ever; For there will then be such a great gulf
fixed, that there is no passing from that state and condition to another, Luke
16. 25. at this our heart may tremble, and be moved out of place; who amongst
us will give ear to this? who will hearken, and hear for the time to come? such
an one as thus shuts up the bowels of his compassion when opened, may possibly
by some men be looked upon as an hard man, and as one that too much loves his
money, and this may be deemed as a venial, or small offense in him; and yet he
may pass for an honest man, though somewhat hard; but were it wisely
considered, how such will hereafter be proceeded against, it would, as viewed in
Christ (in whom there is now forgiveness, and cleansing, and power to deliver
from the wrath to come) be powerful to awaken us to quit our selves from this
iniquity.

What has been said, in showing that we may take heed, and beware of
covetousness, and by what means we may do it, may be of usefulness to us.

Use. 1. To show unto us the preciousness of the blood of Christ, in its
virtue, and in it is discovery for redeeming us, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. As that is it
whereby forgiveness is procured, peace made, spirit received, great and
precious promises confirmed, eternal life, and redemption obtained; so the
discovery, and application thereof is that whereby he does wash us from our
sins, Rev. 1. 5* 1 John 1. 7. redeem us unto God from the Earth, and from
amongst men, Rev. 5. 9. and 14. 4, 5. purges from dead works, as well as from
those that are deadly, to serve the living God, Heb. 9. 14.

2. It shows unto us the reason why we are not washed from this filthiness of
covetousness, namely, because we come not unto, and are not obedient to the
blood of sprinkling, 1 Pet. 1. 2. Ephesians. 5. 6. for were we obedient thereto, it
would save us; and if we do not thus experiment it, let us judge our selves,
and search, and try our ways, for certainly we have been wandering out of the
way of understanding, 1 Cor. 15. 2. 1 These. 1. 9, 10. Oh thou who art named the
house of Jacob is the spirit of the Lord straightened? are these his doings? do
not my words do good to him that walks uprightly? Mica. 2. 2-7.

3. Let it instruct and engage us to give more earnest heed to the things which
God has testified of his Son: in what he has done, and is become: in what he
is now doing: and in what he will do, and so let us receive, and walk in the
spirit, minding the things of the spirit, and we shall not fulfill the lusts of
the flesh, Gal. 5. 16. this is our victory, even our faith; who is he that
overcomes the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? 1 John 5. 4, 5. it is only through the spirit we may mortify the deeds of the
body, Romans 8. 13. it is good for us to know, that a man is not justified by the
works of the law, but by the faith of Christ (the word of faith, in which he is
now manifested to be the foundation, and object of faith, as formerly he was
not) that we may believe in Jesus Christ, that we may be justified, (and
cleansed also, as justified sometimes signifies; as Dan. 8. 14.) by the faith
of Christ, and not by the works of the law; for by the works of the law shall
no flesh be justified, Gal. 2. 16. That we may therefore flee covetousness,
consider we, and remember what God has given us in Christ, and the hope set
before us, to be possessed, and enjoyed when he shall appear in glory, and wait
through the spirit (who glorifies Christ) for the hope of Gods righteousness
through faith; so shall we meet with his Divine power for delivering us from
every path of the destroyer, Col. 3. 3-5. Gal. 5. 5. And to engage us to take
heed, and beware of covetousness, let us briefly consider the motive here laid
down by our Savior, to seal home this caution; For a man's life consists not in
the abundance of the things which he possesses; From whence we noted

3. That the consideration of this, that a man's life consists not in the
abundance of the things which he possesses, is also proper, as viewed in the
glorious Gospel to move us to receive this admonition, viz. to take heed, and
beware of covetousness.

By [ the abundance of the things which he possesseth] is here meant, the
things of this present world, as appears, in that it is said, a man, as a man,
possesses them; and by the parable which our Savior presently joins unto this
Caveat, Luke 12. 16-18. the things of the Earth, and which he possesses here
on Earth, as distinguished from what is laid up in Heaven, in the motions, and
teaching of his* grace.

And by [ a man's life] is meant, that life which he has as a man, or which is
proper to him as a man, as distinguished from that life which God has prepared
for men, and given them in Christ; this is the record, that God has given to
us (mankind) eternal life; and this life is in his Son, 1 John 5. 10, 11. and
which life he is giving with Christ; so as in finding him we shall find, and be
made partakers of it; in which is contained the forgiveness of our sins, and
the favor of God, and fellowship with him; which is now given through the
knowledge of him; our Savior here speaks not of this life, nor is this man's
life as a man, or Son of Adam, but obtained, and treasured up for us in the
second Man, the last Adam; this is called the life of God, Ephesians. 4. 18. which he
has given us in, and is giving us with his Son, and making him partaker of it
by faith that receives him; had our Savior said, eternal life, or the life of
God consists not herein, many would have been ready to say, they know that well
enough, who yet are given to covetousness, and so are idolaters, and rejoice,
and trust in these things, as if eternal life consisted in them; But here he
descends so low, in asserting the emptiness, and unprofitableness of man's
abundance, as that he may show that the thoughts of man, yea and of the wise
also are very vain.

For what man is there that does not secretly think that his life consists in
the abundance of the things which he injoyeth; but it is not so* his life, his
natural life which is given to him through the Mediator, and which God does
preserve during his pleasure by his blessing of meat, and drink to him ( for
man lives not by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of his
mouth,) and by his gracious protection, this consists not in the abundance of
the things which he possesses. That is

1. As life, and to live, signifies in Scripture, a comfortable being, and
enjoying cheerfulness, and gladness (as 1 Samuel 25. 6. so in an higher sense the
word is used, 1 These. 3. 8. so a man's life consists not therein; a man lives
never a whit the more merrily; this is that which men (at least) think to be in
abundance; they think it will make their lives comfortable; they propose to
themselves a great deal of contentment in having an abundance, and therefore
they desire, and lust after it, and labor to be rich in themselves, and they
say, or will say, Eat, drink, and be merry, as he in the parable, Luke 12. 19.
but they never come at it; it makes not their present life comfortable, and
joyous. For

1. There is no satisfaction in these things; he that loves silver shall not
be satisfied with silver; nor he that loves abundance with increase, Eccl. 5.
10. the appetite, or desire, is not filled; but he still cries, Give, give; he
coveteth greedily all the day long, Eccl. 6. 7. Pro. 21. 26. and so is like the
troubled sea that cannot rest; surely every man walks in a vain show, surely
they are disquietedin vain; he heapeth up (continually, etc) Psalm. 39. 9. while
they seek for rest in these things, their desire is enlarged as Hell; and they
cannot be satisfied; this is not our rest, because it is polluted, it is not
bread, and therefore it will not satisfy, Isa. 55. 2. Mica. 2. 10. Christ
only is the rest where the weary may find rest; but the abundance of these
things give no rest, and so the life cannot be comfortable: he is still wishing
for, and desiring more; and such is the way of every one that is greedy of
gain, that it takes away the life (the comfort of the life) of the owners
thereof, Prove. 1. 19. and from the greediness of gain they are led to much sore
travel, and labor, that they may increase to themselves, and more load
themselves with thick clay; it is a loading themselves indeed, for it is an
heavy burden to them, fills them with trouble, grief, and much disquietment,
and vexation of spirit, Hab. 2. 6. yea, though at some time they may laugh, and
rejoice, yet it is but as the crackling of thorns under a pot, appears great,
but it is presently gone; yea in laughter the heart may be sorrowful; and the
end of that mirth is heaviness; Eccl. 2. 2. and 7. 6. Pro. 14. 13. it is the
word of Christ kept in the midst of the heart that is life to those that find
it, and health to all their flesh; and though all the days of the affliction of
such is evil; yet he that is of a merry heart, has a continual feast, Pro. 4.
20-22. and 15. 15. he then that will love life, and see good days (live
cheerfully, and comfortably;) let him (not labor to be rich, but) refrain his
tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile; let him eschew evil,
and do good, let him seek peace, and ensue it, 1 Pet. 3. 10, 11.

2. As such an ones life, or living comfortably consists not in his abundance;
because while he seeks rest therein, he still desires after, and labors for
more, and so disquiets himself in vain: so also he meets with much vexation in
bethinking how to secure to himself what he has gotten, like this rich man in
the parable, Luke 12. 17, 18. he thought within himself, saying, What shall I
do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits? and he said, this will I
do, I will pull down my barns, and build greater, etc. All his days are
sorrows, and his travel grief; Yea his heart takes no rest in the night, Eccl
2. 23. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, whether he eat little, or much;
but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep, Eccl. 5. 12. they
are now caring how they shall lay up what they have, so as to secure it; or how
they may let it out, or l^y it out safely, or to greatest advantage; and full
of fears, lest thieves should break through, and steal; or lest those in whose
hands they have disposed it should be impoverished, and break, and they loose
all; or when troubles are in the Earth, and God orders judgments of war, and
sword, lest all should be taken away by violence from them; all his days he
eats in darkness, and affliction; many sorrows, cares, and fears attend the
abundance here possessed, and enjoyed; and so a man's life, the comfort of it,
consists not herein, Eccl. 5. 14-17.

3. Yea, God distributeth sorrows also, and is ordering sorrow, and wrath to
them with their sickness, while they possess their abundance, and are not
laying it up in Heaven according to the instructions of his grace, Eccl. 5,
14-17. and this to a gracious end, while called to day, that they might seek
after that treasure hid in Christ, and make themselves friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness. To the sinner (to those that err, and miss the way, wander
out of the way of understanding, and so miss the mark) he gives travel, to
gather, and to heap up, etc. Eccl. 2. 26.

2. And as by man's life may be meant the preservation, and continuance of it,
so it consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses; this
will not prolong his days upon the Earth; Yea, on the contrary, as the Proverb
says, He that hates covetousness shall prolong his days, Prove. 28. 16. which
of you (says our Savior) by taking thought, can add one cubit to his stature,
or age? Math. 6. 27. Yea many times such shorten their lives, and dye before
their time. Sometimes more directly, as the fruit of their delighting in their
abundance, in seeking to add to what they have by their labors, cares, and
breaking their rest, and sleep, and adventuring themselves into danger when an
advantage is put into their hands for increasing to themselves, and that they
make sure their uncertain riches, and by many fears occasioned to them they
bring themselves to untimely ends, and shorten their days; such is the way of
every one that is greedy of gains, which takes away the life of the owners
thereof, Prove. 1. 19. and however God is provoked, when men harden their hearts
against his grace, and the reproofs of instruction, sometimes to order, and
permit violent persons to take away their lives, and they dye unlamented, as it
was with Jeh^iakim, Jer. 22. 17-19. or himself to take them away by sickness,
and wrath with sickness ordered to them, Eccl. 5. 17. and their abundance will
not remove his hand from off them, though they have been trusting in their
abundance, and pleasing themselves that they can procure such means, and
Physicians as may recover them; yet if he will not withdraw his hand, the proud
helpers must st^^p (...) him; behold he takes away, who can hinder him? who
will (...) him what do thou? then neither their gold, nor their silver shall
be able to deliver them; he is a God that respects not persons, nor takes
reward, Job. 9. 12, 13. Deuteronomy. 10. 17. Ezekiel. 7. 19. or he may take them away
suddenly, and deprive them of opportunity of seeking help any where; as it was
with this rich man; Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be taken away from
thee; he accepts not the persons of Princes, nor regards the rich (who have
abundance in their possession) more than the poor; for they are all the work of
his hands: in a moment shall they dye, and the people shall be troubled at
midnight, and pass away, and the mighty shall be taken away without hand, Job.
34. 19, 20.

Oh that it might be then of this use to us, to take heed and beware of
covetousness; seeing neither the comfort, nor continuance of a man's life
consists in possessing of an abundance; and if it be not able to do that
which is the least, and that which every one proposes to himself in desiring,
and laboring for it, how then can it do what is greatest? if a man's life
consists not herein, surely much less does eternal life consist herein: Oh then
let us not labor for this meat that perishes, but for that which indureth to
eternal life, which the Son of of man will give unto us, for him has God the
Father sealed. Let us not seek what we shall eat, or what we shall drink,
neither let us be of doubtful mind; For all these things do the nations of the
world seek after, and our Father knows we have need of these things; but let
us rather seek the Kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added to us;
And that we may have our conversation without covetousness, and carefulness,
and cast our cares upon him, oh let us feed upon the flesh of Christ, as given
for the life of the world, this will strengthen thereto.

Remember, and consider his infinite love in appointing him by his grace to
taste death for every man, and the preciousness of his blood, in the virtue
whereof he is raised, and glorified; this we shall find powerful to engage, and
strengthen us to seek those things above, to set our affections on things
above, not on things on the Earth; and so to dispose our way, that God in all
things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise, and dominion
for ever, and ever,

Amen.
FINIS.

