THE Ancient, Legal, Fundamental, and Necessary Rights OF Courts of Justice, In
their Writs of Capias, Arrests, and Process of Outlary.

And the Illegality, many mischiefs and Inconveniences, which may arrive to the
People of England, by the Proposals tendered to His Majesty, and the High Court
of Parliament, for the abolishing of that old and better way, and method of
Justice, and the establishing of a new, by peremptory Summons and Citations in
Actions of Debt.

By Fabian Philipps, Esquire

Antonius Matheus in Praefat: ad Lib: de Auct^onibus,

Arduum est vetustis novitatem dare, novis Autoritatem.

Dira per incantum Serpunt Contagia vulgus.

LONDON, Printed for Christopher Wilkinson, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Sign of the Black Boy in Fleet Street, over against St. Dunstans Church,
1676.



The Contents of the Chapters.
Chap. 1. THe many mischiefs and inconveniences which may happen by an Act of
Parliament, if obtained, for the more speedy recovery of Debts upon Bonds or
Bills, under the Debtors hands and seals, in the manner as is by some desired.
Chap. 2. That the most part of that desired Innovation was borrowed from Mr.
Elsliot's wicked Invention, and a wild Systeme not long after framed, and from
some also now much disused part of the Civil Laws. Chap. 3. The reason and
necessity of the more frequent use of Writs of Arrest and Vtlary, then was
before the Statute of 25 E. 3. cap. 17. Chap. 4. The Ancient use as well as
necessity of the Process of Arrest and Outlawry in this and other Nations.
Chap. 5. The Process of Arrest and Vtlary are a more gentle way of compelling
men to pay their Debts, or appear in Courts of Justice, then that which was
formerly used. Chap. 6. The delays and inconveniences of the Process of
Summons, Pone and distringas, were a great, if not the only cause of the disuse
thereof. Chap. 7. The Writs and Process of Arrest and Outlawry have increased,
preserved, and encouraged Trade, better secured the Creditors Debts, and made
the borrowing of Money more easy then it was before. Chap. 8. The pawn and
engagement of the Body, is most commonly a better security then Lands or
personal Estate, upon which the borrowing of Money was not only very
troublesome, but difficult. Chap. 9. The difference betwixt borrowing of Money
upon Lands and real Estate, and the procuring of it upon personal security; and
that without trust and personal security Trade cannot well, or at all subsist.
Chap. 10. The way of Capias and Arrest is no oppression or tyranny exercised
upon the people, since the making of the Statute of 25 E. 3. cap. 17. or has
been hitherto, or may be destructive to their Liberties. Chap. 11. That the
wisest of the Grecian Commonwealths, Athens and Sparta, those great contenders
for Liberty and preservers of it, did in their establishments and methods of
Justice neither understand or suspect any Tyranny or oppression to be in the
necessary and mod^rate use of the Process of Arrest. Chap. 12. The troubles and
seditions of the people of Rome concerning the whippings, scourging, selling
for Bondslaves, and other cruelties used by Creditors in the suing and
prosecution for their Debts, and the troubles and endeavors of the Magistrates
and Senators to appease them. Chap. 13. That their Order made to pacify a
tumult was not perpetual, or so much as intended to extend to an absolute
freedom of the Debtors from Arrest or restraints of their persons, until they
appeared in Courts of Justice, or gave bayl to do it. Chap. 14. That the
Statute of 25 E. 3. cap. 17. which gives Process of Capias and Exigent in
Actions of Debt, and other Actions therein mentioned, is not repealed either by
the Acts of Parliament of 28 E. 3. or 42 E. 3. cap. 1. there being no
inconvenience or prejudice to the Public good in those kind of Law
proceedings, which might deserve a repeal by those or any other Acts of
Parliament. Chap. 15. That the Nation has not been base or slavish ever since
the making of the said Act of Parliament of 25 E. 3. cap. 17. Chap. 16. An
examination of the Opinions of Sir Edward Coke in his report of Sir William
Herberts Case, touching the Process of Arrest used in our Laws; and the many
Errors appearing in that Book or Manuscript called the Mirror of Justice, and
the fictitious matters and relations mentioned therein. Chap. 17. That the late
incessant needless complaints against our Laws, and the proceedings in our
Courts of Justice, had in the bottom of it a design of overturning Monarchy and
Government, and to create Offices, places, employments and profits to the
contrivers thereof and their party. Chap. 18. That neither Oliver Cromwell or
his Son Richard, the second Mock-Protector or little Highness, did conceive it
to be reasonable, or had any intention to deliver up the Justice of the Nation
to those ignorant, giddy, and ever-changing kind of Reformations. Chap. 19.
What occasioned the contrivance of the former Projects and groundless
Complaints against our Laws, since his Majesty's happy Restoration. Chap. 20.
That the Proceedings at the Common Law desired by the new way of a peremptory
Summons, or the old by Writs of Summons, Pone and Distringas, or Writs of
Capias at the Plaintiffs pleasure, are not consistent or agreeable one with the
other; and that Laws being to be binding, are to be certain and positive, not
arbitrary. Chap. 21. That it will not be for the Interest of the King and his
people to give way to that Design which may open a passage to other Innovations
and Contrivances as much if not more inconvenient and prejudicial.
CHAP. I. The many mischiefs and inconveniences which may happen by an Act of
Parliament, to be made for the more speedy recovery of Debts upon Bonds or
Bills, under the Debtors hands and seals, in the manner as is by some desired.
THe Suggestions and that which should be the Causes or inducements to such an
Act of Parliament are greatly mistaken; or if there happen any such Evils as
are pretended, they are Raro Contingentia, and do but seldom happen.

And when they do arise, have their originals from other Causes, but not from
Arrests in Actions of Debt, which by the shortest account, are and have been of
374. years continuance, by order and approbation of many Acts of Parliament,
but may be demonstrated to have been of a far greater Age, and equal to that of
the Eldest Court or Method of Justice, in this, or any other civilized Nation
in the world.

The mischances happening by two or three Bailiffs in 20. or 30, jears, killed
most commonly upon the score of their own provocation, rudeness and
misdemeanors, are when they do so happen in the unruly Suburbs of London
toward Westminster, for in the other too vast extent of them, an Age or
Century is scarce able to furnish out one of those evil accidents.

And within the City of London, where Credit seems to be the Life and Soul of
Trade, and their growing, and already gained Riches there may be reckoned in
their two Sheriffs Courts twice every week in the Year, holden no less than two
hundred Actions and Arrests weekly, entered and made upon Debts which makes no
more disturbance than a quiet putting in of Bail, which secures the Debt more
than it was before.

And in all the Counties, Cities, and Corporations of England and Wales, as
well as in the City of London, the death of a Bailiff, Sergeant at Mace or
Catchpole, is not to be found in the remembrance of the most aged persons.

And the Writs and Records of the Courts of Westminster, from which very many
Writs and Process do Issue, and are to be returned into, cannot show any
frequency of Writs of Rescues, or any assaults made upon the Sheriffs or their
Bailiffs, in the Execution of them.

And if the Proposers of this Bill and great Alteration of the Laws, will not
think themselves to be prejudiced if they should speak according to the Truth,
and what every man upon the visible evidence of demonstration and Records, may
rationally believe.

It cannot be denied, but if there be in one County or City two Thousand Writs
or Actions of Debt, made out in a year to Arrest, not above five hundred of
them do proceed or come to Appearance, and that of that five hundred unagreed,
there are scarce half of them that are declared against, or make any defense,
and not half of that half ever come to be tried, and that those do also most
commonly come to an end or determination.

Where there is no Demurrers, or matters of difficulty in Law, or peevishness
in some of the parties to occasion the contrary, within less than a third Term,
that many thousands of Actions are both in the Superior courts at Westminster,
and the Country and hundred court Barons, and the inferior Courts, determined
within a few days, weeks, or months, very many in a quarter of a year, and
those that remain uncompounded and undispatched, do not survive the contention
or trouble of half a year after the Suit commenced or begun.

So that all things considered, if the Laws and Praxis in Scotland, France,
Spain, Germany, Italy, Holland, Brabant, and all the other Kingdoms and
Provinces of the Christian world, civil and municipal, shall be rightly
compared with our more happy, less troublesome, and chargable, they will not be
found to afford to their people such a quick dispatch of Justice adaequate, and
ready way unto it as ours have done, and will always do, if they be not turned
out of their old course and channel.

By an Invention now proposed, which will be as illegal as unparalled, and
has no other precedent or pattern then that late way of proceeding in Actions
of Ejectment hatched in the leveling or Oliverian times, and has then and ever
since amongst knowing and good men, gained no better an esteem then that of a
public grievance, and a monstrum horrendum inform ingens cui lumen ademptum,
spawned and bred up in a Rebellion, when Monarchy was Banished, and the word of
God and Laws of the Land were shamefully, and as much as they could, be misused.

For that there is an absurdity, confusion, and Hysteron Proteron in it,
putting the Cart before the Horse, and making a Declaration which should be
after a summons Executed, and Appearance entered to precede the Appearance, and
at the same time go along with the Summons, with a prefixion but from one Term
to the next, which betwixt Easter and Trinity Term, being but with an Interval
of seventeen days, Sundays not excepted, will be too short, peremptory, and
prejudicial to Defendants, and in the Lent Vacation, which is commonly three
Months, and the Summer Vacation which is never less than 15 weeks, and
sometimes longer, may be as inconvenient to Plaintiffs, who by the ancient and
more legal prefixions, with the small distance of time of 15 days from return
to return, in the Term time might sooner have recovered their Debts, appoints
no Trial by Juries, nor declares by what certain Authority or Court the Summons
shall be made, whether by the Parties, Plaintiffs, or otherwise, and gives a
promiscuous Conusance of Pleas to all the Courts of Law at Westminster, when as
all but the court of Common Pleas, (some cases of privilege excepted) have by
our ancient Laws, and Magna Charta, no jurisdiction or right therein.

Makes the Summons for a time to come to falsify the Declaration if at the
same time delivered with it, to suppose it to be already made, and the
Declaration which supposes it to be already made, and is and ought to be a
copy of the Record in the Court wherein the Action is pretended to be laid, and
intended to be Tried; to say he was Summoned when he was not, the Fieri to be a
Factum, and the future to be a past or present, and will create some
contradictions when the injured defendant shall come to wage his law, make
Affidavit of a non Summons, or bring his action for damages sustained by a
false Affidavit or return

And will be sure enough to produce as necessary effects of causes, very many
not easy to be altogether foreseen or enumerated mischeifs and inconveniences.

Overturn and mutilate all our fundamental Laws, upon which the Monarchy of
England, the best of Governments, and less arbitrary in the world, and the
Justice of our Nation have for above one Thousand years been built and
established, and cut and canton both it and our well tempered Monarchy into
little pieces, and bring them as near as may be to an unhappy Republique, which
will neither fit, or be for the good of the Nation.

Deform, or almost annihilate our long approved Courts of Justice at
Westminster, by taking away a great part of the Process, Judges.
and excellent Forms and Proceedings thereof, as Adonizebek is said to have
done to his Captive Kings, when he did cut off their Thumbs and great Toes,
destroy a great part of the Kings Prerogative which limited and bounded by our
Laws and our Kings and Princes Concessions, is no more than his just and
necessary means of Government, and in and by his High court of Chancery
superintends over all the Courts of Justice in the Kingdom.

And as to the Law and Latin part of it, and granting out of Writs remedial
under his Test meipso, will appear to be a Court as ancient as the reason and
civility of the Nation, from which all the other Courts of Westminster Hall,
Country-courts, Sheriffs Turns, Court-Leets and Baron, and all other Courts
inferior in the Realm, may truly be said to have their beginning, the Matrix or
Womb of all our Fundamental Laws, either before or since Magna Charta, which
had its birth and being from it, the Repository (under the King in the absence
of Parliaments) of Justice in all cases where an appeal to the King or
Parliament, or the helps of Parliament shall be necessary, the Custom of the
Nation Officina Justitiae, place and workhouse of Justice, and Lex Terrae, as
it was in the year 1641. alleged to have been by the then House of Commons in
Parliament.

Take away a considerable part of the rights and privileges of Parliaments,
Nobility, Peerage and Parliament Men.

And the Liberties not only of them, but many of the Gentry, and men of great
Estates in the Kingdom, some of them very largely extended in the Executing of
Process and returna brevium, by the Charters of our Kings and Princes, or a
long prescription have been granted or permitted, and vested in them, and their
Ancestors and Predecessors, and in 52 counties of England and Wales, may after
an account but of 20 in a county one with another, amount to no less than one
Thousand, and of the Lords also of Manors in their court Barons, which,
according to the computation but of three hundred Manors and court Barons in
every of the said Counties one with another, will in all probability make a
total of fifteen Thousand and six Hundred, Rot. Parl. 33. H. 6. M. 1.
if not a great many more, which the Commons in Parliament in the 33. year of
the Reign of King Henry the VI. were so unwilling to have invaded by the then
undue practice of Attournys, as they did Petition the King for the Love of God,
and in the way of Charity, to forbid it under great Penalties, which the King
granted, If it be thought to the Judges reasonable, who being thereupon
consulted, an Allocatur of that Petition was entered in the Margent of the
Parliament Roll.

Overthrow, or put into a Chaos or confusion all or much of the long used
course and order of Process and Justice in the large and ancient Jurisdictions
of the courts of Marshal-sea, Principality of Wales, Duchy of Lancaster, and
country Palatines of Chester and Durham.

And do the like to those great Jurisdictions of the Cinque Ports, and the
Admiralty whose business and the ancient course and manage thereof, cannot
conform to the designs of such an unpracticable way of getting in of Debts.

Lame and discourage the very ancient and useful, if something better ordered
Offices of Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs, and their Bailiffs, in the Execution of
Justice, and the Process of the courts thereof, by turning much of their
business into a worse condition.

Change and inconvenience the Government of the City of London, and Borough of
Southwark, and of all the Cities, Boroughs, and Towns corporate of England and
Wales, in their several administrations of Justice.

And like a Hurricano whirling, and passed through the Nation, at once spoil or
confound all the Courts of Justice, great and little, therein and abridge or
take from them their ancient and hitherto justly allowed Rights and
Jurisdictions, which to them and their predecessors, have with our incomparable
Magna Charta, been no seldomer than 30 times confirmed by Acts of Parliament.

Will be directly repugnant unto, and against Magna Charta, 42. E. 3. cap. 3.
and the Statute of 42. E. 3. a branch or limb thereof, which at the request of
the Commons, and for the good governance of them, ordained that none be put to
answer without presentment before Justices, or matter of Record, or by due
Process of Law, and Writ Original, according to the Old Law of the Land.

And if any thing should from thenceforth be done to the contrary, it should be
void in the Law, and holden for Error.

Be a great loss and damage to the King, in his Fines and Seals of Original
Writs, the Seals of the Writs and Process Issuing out of his Courts of Kings
Bench, Common Pleas, Exchecquer, Principality of Wales, Duchy of Lancaster,
and County Palatine of Chester, and the amercements and Issues forfeited or
returned upon Caepi Corpus, Writs of Habeas Corpus, and Distringasses; all
which were intended by Law to be assistant to the defraying of his great
charges in the Salaries and supports of the Lord Keeper, Master of the Rolls,
Judges, and Officers employed in the Administration of Justice, which taken
away, will render him to be in that particular less considered, and in a worse
case then Oliver Cromwell was, who by his miscalled Parliaments, and Instrument
of an Arbitrary Protectorship, was besides his charge of the Navy, and Horse
and Foot Guards, allowed two hundred thousand pounds per Annum, for the charge
of the Government and Administration of Justice.

Take away from the King much of the Law Tax upon the writs and process, which
a late Act of Parliament consented unto for supply of his urgent occasions, and
bereave him of his never denied Prerogative, and benefit of Utlaries.

Extirpate the Anciently and legally allowed Essoynes de malo lecti, or
veniendo, de ultra mare, or in servitio Regio, or any hinderance which might
happen to excuse their nonappearance after a lawful Summons in Debt, which by
the Laws of Nature and Nations have been in cases of necessity, Inundation of
waters, or employment for the public never denied.

Turn all, or the most of the proceedings upon Actions of Debt into Surprises
and Defaults, and disturb the more deliberate, satisfactory, and safe way of
Trials by Juries.

Make a default which no Law ever did, to have the force and effect of a
Verdict by Jury when there was none.

And debar the helps of Writs of Error, when all Mankind, as well Judges as
Juries, and the parties and their Council on both sides, may err, and can have
no assurance to be Infallible.

Deprive the People of that part of our Magna Charta, 9. H. 8. cap. 14.
which would have no man amerced for a small fault, but after the manner of the
fault, and for a great fault, after the quantity thereof, saving to him his
Contenement, and to a Merchant his Merchandise, and that none be amerced but by
the Oath of good and lawful Men of the vicinage, which did not certainly intend
a Debtor to be ruined for a small default, or to be debarred of his Trial by
his Peers.

And obliterate the equity of the Act of Parliament of 13. E. 1. which
providing that he that recovereth a Debt, 13. E. 1. cap. 18.
may Sue Execution by writ of Fieri facias, or Elegit excepteth the Oxen and
Beasts of the Plow, and cannot be rationally supposed to favor such a Ruin
upon a Debtor, when for want of evidence and witnesses, he shall not be able to
escape the fury of such a default.

And likewise that part of Magna Charta which granted that the City of London
should have and enjoy all the old Liberties and Customs, 9. H. 3. ca. 9.
which it has been used to have, and that all other Cities, Boroughs, and
Towns, and the Barons of the five Ports, and all other Ports, should have all
their Liberties and free Customs, and did not take it (as it may be
conjectured) to be any reason that a surprise in Actions or Suits for Debts,
should by Malice or Tricks, without pleading, or reasonable time given for
Defense, destroy them and their Trade, and Families, and all their endeavors
before and after.

Which the prudent Romans held to be so unjust, as where they gave a Plaintiff
but three hours to Plead, they allowed the Defendant nine.

And it is not yet gone out of the memory of Man, that in the year 1642 or
1643, the course of stealing or hurrying of Judgments, now unhappily borrowed
from the Innovation of the late wicked times of Usurpation in Actions of
Ejectment, was believed by Justice Bacon in the Court of Kings Bench, and
Justice Reeve in the Court of Common Pleas, to be such a vioviolation of our
Laws, as they Publicly declaimed against it, and threatened to imprison any
Attorney that should practice in such a manner.

And with great authority and warrant of our Laws, and right reason, for that
as it was justly and truly said by the Judges in the Reign of King Edward the
first, that non summonitus nec attachiatus per Legem terre prejudiciari non
potest, and Fleta an approved Lawyer in the Reign of that King, and King Edward
the second his Son has published it to be a great and known Truth, that the
Court of Common Pleas cannot hold Plea in real and personal Actions, without
the Commission or Authority of a Writ original out of the Chancery, Fleta. lib.
cap. 34.
and that without it, nec Warrantum nec Jurisdictionem neque Coercionem habent,
and our Laws did then and long after not proceed upon such warrant or
commission until the Plaintiff had actually given sureties to prosecute and
maintain his action, and the Sheriff to whom such original Writ was directed,
for to summon or attach the debtor to appear before the said justices had
returned that he was summoned or attached as the nature of the Action required,
or had nothing whereby to be summoned or attached.

When but a few years preceding, that well deserved indignation of those two
worthy Judges, that excellent, most just, lawdable, and rational course of
justice had been endeavored to have been subverted by one Elsliot of a degree
betwixt an Attorney and a Barrister, and a man very bold and able enough to
make and contrive tricks and abuses in Law proceedings, who having about the
middle of the reign of King Charles the Martyr as a Reprobate and Cast away in
the Law shifted himself from England into Ireland, and from thence after some
bad prancks there played returning back again with as much poverty as impudence
attending upon him, and having a desire to get some money by a contrivance, to
gain a sudaine possession of some Lands or houses for one as bad as himself,
upon a judgment by default against the Landlord or his Tenant who were to know
nothing of it, caused a declaration to be prepared in an action of Ejectment
against a feigned Deft. or ejector in the name of a feigned Lessee upon a short
Lease pretended to be made by his naughty Clyent, and left at the house of the
Tenant, who not well apprehending the force and extent of the project, a
judgment by default was entered, possession surprised and taken for which upon
complaint made to the Judges of the Court of Kings Bench, in which Court the
action was supposed to have been laid, and examination of the fact, the
judgment was made void, possession restored, and Master Elsliot the contriver,
committed and told by Justice Barkley, that it was a shame that ever he should
come or show his face in a Court of justice.

Howsoever getting himself afterward enlarged, and the confusion and troubles
of the late civil Wars disturbing and breaking in upon the Law and all the
Courts of Justice, Mr. Elsliot; began again to appear to be somebody, and
engages in another exploit, which was to gain by the like device, accompanied
with force and some other naughty ways, possession of an house and a very
considerable estate in Lands in the County of Essex of Sir. Adam Littletons the
Father of Sir Thomas Littleton Knight, now a member of the house of Commons in
Parliament, who to his great cost and trouble endeavoring to extricate and
free himself and his Fathers Estate from the peril and danger of such a
villainy, may well remember that a counterfeit record was in that pretended suit
privately laid in the office of the Records in the Tower of London, sworn unto,
and offered to be justified, but was at length taken as it ought to be for a
Roguish piece of Forgery, and Sir Adam Littleton and his Estate freed from any
further disturbance.

Whilst that no small parcel of Knavery being in great respect with the
Agitators of the then called Parliament Army, Levellers and other State
moulders, and stiling himself the Esquire at arms, being sometimes a Prisoner
in Newgate, and sometimes out, wanted not a Liberal maintenance from his
Patrons and great Masters, until death shortly after unexpectedly rid the world
of him.

From which reasonless and ungodly formula or way of proceeding, rather to be
exploded then embraced in actions of Ejectment, and so utterly against the Law
(evil examples being oftener followed then good) by some of his proselites and
the connivance or want of courage in some of the Judges, in the time of the
Cromwelian usurpation, dum sui non fuerunt, knowing better, but doing worse,
the same came again to be revived, and creep into an allowance, with a note
indorced by the Attorney in the name of the incognito or casual ejector,
directed to the Tenant or Landlord, requiring them to appear and look to the
action, and confess Lease Ouster and Entry, otherwise he must and would confess
a judgment, or let it pass by default.

As if such a judgment acknowledged by practice and confederacy, could not with
a great deal of ease have been reversed by a court that should not be so
abused, and the parties contrivant severely punished.

Of which kind of irregularity in the Law* and wandering out of the old Paths,
never to be justified, the Justices of the court of King's Bench have been so
sensible as they have for some years last past, caused a Writ of Latitat (which
anciently was used to be warranted by a Writ Original of the Chancery) to be
awarded and sued out against the feigned ejector.

And it is not half a year ago, since the Pillory of Westminster proclaimed a
Brewer to be more Crafty then wise or honest, when to gain an indirect
possession of some houses by Judgments upon defaults, having fudled the Tenants
with Drink and Tobacco.

And giving them pieces of the declarations as waste paper, when they knew not
what had been written therein to give fire to their tobacco thought he had
snapt them with judgments upon defaults when he made oath that he had left
declarations at their houses, where they were in that manner made drunk, and
could neither say or swear to the contrary.

But unde or from whence soever it came, or if this new manner of Law
proceedings could have derived its pedigree from any more Noble an Ancestor.

It will if every Client and his Attorney who is no member of the court, but
only represents his Client, shall be suffered to make the summons or Citations,
and to be both Party, Judge, and Sheriff, without an authentication of hand,
seal, or stamp, of any Court or their subordinate officers (which no Court of
Justice, Christian or Heathen, has yet adventured to allow) be hugely opposite
to the rules and maxims, as well of the Civil as the Common Law, used for more
then one thousand years, that nemo privatus Citare potest, and bereave the high
court of Chancery of those Rights which do truly and justly belong unto it, and
the Judges of all other the Courts and circuits of England and Wales, who by an
act of Parliament made in the thirteenth year of the Reign of King E. 1. and by
ancient custom long before used are to have their Clericos Irrotulantes sworn
and intelligent officers to record and make their writs and process. 13. E. 1.
cap. 30.


Frustrate the Anciently well approved power of the court of Chancery in their
process upon contempts, when there shall be as there will always happen to be
matters of Equity in cases of Fraud, Combinations, Hardships, or Rigours of Law
fit to be releived by the said court, and a great deal more then were
formerly, if the Creditors shall by this new Model of common Law proceedings be
let loose to act their own will and furies upon their insolvent or not
punctually performing debtors, and that high court shall upon contempts or
disobedience of its process of Attachments or commissions of Rebellion have no
power to punish them by arrest or imprisonment being the only means tueri
Jurisdictionem to maintain and uphold its Authority and Jurisdictions.

The hands of Justice and coercive power and authority of it, will be
paralitique manacled and less in the laying by of the Sheriffs and their very
necessary under Officers, by whom the Law received its Execution, which is as
the life of it, and might as well be made use of in the Summons, Attachment or
Process before Judgment, as they are to be afterward, where there are and may
be dangers of killing of men (if ever there were so many as is informed) by how
much an execution after Judgment of Body or goods being unbaylable, is more
terrible, and to be avoided by the debtor, then that which is baylable, and in
many cases to be discharged by an appearance only to the action, and if the
Plantiffs or their servants, the Attorneys, Clarks, Constables or Porters, must
be the Sheriffs or their Bailiffs, there may be more danger of resistance,
killing, tumults, and commotions, then ever there was of Bailiffs, and of more
extortion and tricks, in those that are not sworn, then in those that are
sworn and bound up by many Statutes and Acts of Parliament, and the penalties
thereof.

Or if arrests and the execution of Justice by the Sheriffs and their
subordinate officers could be any primary or never failing efficient causes of
the sl^ughters seldom happening upon arrests, or that to prevent it there will
be any such necessity of laying aside or disuseing that necessary office of
Sheriffs in the execution of Justice, as well after judgment as before, that of
the raising the posse comitatus in cases of a forcible resistance of their
taking possessions or levying the Kings debts, is to be put under the same
fate, and neither Sheriff or Constable may arrest a felon, but obey the like
method of Summoning him at his house or Lodging, to know if he be willing to be
indicted, come to his Trial, and adventure a Hanging.

But no well built or grounded reason being likely to be found to support such
reasonless and lawless opinions, the Adorers of such Imagination may assure
their disciples that Elias is to bring the reason, and that until then they
must expect it, and may in the mean time do much better to give them leave to
believe that.

Such a System of Infamy and Cruelty, and an unmerciful credit, tearing course
of summoning publicly by papers left at the debtors Houses or Lodgings, or
which is worse, fastened upon the outward doors, which the malicious
contrivances or tricks of ill affected or violent Plaintiffs, if not prohibited
by some severe penalties, will too often prompt them unto, and in the
consequence bring an Inundation of ruins upon this Nation who do now more than
half of them live upon credit, and are so generally indebted, as they will not
be much wide or from the Mark, who do believe that half the Lands and Estates
real and Personal of the Kingdom sold to the utmost will not be enough to pay
the debts thereof.

And by Suing out as it were Commissions of Bankrupt against all the Nation,
write, Lord have mercy upon us, upon too many men's doors, and now there is so
little money left them, take a way the Credit that should help to support them.

Add affliction to affliction to all the Loyal nobility Gentry, and Citizens,
that had impoverished themselves by their Loyalty, and taking part with their
King and his Laws, and the Church of England, and leave them to the invisible
mercy of those that did help to Rob, Plunder, and Sequester them.

Bankrupt and undo most of the Tradesmen, and be a means to help the
overhasty Creditors to a composition of four Shillings in the Pound, or a
great deal less, when as otherwise, with a little patience, they might have had
their whole debts paid unto them, and make the unbridled fury of one Creditor,
to be a cause of the never payment of other Creditors debts.

When plaintiffs are many times as unreasonable as they are unmerciful,
insolent and unperswadable, where they can either find or keep advantages, and
that many an Action as well as many a Plaintiff, may be Malicious, Oppressive,
Unjust, and Vexatious, and such a fancied speedy way of geting in debts, may be
very instrumental for the advance of evil purposes and knavish designs.

No Inhabitant of Wales where their Laws do already allow them an Iterum
summons nor in the Cincque ports or any of the Counties palatine of Chester,
Lancaster, or Durham, will be able to borrow any money in London, or out of
their own Countries upon the best security, when that those who shall be
employed to serve the Summons, being not the Sheriffs officers, may be in
danger to be beaten, and cannot be outlawed without several Writs of Capias

Many Tradesmen do only subsist by their credits, and take up great sums of
money upon an opinion of their present abilities, or future gain, by which they
do commonly give no other security then their Persons, and by the advantages
thereof do many times by their industry attain unto great Estates, but if the
process of arrest be taken away, they can hope no more to be so easily
entrusted, for that an Attachment of the person does secure the plaintiffs
debt, either by present payment or causing other satisfaction, which the
proceedings by summons in this manner will never attain unto.

The fear and disgrace of a Process of Arrest do put a period to many suits
before the persons be attached, and before appearance, for that as a man will
give all for his Life, so he will do much for his Liberty, and when men will
either not regard a Summons, or delay to give satisfaction or an appearance,
they will make a great deal more have to prevent an arrest.

Debtors are several times or often called upon by their Creditors, which is
as much as a Summons made without a Legal Officer, but yet neither that nor a
Writ of summons does drive the most of them, to any care of payment, until the
Process of Arrest do issue forth, which is more compulsory, and will be sure to
prove a more speedy remedy for the Creditors then the way of Summons.

And a large and long experience consensu rectae rationis and totius
antiquitatis, and many ages will evidence that the benefit of the process of
arrest has been very great to this Nation, and that the care and wisdom of
several Statutes and acts of Parliament who have always provided for the
public before the private, universals before particulars, believed certainties
before incertainties, and long and never failing experiences before remote
probabilities, and have from time to time given a larger extent unto it then
before it had, may tell us that for many ages past it has been the best
remedy for the people to recover their debts, and to compose other differences
that our forefathers in some hundreds of years last past could devise.

And that to give the force of an Utlary after Judgment in a few days upon such
a peremptory summons betwixt the terms of Easter and Trinity, and in the
longer intervals, betwixt the other terms, does scarcly allow half the time,
which our Laws thought reasonable and fit to the bringing of a man to be
outlawed, which for its rigor and severity, Bracton. lib. 2. de corona. cap.
22.
was not by Law as Bracton says to be over hastened, but to be after three
Writs of Capias returned non est inventus and eight several contempts more.

Will settle upon the plaintiff a liberty appropriated only to a special
Capias utlagatum, to take both body and goods at one time, which the Law where
the body is first taken, although the Lands and Goods of the Debtors, unless in
cases of extents, upon Statute, Merchant, or of the staple, and Utlary be
otherwise sufficient to answer the debts will not condescend unto.

When unless it could be probable possible or Imaginable, which a large
proportion of melancholy can hardly do, that a personal estate in goods, money,
or Chattels, in the debtors house or shop, could be allways ready and enough to
pay that and all other his debts (and the King were no Creditor, for his debts
are to be first satisfied) there must where a Man owes one thousand Pounds to
ten several Creditors, of one hundred pounds a piece, and has but one hundred
pounds in estate toward the satisfaction of those several debts, and one of
the ten Creditors has out run the other and seized it, be a necessity of a
nihil habet to be returned, and the severest Plaintiffs, must against their
wills be constrained to forsake the By-ways of this new kind of summons, and
make what have they can with some repentance into the bargain to return out of
them into the plain roads and highway of arresting the Body, or where there is
a haste of the getting in the money, or there is a suspitio fugae, or his
insufficiency, or a necessity (which may often be the case) to outlaw a
fugitive, or invisible debtor not easy to be taken or come at.

Bonds given to the Sheriffs, or spetial Bail before Judges, so many times
necessary according to the old usage and customs of our Laws and Courts of
Justice, and fortifying many a debt, will by this new course of proceeding be
no more to be hoped for or insisted upon by the Creditor or Plaintiff, who will
be put in a worse condition then they were before, and where upon some doubt or
mistrust of the debtor or his Estate he might have had two more sureties or
Strings to his Bow then he had before, that the Deft. should answer the Action,
or yield his body to Prison, must now be content with what he did not like,
when by an arrest he might have had a better security.

Instruct or give warning in a Lent or Summer Vacation to an insolvent or
suspected debtor, to convey away himself, goods or estate, and by such an
unmerciful way of Process and proceedings, will not seldom incumber and ruin
their debts and debtors, as many cruel creditors in the times of a more gentle
and Christian way of process have done, to the great loss of themselves as well
as others, for want of a competent prudence and patience.

Occasion, multiply and increase perjuries, which are already too frequent and
in fashion.

And therefore when all is done, and some scores of good Acts of Parliament,
without repeal, or any mention of them, and many a lawful reasonable and useful
custom and course of the Courts of Justice of this Kingdom shall be run over to
prepare a way for this innovation, which if it be well inspected and
considered, and put in the Balance of Law and right, Reason against the old,
and that he or his posterity that is now a Plaintiff, may be hereafter
defendants, will certainly appear to be much lighter than the old, which is
the better and more experimented, and not only to be very destructive to the
design held forth, and benefits expected by it, but very disproportionable to
the public good and the Laws and Liberties of the people.

CHAP. II. That the most part of that desired Innovation, was borrowed from the
said Mr. Elsliots wicked invention, and a wild System not long after framed,
and from some also now much disused part of the Civil Law.
ANd the promoters of the petarre invention, to blow up the Estates and better
part of the People (for Usurers, Brokers, oppressors, and such as grind and
devour the languishing and wanting part of them, are not like to be malignant
to such a profitable engine for their purposes) when they shall have made their
account with God and Man, for bringing such a desolation upon their
fellow subjects, for some selfended intrests.

Will bring themselves and all to this conclusion, that the most part of it was
taken from Mr. Elsliots wicked invention, and another part of it framed out of
a wild System, not long after thrown amongst a disaffected party of the People,
to infect those who were mad enough before; and that the little color and
glimmering of reason, that seems to keep them company, was borrowed from a now
much disused part of the Civil Law; that in cases of contumacy, the Judge after
a citation served, and disobeyed, did mitte^e Actorem in possessionem bonorum.

And that even in that Custom of the Civil Law, Clem. 1. de Jud.
these Innovators did not consider as they might, that such a citation public
or peremptory, Gail. 1. obss. 16. l. ejus sect. si quis ad municip.
is by the Civilians themselves acknowledged, to be a deviation a jure communi,
and in casibus necessitatis tantum recepta quando alio modo, qui^ citari non
potest. Secondly, Vbi locus non est ^utus ubi citandus habitat. Thirdly, Si
persona est vagabunda quo casu edictum eo loco affigi debet ubi solita est
conversari.

That such a possession is notwithstanding but fiduciary, and the Plaintiff
only put in possession, Custodia causa and vice pignoris deti^et donee reus
veniat responsurus.

That a 2d. trial, decree, or sentence, and restitutio in integrum do not
seldom afterward follow.

And that appeals from the lower Courts or Judges, to the higher Commissions of
adjuncts and revisions, will never allow that Law to be ^o desirable, expedite,
or little chargeable as our Common Laws are, which our Novellists would
persuade us to renounce and abandon.

Of which and the disparity of a great part of the Body of the Civil Laws with
those of our cipal and common Laws, the Dukes, Earls, and Barons of England,
were so sensible as in the eleventh year of the Reign of King Richard the 2. in
the cause and appeal of Thomas Duke of Gloucester and others against Robert de
Vere Duke of Ireland, 11. R 2. in Rot Process and Judic contra le duc. d'
Ireland and autres.
the Earl of Suffolk and others they denied to proceed to Judgment thereupon,
according to the Law civil and declared que la Roialme de Angliterre ne estoit
devant ces Heures ne al intent du Roy and signiours de parliament unques ne
serra rule ne govern per le ley civil, and our Ancestors more than what they
retained of some of the actions rules and directions of reason which that
excellent Law afforded, Seldom dissert. ad Fletam ca. 9.
and was necessary, would not as our learned Seldom has observed constanti
adhaesione by a constant perseverance and affection be drawn from that singular
reverence and esteem which they had of the common Law, which so long a course
of time and antiquity had fitted to their nature and Genius.

In so much as William de la Pole Duke of Suffolk was in the Reign of King
Henry the sixth accused amongst other things by the Commons in Parliament that
he had sought to introduce the Civil Law. to: parl 28. H, 6. m. 19 and ab inde
usque 47.


And the great Cardinal Wolsey was in the Reign of King Henery the eight
indicted or informed against, quod ipse intendebat finaliter antiquissimas
Anglicanas leges penitus subvertere and enervare in universum and hoc Regnum
Anglie and ejusdem Regni populum legibus Imperialibus dict. legibus Civilibus
and earundem legum canonibus subjugare. Trin. 23. H. 8. coram* rege.


And King James coming from a Kingdom where those Laws were much in use, and
seemed to have some inclination to introduce or intermingle some part of it
with our Common Laws, King James his Speech in the Star Chamber.
did notwithstanding forbear to do it, acknowledging that the Civil Law was not
applicable to this government, or fit for it.

And our Innovators that have been so wiling to intermingle with their System
that part of the Civil Law, which in the cases of contumacy did allow a missio
bonorum repleuisable as aforesaid, may upon a further search and enquiry
satisfy themselves and others that for the expedition of Justice put on and
persuaded by the increase of trade and insolvency of debtors the Caesarean or
Civil Law has long ago forsaken their course of granting judgments for not
appearing and missionem rum and Seizure, and found the Citatio realis captura
and incarceratio, to be the more ready and less prejudicial way of compelling
debtors or Defendants to appear in judgment.

For certainly to enforce, persuade or give a liberty to the people in their
Law Suits and concernments depending thereupon to circulate, when they may go a
more easy and less expensive way, nearer, more straight and better conducing to
their honest ends, will be but to vex and tire both Plaintiffs and defendants,
and multiply their charges.

When to draw and prepare the declarations which in Debt and common Actions
were until the fourteenth year of the Reign of King James to be entered by the
Filacers, and ought yet, if the cause or reason of their remitting that ancient
part of their employment do cease, and be taken away, the Plaintiffs will in
this new devised expedient for a quick and Pie-powder Course of Justice, be put
to a charge for the drawing of their Declarations before hand, when it may be
there will be no need of them, and to pay for the Copies of them, which in a
more regular course after apparances entered, were to be paid for by the
Defendants.

And to the Trouble and charge of entering judgments and the hazard of the loss
of charges poundage and other fees paid to Sheriffs and Bailiffs upon
execution, or paying of damages where they are wrongfully or not well obtained
multitude of Affidavits, pro and con, of motions in Court on the one side and
the other many referrences and reports wagers of non-summons, writs of
restitution, actions on the case for non summons, or for slander or defamation
brought for malicious contrivances cum muliis aliis which will increase and
heighten the Bill of Charges.

And that goods Seized inventaried and sold by under Sheriffs and Bailiffs at
half or less value, though it may suffice one greedy and merciless Creditor,
will not be unlikely to defeat another or many others of their more just debts
and utterly blast the Debtor in his credit by which he might well have
subsisted and survived the disgrace and trouble of so furious a prosecution.

And that the long ago trodden path, or way of compelling or bringing men unto
judgment or unto Courts of Justice, would not so frequently be made use of in
England, the way of Summons Pone and distress being not yet altogether
forsaken, and disused as it was formerly) for that betwixt the Reigns of
Canutus a Danish King, and the 25 year of the reign of King Edward the Third,
and for some ages after, there neither could be any, either frequency of
arrest, or necessity for it, as there has been since and is now.

CHAP. III. The reason and necessity of the more frequ^nt use of Writs of
Arrest, and Outlawry then was before thy making of the Statute of 25 E. ca. 17.
IN regard that in those former Ages there were more Lands than Tenants, more
real Estates, and but little personal, the Trade of the Nation not the fortieth
part of what it is now, and so little before the Reign of King Edward the
third, as those few Merchants that came hither, had Letters of safe conduct
granted unto them before they came; and that the Commerce and Trade, which was
in King Edward the Third's time and long after, was only with the Esterlings,
and Hanse Towns, Burgundy, Aquitaine, and some Genoese, and Italian Merchants,
(the Turkey, East and West- Indy, and Affrican trades not then or long after
known or used) Usury so horrid and damnable a Crime as it was, a cause of
Excommunication, denial of Christian Burial, or a power to make a last Will and
Testament* the Friborghs or Tubings in every County, so obliged men to an
obedience to the Laws, and the public peace, as every man of the Tubing or
Freborgh were bound upon all occasions to bring each other to Justice, and the
Nobility Gentry, and Masters of their numerous Families were to do the like,
for all that were de manu pastu, or in their service; the Lords of Manors kept
much of their demesnes in their own hands, with great Stocks and Herds of
Cattle thereupon, had their Bondmen and Bondwomen in their Families, Villains
and Neifes regardant to their Manors, did let their other Lands for small
Rents, and much personal service, as to plow their Land, now their Grass, make
their Hey, reap their Corn, carry in their Harvest and Wood, do a great part of
their Husbandry, and sometimes ride with them 600 Abbeys and Religious Houses,
with their numerous Monks, Friars, Nuns, and all their Dependants and Servants
belonging to them* lived out of the reach of Writs and Process, and all or most
of them and the secular Clergy in above 9600. Parishes, so formidable as they
were as it were exempt from common Process, and no man durst lay violent hands
upon them, that many thousand Tenants in Capite and by Knight service, and the
Tenants which did hold their Lands of the Nobility and Gentry, either as
freehold or copy by Lease or at Will, in the times of that great Hospitality,
Protection, and Comfort, which they receivedunder them, and the great
Veneration, Awe, and respects which they paid unto them could, never find it to
be either safe or convenient for them to commence or prosecute any Action or
Suit in Law against them, or any of their very numerous Dependants, Friends,
Kindred, or Alliances, and there were many thousands which in the Reigns of
King Henry the 1, Henry the 2, Richard the 1, King John, Henry the 3, and
Edward the first were Croysadoed for the wars in the Holy Land and at
Jerusalem, and thereby claimed and enjoyed a Freedom from any arrests or
molestations concerning the paymentof their debts, with the many necessary
protections given unto such as were employed in Servitio Regis, which the said
several Princes and several of their successors, whilst they had so many
Provinces in France, and wars for the defense of the same, could not deny unto
those whose service they made use of, increase of people by reason of more than
formerly frequent marriages of the laics and the marriages of all our Clergy,
which before had been for some hundred of years forbidden, could not but
administer so many occasions to disuse the more slow way of the process of
summons pone and distringas, and make use of that more expedite and quicker way
of recovery of Debts, or bringing men to justice, when in so great a change as
has since happened in the alteration of the Estates, Manners, business, and
trade of the Nation, not only at home, but a broad inward and outward, and that
every man could not like a Snail carry his house upon his head, or be sure
always to be found in it, there could not be a few very great and pressing
necessities to call for it, especially.

When if all the People of the Nation were numbered, or put into Ranks, there
would be,

1. Freeholders.

2. Copyholders, Lease-holders, and such as have an Estate only in Tithes,
Annuities, or Rent Charges.

3. Men of Estate only in Goods.

4. Or of Trade and Credit only.

5. Men whose Estates are only in Money at use, or abroad in other men's hands.

6. Or of no Estate but what they carry about with them, or hope for by their
Friends, or their Industry, or some future preferment.

7. Such whose Estates depend upon their daily labors, or profits arising
thereby, as mechanics Artificers, Servants, Laborers, and the like.

8. Mariners, and a sort of adventitious people, who have little or no abode,
going or coming to or from beyond the Seas, Merchants, Strangers, and the like.

Of all which several sorts of people, the Freeholders and first Classis are
the only men, who are properly to be summoned, or to be within this new
proposed Law, because they have lands and Estates to be known, and thereby
summoned, and are to be found with some certainty, but are not the fortieth
part of those which have not.

Of the second sort, the Copyhold Estates, which being very near a fifth part
of the Nation, are not extendable or liable to debts, nor can without manifest
prejudice to the Lords of the Manors, whose Predecessors or Ancestors did under
certain Limitations permit them to enjoy them, be made to be so; Tithes are for
the most part not distrainable, and may be sold or compounded for before they
be due, Leases may be surrended or assigned, so as none shall easily find the
true Proprietor, Annuities or Rent-Charges are not extendable.

The third and fourth sort, may either convey away their Goods, or have very
little of them.

The Estate of the fifth, either not to be found out, or hardly to be come at.

And the experience of some Thousands of years past, and the latter as well as
the former Ages, can and will bear witness, and record of the usefulness and
approbation of the Process of Summons pone and Distress, where the Defendants
are Freeholders, and have a visible Estate, and of Arrest in case of Contumacy
and Contempt of Courts of Justice, and suspicion of Flight and Insolvencies.

CHAP. IV. The Ancient use as well as necessity of the Process of Arrest, and
outlawry in this and other Nations.
FOr it may be evident to any, who shall not too much be led by a causless
prejudice, or an humor of censuring that which they do not understand, that an
attachment upon Pones do cause a manucaption or Bail, and that upon on a
Distringas made thereupon, a manucaption of the Defendants person is Returned
as well as the issues or profits of his Lands or goods, that the words of
Attach or Capias, used in the writs, process, and records of our Law, are in
many things Synonimous, and of one and the same signification.

And that the procedings in law by process of Capias and Arrest may not at all
seem to be unwarrantable, cruel, and unjust, when precedents and approbation of
the like and greater severities are to be found in the sacred, and always to be
believed records of holy Writ, in the old and new Testament, Numb. 15. v. 32,
33, 34.
as the putting the man in ward that was found gathering of sticks upon the
Sabbath whilst the Children of Isreal were in the wilderness, Levit. 15. v. 39.
because it was not declared what should be done unto him, 2 Reg. 4. 1. and 7.
and if thy Brother that dwells by thee be waxen poor and sold unto thee,
thou shall not compel him to serve as a Bond Servant; and the selling of a
debtor and taking his Children to be bondmen.

If thou be surety for thy friend, Proverbs. 6. 1. and 2.
thou art snared and taken with the words of thy mouth, Mat. 18. v. 25. 26. 27.
28. 29. 30.
that of taking and casting into Prison for debt until the utmost Farthing was
paid, and such or the like coercions to compel men to appear in Courts of
Justice and satisfy actions, were long before the Incarnation of our blessed
Savior in use amongst the Athenians in their Laws. And the Romans, those great
Masters of Liberty, who having their Lictores and Sergeants carrying their
Rods and Axes before their Magistrates, expressly ordained that if a man would
not or could not come before the Judge, Sigonius de Judiciis, cap. 18. 372.
he should give Bail to answer the action.

Metellus one of the Tribunes of the People at Rome arrested one of the Consuls
for taking away his Horse.

The great Scipio Africanus being called to account for moneys received, Livy
lib. 24.
and refusing to come to his answer, the Tribunes of the People, those great
protectors of their supposed Liberties, Livy lib. 38. 1007.
urged very hard to have him Arrested, and fetched out of his house in the
Country and made to appear.

Julius Caesar was enforced to give Bail to his Creditors who were about to
stay him when he went Praetor to Spain. Plutarch in vita Julii Caesaris.


Urgulania a great favorite of Augusta, Tacit. Annals lib. 2.
mother of Tiberius the Emperor, being summoned by Piso in an action of Debt,
which she disobeying, was Arrested, but rescued and conveyed to Caesar's house,
whereupon a great stir and tumult happening, and Augusta her self complaining
that she was injured by it, the money notwithstanding was afterward sent and
paid by her; nor was such arresting of persons condemned by our Blessed Savior
when he advised Defendants to agree with their adversaries before they were by
them delivered to the Judge, Mat. 5. 25.
and the Judge deliver them to the officer, and they be cast into Prison.

Those Roman Laws and Customs being to be allowed for an inducement to our
Common Laws to do the like, Seldom Di^sert ad Fletam 478, 479* and 501.
which never refused to take in and borrow from other Nations any thing that
might add to its own perfections and excellencies, and could be no strangers
unto the Civil and Caesarean Laws brought into England about 50 years after
Christ, when the Emperor Severus Reigned seven years together at York, and that
great Lawyer Papinian as Praetor or Lord Chief Justice, governed the Civil
affairs and Justice of this Nation under him, and those Laws continued as a
Seminary of many of our Laws and Customs, as may be demonstrated for more than
three hundred years after.

By the Laws of Ina a Saxon King Reigning here in England betwixt the years 712
and 727. made suasu and instituto of Cenred his Father, Hedda and Erkenwald his
Bishops, and omnium Senatorum and natu majorum and sapientum populi sui in
magna servorum Dei frequentia; if the Plaintiff demanded right to be done unto
him by the Judge, In Legibus Inae. 8.
and could not obtain it, and the Defendant show no cause why he should not
give him a Pledge or Sureties, the Judge was to be fined thirty shillings, and
to do him right notwithstanding within a Week after.

And then there could be no doubt but that he had power to compel him to
appear, and to Punish his contumacy, for otherwise the Judge could not be
justly fined that had no power to enforce the Defendant to appear before him.

And if a Pledge were required of him that was accused (which as to the giving
of a Pledge or Bail was no less then the awarding of a Capias) and he had not
wherewithal to do it before the Suit be determined, in Legibus Inae. 63.
another might lay down a Pledge for him, upon condition that he remained with
him or in his Power (which is a most ancient and clear example) says that
great AntiAntiquary Sr. Henry Spelman) of being Bailed out of Prison or giving
Bail to answer the Action. Spel. Gloss. in voce Ball 69. and in verb capital.
140.


By the Laws of King Edgar (who Reigned Anno Dom. 971.) made Frequenti senatu,
Lamb. Sax. Laws 62.
every man was to have sureties who might have him forth coming to do right.

By the Laws of Canutus made Sapientum consilio, Lamb. Sax. Laws 97. ib. 18.
who Reigned in Anno Dom. 1031. no man was to compel another by distraining or
taking away Pledges to a Suit in another Liberty, Ex Chron. Jo. Brampton in
legibus Canuti.. 62.
unless he had thrice required right to be done him within the hundred.

If any one be destitute of Friends, and cannot find Pledges, let him be put
into Prison.

In the Hundred Courts, Vide Spelmans Glos. in voce Carkanu^.
County Courts, Courts Leet and Baron, which (says our Learned Seldom) have a
resemblance of the Customs of the old Germans brought hither by the Saxons,
Seldom. Janus Anglorum 43.
the Process are for the most part by Summons, Attachment, and distress, or if
upon the Summons a nihil habet be returned, that is to say, has nothing
whereby he may be Summoned, then a Capias.

By the Laws of King Edward the Confessor who Reigned in Anno Dom. 1044.
Lambert Saxon Laws 138.
which were of so high esteem with the English, that after a commission to find
them out by the oaths of twelve men in every County of England elected and
chosen, they with much a do, Precibus and fletibus, Ibid. 149. and 158. ex
Chronico Lichfieldensi.
obtained of William the Conqueror to have them confirmed, and were after so
exceeding careful not to loose them, as the observation of those Laws, were by
an oath afterward taken by the succeeding Kings of England at the Coronation,
more espetially recommended unto them.

Every man that would be accounted a Freeman, Cap. 64. Spelmans gloss. in verbo
Friborge. 297.
ought to be in Pledge, that the Pledges might bring him to Justice if he
should offend, and if he escape, such Pledges should pay what he was Sued for,
which (says our Sr. Henry Spelman in his Glossary resembles our Frank Pledge)
and let the Hundred and County (say those Laws) be demanded for him as our
Ancestors have ordained.

For say the same King Edwards Laws, it is the greatest and highest security by
which all men and their Estates are strongly upheld.

By the Laws of William the Conqueror who confirmed the Laws of King Edward
the Confessor, omnis homo qui voluerit se teneri pro liber^ sit in plegio ut
plegius eum habeat ad Justitiam si quid offenderit and si quisquam talium
videant plegii and solvant quod Calumpinatum est, LL. Gulielmi Conquestor 64.
every man who would live or be accounted as a free holder is to live in frank
Pledge, so as his Neighbor or Pledge may bring him to Justice, if he shall
offend, and his Pledges (or Neighbor in the Tithing) are to look unto it and
pay that which shall be demanded of him, and he shall be adjudged to Pay.

By the Laws of Henry the 1 made Concilio Baronum, In leg. H. 1. cap. 29.
he which is summoned to the Hundred Court, and without any just necessity
refuses to come, if he be able let thirty Pence be taken from him, for the
first and second time (which seems to be a forfeit) and let him be distreined
by the Hundred, Lindenbrog. glos. in verbo pulsare.
but let him be put to Pledges till the day of Pleading.

And he which was brought or compelled by Process before the Judge, In leg. H.
1. cap. 5. and in Capital. Car. and Lodovic. Imp. lib. 7. 283. Goldastus Tom.
3. Imperial. Constitut. 30.
for so the word Pulsatus in that Law of H. 1. was by the Civil Law, and the
Laws of the Longobards commonly rendered, might appeal if he suspected his
Judges, and appealing might not be detained in Custody.

Ranulphus de Glanvil who recorded much of what was the practice of the Courts
of Justice in England in his time, and was Lord Chief Justice in the Reign of
King Henry the 2 when (as he says in his proaemio or Epistle to that Book) the
Laws then in use were founded upon reason and ancient Customs, Glanvil in
proaemio.
the King willing to be advised, the Judges, men of great Wisdom and Knowledge
in the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom, and Justice so faithfully administered,
as the great men could not oppress the Poor.

Writes, Lib. 10. cap. 3. and 11.
that if the Defendant appeared not in an Action of D^bt, after he was
Summoned, an Attachment was awarded and a Distringas as in other Pleas.

And it was in those times held to be Common Law, Ibid. lib. 8. cap. 5.
that where a fine was Levied, and that after 3 Essoynes either of the Parties
refused per^ormance, tunc remanet in misericordia Regis and salvo attachiabitur
quous que securitatem in veniret bonam.

In the Reign of King Henry the 3. (as appears by Bracton a Judge and learned
Lawyer of those times, in his book delegibus and consuetudinibus Angliae,
compiled as he says ex veteribus Judiciis Justorum out of ancient records and
memorials; if upon the 4th day of the return of the Summons in an Action of
Covenant or Trespass, Bracton lib. 5. de Exceptionibus 440. 441.
the Defendant appeared not, whether the Summons were returned or not, an
Attachment was awarded.

If he came not then a second Attachment was awarded to put the Defendant to
better Pledges or securities.

And if he had not Land which might be taken into the Kings hands, or by which
he might be distrained, the Sheriff should be commanded to take his Body or
bring him, and the Pledges were to be in misericordia quia ulterius non sunt
summonendi, and if he came not at the day appointed, sed maliciose se
subtraxerit and latitaverit quod Corpus inveniri non possit vel forte se
transtulerit extra Comitatum and potestatem vicecomitis and vicecomes mandavit
quod non fuit in ventus in balliva sua, then in default of his appearance,
three Writs of Distringas shall be made out one after another, the first by all
his Lands and Chattels, second by all his Lands and Chattels, ita quod nec ipse
nec aliquis pro eo nec per ipsum manum apponat ita quod habeat Corpus ejus ad
alium diem and si tunc non veniret precipiatur vicecomiti quod distringat eum
per omnes terras and Catalla and quod Capiat omnes terras and omnia Catalla sua
in manum domini Regis and Capta in manus domini Regis detineat quousque dominus
Rex aliud inde preceperit and quod de exitibus eorundem domino Regi respondeat.

And for this kind of proceedings cited a Record in Michaelmas Term in the
Third year of that Kings reign, which in its use and nature carried along with
it a restraint of the Body of the Defendant, for the Sheriff was by the Writ to
distrain the defendant, Ita quod haberet corpus, and it would be in vain to
distrain him who perhaps had a small Estate or profit of his Lands to be
destrained betwixt the Test and return of the Writ if the Sheriff did not at
the same time restrain or secure his Body to appear before the Justices at the
time prefixed, to answer the contempt as well as the Action.

But says Bracton, Bracton. lib. 5. cap. 31. 9, 6, and 7.
if the Plaintiff post tot and tantas dilationes justiciam non fuerit
consecutus should not after so many delays obtain Justice, what shall be done,
for durum est enim quod placitum suum deserat and infecto negotio desperatus
recedat domum, it would be hard that the Plaintiff should go home in despair,
and be able to do nothing; and therefore concludes, that if it be a civil or
personal action, for money, or upon any contract, it would be good to put the
Plaintiff in possession of the Defendants goods and Chattels according to the
quantity of his demand and summon the Defendant at a time limited to appear,
and answer the Action, at which time if he do appear, he shall have his goods
and Chattels restored unto him, so as he answer the Action otherwise, he shall
never more be heard concerning his goods and Chattels, sed querens extunc verus
possessor efficiretur, but the Plaintiffs shall from thence be reckoned the
true owner and possessor thereof, si autem cum corpus non Inveniatur nec terras
habuerit nec Catalla ille de quo quaeritur iniquum esset si Justicia remaneret
vel malitia esset Impunita; But if his Body cannot be found, and he has not
any goods or Chattels, it would be unjust that Justice should be at a stand and
not go forward, and that the evil actions of men should remain unpunished, and
therefore whether the Action was pecuniaria vel injuriarum, was in Debt, or for
money or Trespass, the Court was to proceed against him by Process of Utlary,
propter contumaciam and inobedientiam factam domino Regi quia nullum majus
Crimen quam Contemptus and inobedientia omnes enim qui in Regno sunt obedientes
esse debent domino Regi and ad pacem suam and cum vocati vel summoniti per
Regem venire contempserint faciunt se ipsos Exleges, for their contempt and
disobedience to the King, because there is no greater Crime then contempt and
disobedience, for all that are in his Kingdom are to be obedient to the King,
and observe the peace and Justice thereof, and being called or Summoned by him,
shall contemn it or refuse an obedience thereunto do make themselves Outlaws.

Et ideo Utlagari deberent non tamen ad mortem vel membrorum truncationem si
postea redierent vel intercepti fuerint cum causa utlagationis criminalis non
existat sed ad perpetuam prisonam vel Regni abjurationem and a communione
omnium aliorum qui sunt ad pacem domini Regis, Bract. l. 5. de Exceptionibus
cap. 31.. 7.
and therefore he ought to be Outlawed but is not if he return, or should be
taken to be punished by Death, Mutulation or cutting off his Members, in regard
that the cause of the Utlarie was not Criminal but he is to be committed to
perpetual Prison, or to abjure the Kingdom, be Banished, and forbid the society
of all the Kings Subjects.

And in those days where a man by Lease had taken an house rendering a certain
Rent, Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 28. 1. Fleta. lib. 2. cap. 59.
quid says Bracton, what shall be done when the Tenant does not pay his Rent,
and nihil in domibus locatis and conductis inveniatur, and has no goods and
Chattels, yet howsoever resolves the question, recurrendum erit ad corpus
conductoris, si autem Corpusnon inveniatur hoc poterit locator suae imputare
negligentiae vel imperitiae quod sibi Cautius non prospexit, recourse is to be
had to the Body of the Tenant, and if he be not to befound, the Landlord is to
impute it to his own negligence that he did not look better to it.

Cum quis ad warrantum vocatus fuerit Christianus vel Judaus qui terram non
tenuerit in feodo quae capi possit in manum domini Regis per quam distringi
possint pracipiatur vicecomiti quod habeat corpora eorum, Bracton. lib. 5. de
warrant. cap. 6. sect. 13.
when any man is vouched to warranty be he Christian or Jew, and has not Land
which may be taken into the Kings hands or by which he may be distrained the
Sheriff shall be commanded to take his Body or bring him. Bracton. lib. 4. de
assisa. vltunae. presentationis cap. 9. sect. 3.


And a Bishop being Summond in a quare non admisit cum non venit nec se excusat
per nun-nec per Essoniatorem attachietur, when he neither comes, nor sends his
excuse, nor essoins shall be attached.

Upon a writ awarded to a Bishop to command him to bring before the Kings
Justices a Clark or Minister in holy Orders, refusing to find Pledges because
he was in holy Orders, and had no lay Fee whereby he might be distrained, if
the Bishop did not after a Summons pone and Distringas, awarded against
himself, cause him to come, Bracton de exceptionibus 443.
the Court did proceed against the Clark upon the contempt, and cause him to be
arrested, nor could the Sheriff or his Bailiffs incur any punishment for doing
of it; for the execution of the Law says Bracton wrongeth no man.

By the Statute of Marlebridg made in the 52 year of the Reign of that King,
52. H. 3. cap. 3.
if any shall not obey or suffer Summons, attachments, or executions of the
same according to the Law and customs of the Kingdom they were to be punished.
Vossius lib. 2. devariis glossem in appendic. 814. Spelmans glossar^ in verbo.
attachiare.


The word Attachment being, says the learned Vossius, derived from a French
word to apprehend or detain.

An Attachment is to arrest, force or compel a man denying to come to
judgment, says Sir Henry Spelman.

And by Skene a learned Scotch Lawyer is defined to be a certain Bond or
Constraint of the Law, Skeneus indice ad leges Scoticas. 52. H. 3. cap. 23.
Register 35.
whereby a Defendant is unwillingly compelled to answer in Judgment to the
Party complaining.

In the Statute of 52 Henry the third, where a Capias is given against
accomptants, it is said they shall be Attached by their bodies.

An Attachment made for disobeying a Writ of prohibition is in the very form of
a pone, 52. H. 3. cap. 23.
and the awarding and entry of a pone is that the defendant should be Attached.

And says Bracton the course, or solemnity of Attachments to compel the
Defendant to come to the Court to answer his contempt, was not so always
observed, but in trespass for the greatness of the offense, or in favor of
Soldiers that were going to the Wars, Bracton lib. 5. cap. 33.
or of Merchants or such as required haste in Actions of Debt (and it is
probable that the Actions or Suits of Merchants were most commonly of that
nature) the Judges granted an Habeas Corpus (which to that purpose was in
effect as much as a Capias) whereby the Sheriff was commanded, all delays set
apart in regard of such haste and privilege to bring the Body of the Defendant
to answer the Plaintiff in an Action of Debt or Trespass as the case required,
with a Clause in the Later end or perclose of the Writ, that the Sheriff should
be grievously amerced if he refuse to do it.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 52 year of the Reign of the aforesaid King
in a Plea of Common custody or guard by reason of ward, ^2. H. 3. cap. 7.
if the deforcers came not at the great distress the Writ was to be renewed
twice or thrice within the half year following, and if after the Writ read and
proclaimed in open County, the deforceant absent himself and the sheriff cannot
take his Body to bring before the Justice, then as a Rebe^^e shall loose the
Seisin of his ward.

By the Statute made in the third year of the Reign of King Edward the first,
if any under Sheriff or other do withhold Prisoners replevishable after they
have offered sufficient security, 3. E. 1. cap. 1. 5.
he shall pay a grievous amerciament to the King, in which act of Parliament,
men committed by the King or his Justices, are excepted and declared to be not
replevishable.

By a Statute of the aforesaid King made in the same year 3. E. 1. cap. 34.
(the title of it being against the arresting of men in Liberties) great men
and their Bailiffs (the Kings Officers only excepted, to whom special authority
says the Statute is given) were not to attach men passing thorough their
Jurisdictions with their goods compelling men to answer before them upon
contracts and covenants, etc. And the writ of prohibition in the Register
awarded upon that Statute, Register 98.
is for attaching a man to answer upon contracts and covenants.

Britton who wrote his Book by the command of King Edward the first says,
Britton cap. 6. tit. Attachment. and cap. 28. tit. Debt.
if any man will complain of a debt under forty shillings, let him find Pledges
to prosecute his debtor, and if he that is sued in Trespass makes default, let
him be distrained.

And that in an action of debt if there be not a sufficient distress the
Difendants might be taken by their Bodies, Tit. Attachment 51. and Debt* 68.
be they Clarks or Laymen.

Fleta or whosoever was the Author of the Book so called reciting the then
manner of proceedings at law as an old and accustomed course says, Fleta, lib.
2. cap. 62, 65, 67, and 70.
they were by Summons, Attachments and distress in personal actions the entries
and awarding thereof upon record being the very same with little difference as
they are now used. If a debtor had bound himself to be in default of payment
distrained by the Steward, Ibidem lib. 2. cap. 60. Sect, 33. 36.
and marshal of the Kings house, then upon security given by the Creditor to
prosecute, a distringas was awarded against the debtor until he found Pledges,
so as he were within the virge, and if he were personally to be found, was to
be Attached by his body until he should by Pledges acquit himself, and if he
had not Pledges was to be held in Custody until that he answered the Creditor,
non tamen in vinculis, or if he found Pledges and after made default, the
Pledges were to be amerced and the Defendant arrested and detained, and not be
bailed or let loose by Pledges before he had answered.

And that not only, Marescallus sub suo periculo omnes captos infra virgam
custodire debet, sed de eis coram Senescallo respondere and de Judicatis plenam
facere executionem, Fleta lib. 2. cap. 5. sect. 5.
the Marshal should at his Peril keep all that were taken within the virge, but
answer for them before the Steward, and ought to take in execution those
against whom Judgment should be given, and the Steward did of course command
the Clark that keeps the placita Aulae pro Rege Rolls and Records of the
Kings Court to direct his writ, Marescallo quod ipsum de quo fit sine dilatione
attachiari faciat, to the Marshal that he do without delay attach him of whom
any complaint should be made.

In the seventeenth year of the Reign of King Edward the second a nihil habet
being returned by a Sheriff upon a Distringas in wast a Capias was awarded by
the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas against the defendant. 17. E. 2.


And that if a Sheriff return upon a pone a Tarde that the Writ came so late
unto him as he could not execute it, Fleta lib. 2. de maliciis Vicecom. obviam.
cap. 67.
and it be averred that the Writ came time enough, or that the Party was
present and might be attached the Sheriff was to be amerced. Mirror of
justice. 79 register. 267.


Personal Actions, says the Mirror of Justice, (so much admired by Sir.
Edward Coke) have their introductions by Attachments of their Bodies, real by
Summons and mixed actions.

By Summons and after by Attachment in personal Action. And in the same Kings
Reign if a Religious man Professed, had forsaken the house and become vagrant,
a Writ upon a Certificate of the Abbot or Prior issued out of the Chancery to
the Sheriff to take him. 20. E. 2. Register* 267.


In the eight year of the Reign of King Edward the third presentatio facta fuit
apud Lincoln contra Thomam de Carleton sub Vicecomitem Indictatum de
extorsionibus and aliis malefactis and inter alia quod mittit homines
arrestatos pro debitis in ergastulum strictum and fetidum inter latrones
quousque finem fecerint cum illo pro deliberatione sua extra, 8 E. 3. corain.
rege* Ro^i 24.
etc. Contra formam statuti and plurima alia pro quibus fecit finem cum Rege
and postea pardonatur per breve domini Regis eo quod invenit Regi in guerra sua
Scotiae tres homines armatos and duos Hobelarios Thomas de Carleton under
Sheriff of the county of Lincoln was indicted at Lincoln for several
Extortions and Misdemeanors, and amongst other things, for that he did put such
as were Prisoners and arrested for Debt in a close and loathsome Prison amongst
Thieves until they gave him money for their better accommodation, against the
form of the Statute, and did commit many other Misdemeanors, for which he paid
a Fine to the King, and was pardoned for that he furnished the King in his
Wars in Scotland with three armed men and two Hoblers or common Soldiers.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 18 year of the Reign of the same King a
Capias is to be awarded against such as not having wherewithal to live do
refuse to serve. Statute of Laborers 18. E. 3.


22. Ed. 3. It was held for Law, that upon a Judgment obtained for Debt or
Damages, Lib. Assis. 22. Ed. 3^. 61.
the Body of the Defendant might be taken in execution, and by the opinion of
Thorpe and Basset Judges where conusance of Pleas is granted, Br. Conusans 33.
there are also granted all things necessary unto it, as to proceed by way of
Capias, Distress, etc.

And it was in those times agreed to be Law that the Judges have Power by Word
of Mouth to command a Defendant to be Attached, 22. Assis. 43. Brook tit.
execution 79.
and that he that Bailed a man might by the Law, without Process, Arrest or
take the party Bailed, and bring him into the Court.

All which put together and brought to a due consideration, with the small or
no difference, which is betwixt a Pone and a Capias, as to the Attaching and
Compelling of Defendants to appear in the Tenor, and anciently practiced, and
yet intended use of it may be enough to Rescue us from the imputation of Error
or presumption, Coke l. 3. relat. Sir William Herberts Case 25. Ed. 3. cap. 17.
if pace tanti viri, we shall take that which has been said in Sir. Will.
Herberts case by Sir. Edward Coke in his third Reports that the Body of a
Defendant in an Action of debt was not subject or liable to an execution before
the Statute made in the 25th year of the Reign of King Edward the third, to be
no more than an opinion built upon a great mistake, for that Statute was not
made only to give Process of Arrest by Capias upon a nihil habet or non est
Inventus upon a Pone or a nihil habet or non est Inventus returned upon a
Distringas by a Sheriff, because it was so before by the Common Law of England
(it being altogether improbable that those who had Lands or any visible Estate
in Goods or Chattels were before the making of that Statute always Resident, or
did never hide or absent themselves for Debt or some other Actions, to avoid a
Summons or some Arrest or compulsory way to bring them into Courts of Justice
to answer and give satisfaction unto such as had cause to complain of them, or
that those who had no Lands or Goods were always to be free and exempted from
any restraint or arrest of their Bodies upon actions of Debt or for any other
matters commenced against them.

But was intended only to have Process to the Exigend and Utlary, (which could
not be without a Write of Capias) in Actions of Debt, detinue of Chattels, and
taking of Beasts, per Capias and Exigend selon return du vicecount come home
use en breifs daccompt, by Capias and Exigen^ according to the return of the
Sheriff, To. part. 25. E. 3.
as was used in Writs of account, and being at the petition of the Commons in
Parliament priont les Commons, the King, as the record it self witnesses, did
answer, Il plese ou Roy que ainsi soit and quil soit mys en Estatut, it
pleases the King that it should be so, and that it be put or formed into a
Statute.

And the reason of that petition of the Commons in Parliament to the King which
introduced and procured that Act of Parliament, (many Acts of Parliament and
good Laws in the former Ages being ushered in, and obtained by the Petitions of
the Commons in Parliament to their King and Sovereign,) may in all probability
seem to be, for that they did not think either the former Process of the Law by
Summons, Bracton lib. 3. cap. 13.
Pone Distringas or Capias to be severe or sufficiently coercive, or so
powerful to bring a Defendant to Justice, as the fear of an Utlary, which in
the Saxons times were so Terrible as he that was outlawed was accounted to be a
Friendless or Lawless man and was afterward so formidable to those, that by
the contempt of the Laws incurred in the forfeiture of their Liberties, Goods,
Chattels, Profits of their Lands, and Benifits of the Laws, as it might well be
believed every man would be careful to avoid so great a danger and trouble.

And therefore in the eighteenth year of the Reign of that King, being but
seven years before the making of that Statute, it was deemed to be for the good
of the People to have it declared by Act of Parliament in what cases process of
Exigend and Utlary should be, that is to say, against such as received the
Kings. Wool or Money, and detained it, such as transported Wool, not Cocquetted
or without Custom, against Conspirators and Confederates of quarrels such as
committed Ryots and brought in false money, if they could not be found or brought
in by Attachment or Distress, and not against any other.

And by another Statute of the same year no exigend was to be granted in
trespass but where it was for breach of the Peace, and at this day
notwithstanding the Statute of 25. E. 3. ca. 17. no Writ of Capias can be made
without a nihil habet returned, nor could a Capias in account be otherwise made
before the making of that Statute, nor can be since without a nihil habet
returned by the Sheriff, unless the Co^^t should by their coercive power of
punishing contempts and contumacy think fit to do it, as is now done by
Attachment in Chancery upon a Defendants not appearing, and was long before
that Statute done by the Judges of our Courts of Common Law, for not obeying
prohibitions or Writs Commanding the not Impan^lling of one above the age of
70 years to be of a Jury, a Writ to replevin or Bayl a man which was
Imprisoned, upon a moderata misericordia, against a Steward or Bayliffe of a
Manor for amercing too much, against a Sheriff, for not Summoning or
misreturning a Jury (and the like) they being as well enabled to cause a
Defendant to be attached or arrested for a default or contempt in refusing to
appear before them as they did usually before that statute, and do yet award a
grand Cape against the Lands of a Tenant for not appearing in a real Action,
make out a Capias pro fine and Imprison, a Defendant for Pleading non est
factum to a Bond or other deed after it is found against him, and a Capias to
arrest such as shall make a Rescue as they did before that statute, and do yet
make a Capias upon a nihil habet returned upon an original in account when the
Statute of Marlbridge 52. H. 3. cap. 23. only gives it upon a Distringas when
the Defendant has nothing to be distrained and as they did before the statute
of 25. E. 3. cap. 17, and yet do in actions of Trespass make a Capias upon a
nihil habet returned instead of a Distringas when the original Writ out of the
Chancery is a Pone or attachment.

Otherwise they cannot do Justice to those that complain and their jurisdiction
will be useless, Oldendor pius in definit. actionum 25. 31. and Seldom, de
Synedriis in prefat. and 61. and 62.
and to no purpose says Mr. Seldom, and therefore where ever there is the one,
of necessity there must be the other, and the Judges says Glanvil in H. 2.
time had power to Punish contempts and such as should absent themselves.

And had no less in the Reign of King Henry 3, Bracton. lib. 3. cap. 1.. 3.
when it was said by Bracton, ex quo eis commissa est causa simpliciter
extenditur eorum Jurisdictio ad omnia sine quibus causa terminari non potest
quantum ad judicium and executionem judicii, when they are commissionated to
hear a cause, their jurisdiction is to be extended unto that without which the
cause, as to the judgment and execution thereof, cannot be determined, and did
not want a coercive power in the Reign of King Edward the 1. Westminster cap.
15. and F. N. B.
when a man could not have a Writ de homine replegiando when he is taken by
the commandment of the chief Justice, and upon all contempts made to any Courts
of Record in disobeying the commandment of the King under his great Seal, the
offender is to be fined and imprisoned, Coke 8. relat. Beechers case 19. E. 3.
for jurisdictions says the civil Law are maintained and upheld by such kind
of coercions, and is no more either as to the point of contumacy or when the
defendants have not goods sufficient then is now usually done in the collecting
the excise or monthly assessements, when the collectors where no distress can
be found, are empowered to take and imprison the Body, and even the System
maker in the time of the late rebellion when the enclosures of the Law and all
that supported or savoured of Monarchy were endeavored to be thrown down, and
every discontented or foolish fancy would be a Legislator, and busy it self in
the alteration and spoiling of our Laws, could not tell how to avoid the
allowing of an arrest or Capias where the defendant had no visible and certain
Estate whereby to be Summoned.

And with much more which might be alleged for the antiquity, legality,
rationality, long approbation and usefulness of the Writs and Process of
arrest, and Utlary, which have been and are a great part of the power and
ancient rights and customs of our Courts of Justice without which they can
neither subsist, exercise, maintain or Keep their authorities, or accomplish
the design and ends of justice, and their constitution may inform all those
that would not bind or make themselves more than apprentices to those
inconsiderate clamours which since that fatal and unhappy year 1641, have been
raised by the mobile and scelestum vulgus, ignorant and plundering part of the
People and their new Fangled devices and designs for the banishment or
alteration of our Laws which they but a little before had cried up and
publicly professed to be their birthright.

And by the Extirpation of Monarchy, Kingly and Church government plow up the
Kingdom to their own ungodly advantages and profits, and render it to be in a
worse and more barbarous condition then Wat Tiler, Jack Cade or Ket could have
brought it unto if their several Rebellions and Clounery had gained their
expected success.

That there is nothing to uphold those their reasonless desires of Innovation.

And that our Forefathers were so well content with the benefit of that Act of
Parliament of 25. E. 3. for the proceedings by Writ of Capias, and by Process
of Exigend to the Utlary, in Actions of Debt, detinue of Chattels, and taking
of Beasts, (for that may appear to be the only design and purpose of that
Statute.)

And did so little believe the Process by way of Capias and Arrest, to be any
invasion of their liberties and rights of Freemen, as they did in the said
Parliament Petition for, and obtain an Act of Parliament, that no man might be
taken but by Indictment or Presentment, or by Process made by Writ origynal at
the common Law, or to be prejudicial unto them or their posterities and in the
38 year of the Reign of that King.

Although great mischiefs did as was complained to that King in a Parliament
holden in the seven and thirtieth year of his Reign often happen and daily
come, 37. E. 3. cap. 2.
because that Escheators Sheriffs and other the Kings Ministers did seize the
Lands Goods and Chattels of many surmising that they were Outlawed, where they
were not because they did bear such names as those that were Outlawed the
benefits of the aforesaid Statute of 25 E. 3, for Process of Utlary by Writs
of Capias and Exigend which was made but two years before did so over ballanc^
that or other inconveniences as might happen in some men's particulars, as the
Wisdom of that King and Parliament, could not think it fit to repeal that
Statute, or forbid or discourage the right use of it, but did only ordain that
if any complained, he should in such a case have a Writ de ldempuitate nominis
as had been in time past.

And in the 38th year of that Kings Reign whereas many People were grieved and
Attached by their body in the City of London at the Suit of the People of the
same City surmising to them that they be Debtors, 38. E. 3. cap. 5.
and that they Prove by their Papers whereas they have no Deed or Tally, It was
assented, that men may wage their Law, upon Debts due upon such Papers.

And the Right use of that Act of Parliament of 25. F. 3. cap 17. did from time
to time receive its Allowance and Approbation by several Acts of Parliament
made by our Kings and Princes* from the making of that Act until that never to
be enough deplored infatuation and unruly Giddiness of a rebellious part of the
Nation betwixt the year 1641, and his Majesty's happy return in the year, 1660.

As by an Act of Parliament made in the first year of the Reign of King Richard
the 2, 1 R. 2. cap. 12. and 15.
it was enacted, that Prisoner upon judgments given in any of the Kings Courtss
of Justice should not be suffered to go at large that a fained confession of a
Debt due to the King should not delay another Execution.

And that Priests should not be arrested doing Divine service.

And in the second year of that Kings Reign, being but about 27 years after the
making of that Statute of 25 E. the 3. to proceed to Utlary by way of Capias in
Actions of Debt, Rs. parl. 2. R. 2. m. 72, 73, and 74.
Robert de Hauley Esquire being Arrested upon an Action of Debt, and upon his
Escape pursued into Westminstar Abbey Church, where he took Sanctuary, was in a
Tumult in the Church, Slain at the High Altar when the Priest was Singing high
Mass, and the offense and breach of Privilege (as it was then pretended to be)
complained of in Parliament by the Arch Bishop of Canterbury and the rest of
the Prelates and Clergy, who prayed that due Satisfaction and amends might be
made of so Horrible a fact, It was opposed by the Lords and Commons who Vouched
records and called to witness the Justices and others* that were Learned in the
Laws of the Land, that in the Church of England* It has not been accustomed
that the offenders flying to a Church ought to have Immunity for Debt or
Trespass or other cause whatsoever, except for crime only, and certain Doctors
of Divinity, Canon and Civil Laws being thereupon examined, and sworn before
the King himself, to speak the plain truth, said upon mature and sound
deliberation, that in case of Debt account or Trespass where a man is not to
loose Life or Member, no man ought to have Immunity in holy Church, and said
further in very high expressions, that, God saving his perfection, and the Pope
saving his holiness, nor any King or Prince can grant such a Priveledge, and
that if the King should grant such a one, the Church which is and ought to be
favored and nourished, ought not to accept of it, whereof offense or occasion
of offense may arise, for it is a Sin and occasion of offense (says the
Record) to delay a man willingly from his Debt or the just recovery of the same.

And so little did that great affray, and complaint of a then Powerful Clergy,
for that breach of Priveledge, and the trouble of the King and Parliament
therein, persuade our forefathers to any dislike of the way of proceedings by
way of arrest, 2R. 2. cap. 3.
by Capias or Utlary thereupon, as at another Parliament holden in the same
year, for the avoiding of debtors, withdrawing themselves and Flying into
Places of Churches Privileged, It was ordained by the King upon the Petition
of the Commons in Parliament, that in such cases after the Creditor had brought
an Action of debt, and procured a Capias to be thereupon awarded, and the
Sheriff returned that he could not take the defendant because of places of
Privilege, another Writ should be made with Proclamation to be made at the
gate of such Privileged place by five Weeks continually every Week once that
such person render himself.

And the Succeeding Kings were so careful not to suffer particular grievances
to disappoint the effects of good Laws, made for the generality of the People.

As by a Statute made in the first year of the Reign of King Henry the fifth,
1. H. 5. ^a. 5.
it was ordained that in every original Writ of Actions personal upon which an
Exigend shall be awarded, the names of the defendants and their additions shall
be mentioned.

And by another made in the 7th year of the said Kings Reign, 7. H. 5. ca. 1.
upon the Petition of the Commons as the Statute witnesses, like process for
the common profit of the Realm, says the preamble of that Statute shall be had
in Writs of forging of Charters or evidences by Capias and Exigend as in
Trespass.

By a Statute made in the 23 year of the Reign of King Henry the sixth, 23. H.
6. ca. 10.
Sheriffs shall take Bonds securities or sureties for the appearance of such as
be Arrested, except upon Writs of Execution Capias utlegatum or excommunicatum,

By a Statute made in the 19th Year of the Reign of King Henry the 7th because
there have been great delays (says the Preamble of that Act) like Process is
given in Actions of the Case as in Actions of Trespass or debt. 19. H. 7. ca. 6.


By an Act of Parliament made in the sixth year of the Reign of King Henry the
eighth, 6. H. 8. cap. 4.
Proclamation shall be awarded to give notice unto him that dwelling in one
County, shall be sued to an Exigend in another.

By a Statute or Act of Parliament made in the three and twentieth year of his
Reign, 23. H. 8. cap. 14.
because there are many delays in Actions of Annuity for that Process of
Utlary, says that Act does not lie like, Process was granted by the King in
Writs of Annuity as was formerly used in account.

Writs of Capias, 34. H. 8. cap. 16.
Exigent and Outlawry were allowed in Wales by a Statute made in the 34th year
of the Reign of the aforesaid King.

And two several Statutes, the one made in the 1. year, 1. E. 6. cap. 10.
and the other in the 5th year of King Edward the 6th, taking notice that for
want of such Proclamations, many of the persons Inhabiting in Wales,
Lancashire, Cheshire, or Chester, were without knowledge or cause of Suit
wrongfully and unjustly Outlawed to their utter undoing, did without abrogating
the Right use of the process of Utlary ordain, that upon every Writ of Exigend
against any Persons Inhabiting in every of the said Counties or Places,
Proclamations shall be made and awarded, 5. E. 6. cap. 26.
directed to the Sheriffs of the several Counties where the defendants inhabit,
do give notice thereof.

By an Act of Parliament made in the fifth year of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, 5. Eliz. cap. 26.
three several Writs of of Capias with Proclamations, with the Penalty of 20l
a time shall be awarded against an Excommunicate person that cannot be taken by
the Sheriff upon the Writ of Capias excommunicatum granted out of the Chancery.

By a Statute made in the eighth year of her Reign, 8. Eliz. cap. 2.
for that many of their malicious minds, and without any just cause did procure
diverse of the Queens Subjects to be Arrested, it was enacted that the
defendants should recover their costs and damages where the Plaintiffs do
delay, discontinue their Suits or be non Suited.

And by an Act of Parliament made in the one and thirtieth year of her Reign,
31. El^z. cap. 3.
it was for the avoiding of secret outlawries in Actions personal, ordained,
that upon every Writ of exigend awarded against any person, three several
Proclamations shall be made by the Sheriff of the County or place where such
defendant inhabiteth, first at the County Court, the second at the Quarter
Sessions, and the third at the Church door of the Parish where such Person
inhabiteth.

And the like to be done in the County Palatine of Durham where as the Statute
says many men have without knowledge been outlawed, Ibidem. cap. 6.
to their utter undoings, if some speedy remedy be the sooner provided but
those misdoings were not not then accounted to be sufficient to bereave a
Multitude or far greater number of the people, of the good which they received
by the process of Utlary.

By an Act of Parliament made in the three and fortieth year of Her Reign, the
procurers or makers of any Warrant to Summon, Arrest, or Attach any Person by
his or their Body or Goods to appear in any of her Majesty's Courts of Justice
not having before an original Writ or Process to warrant the same, 43. Eliz.
cap. 6.
shall be Imprisoned without Bail or mainprise, and not be delivered until he
shall have paid 10l. to the Party grieved, besides his Costs and Damages, and
20l. a piece for their offenses to her Majesty, her Heirs and Successors.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 21th year of the Reign of King James, 21.
Jac. cap. 24.
the Lands of him which Dies in Execution, shall be Chargeable with the Debt.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 13th year of his now Majesty's reign
reciting, 13. Car. 2.
that by the ancient and fundamental Laws of this Realm, where any Person is
Sued, Impleaded, or Arrested by any Writ, Bill, or Process, Issuing out of any
his Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster, at the Suit of any Common
Person, the true cause of Action ought to be set forth, and particularly
expressed: It was ordained, that where the true cause or certainty of Action is
not expressed, in any such Writ, Bill, or Process, the Sheriff shall take no
greater Bond for any Defendants Appearance thereunto, then of the Penalty of
Forty Pounds.

Which in such a length of time and approbation of many Statutes and Acts of
Parliament, and of our Judges in Courts of Justice, in the awarding and
allowance of such kind of Writs and Process, which as the Rolls and Records of
the Court of Common Pleas in the 17th year of the Reign of Edw. the 2, and of
former Kings Reigns do declare, were not granted of Course (as for the ease of
the People they have been in later times, by sworn and experienced officers)
but upon grave and deliberate advice, upon Petitions or motions to the Judges,
and the names sometimes of the Chief Justice, and at other times of the
particular puisne Judge that granted them, Trin. 17. E. 2, in communi Banco and
in aliis antiq. Record and Rotulis ejusdem Cur.
mentioned in the latter ends of the Entries thereof, might if there had been
no Vestigia or track of the necessary Process of Arrest, to compel men to
appear in Courts of Justice to be found, a multis retro seculis ex longissima
experientia observata, in almost all the foregoing ages and wisdom of the
Auntients, abundantly serve to recall that humor or desire of novel
experiments, or imposing or practicing upon our Laws and Liberties and conduct
those Sons of Innovation to a better obedience and veneration of our Laws,
rules of right reason, and necessity of maintaining the indispensable, Ancient,
Legal power and Authority of Justice, in the blessings of that which we have
already received, and may hereafter, receive by its due administration, if we
do not give entertainment unto the wild proposalls, of those who in their
plenty of Ignorance, Obstinacy, and Interest, would have they know not what.

And bring upon the Nation, and themselves, and posterities, the many sad
effects and consequences it will produce, and may give them to understand, that
having such a small assureance of an Infallibility, they may do better to stop
the Carrere of their so causeless prejudice, against the Process of Capias and
Arrest, and observe what their Neighbor and other Nations have adjudged to be
very necessary and unavoidable in their proceedings in Courts of Justice upon
personal Actions.

Who have not so lost or forsaken the Ancient Customs and Paths of their
Forefathers but that the same or very like, what is, and has been so long in
use amongst us, may be seen amongst many of the most civilized of them, and was
so early in the World as it seems, (...). Oldendorpius de definit. actionum
11. 20. 21.
says John Oldendorpius to be deduced from the Laws of God and Nature, Right
reason and necessity.

By an Edict or Law of Theodorico, Goldastus constitutiones Imperial. 18. cap.
8. Spelman Glossar. in verbo Hinfare.
King or Emperor of the Goths, made in the year of our Lord God 497, Arrests
of the Bodies of Defendants, were allowed to be made.

By a Constitution of Charlemaigne, whose dominion extended over the greatest
part of Europe, made about the year of our Lord God 780. the houses of those
that withheld their Tithes were to be seized, and if they opposed and presumed
to enter again of their own authority, the Ministers of the Commonwealth were
to put them in Custody.

In the Empire of Germany, more especially in famous Mart Towns, Jo. Koppen. in
decision questionum in Germania qu. 35.. 1. 2. 4. and qu. 29. 10. and 15.
and Imperial Cities, as Frankford upon the Mayn Lipsich, Norinberg, etc.
(says John Koppen in Rangensdorff, Chief Councellor to the Elector of
Brandenburgh) Arrests for Debt are frequently made, and the Debtors Imprisoned,
and this says he, a vetustissimis Romanorum legibus originem sumpsit, had it is
beginning from the most Ancient Roman Laws, a Clark in holy Orders, and likely
to run away, a Debtor that has no Land, or is likely to remove away his Goods,
is a Prodigal, or contumatious, refuses to appear, and cannot give Sureties,
may by the Laws and practice of those Countries, and Jure Saxonico, be Arrested
and taken.

In Poland, Cromerus lib. 2. de Polonia.
he that will not or cannot give Bayl to answer the Action, is arrested.

In Russia when any of the officers of the Courts of justice, Commentar* de
Russia.
do come to a Defendant, if he give not Bayl, Laws of Geneva Printed at London,
1562.
he is to be detained in Custody.

In Geneva upon a return or Certificate, that the Defendant has nothing, he is
arrested.

The like course of Arrest and compelling of men to appear in Judgment, Molin.
in consuetud. Paris. tit. 2. gl. 1. Number. 3.
is and has been long ago practiced in the Kingdoms of France Spain, Hungary,
Scotland, and in the Dukedom of Savoy, Bibliotheque o^ Thresor. du droit. du
France. tit. Arrests. 326.
and many other Places, who do think that they have a great deal of Liberty, as
the Commonwealths of Venice, Holland, and the united Provinces, the Hanse
Towns, Switzerland and Genoa, etc.

And in New England, Gonzale de Suarez. de pas as part. Tom. 81.
whether the ignorant and mistaken consciences of many, having carried diverse
of our People where they would, make their own Laws, and be independent of the
government of this Kingdom from whence they came they do notwithstanding.

Not want it, decret. Uladis^ai Regis Hungariae Anno. 1492. Art. 91.
where for the better expedition, and execution of Justice (as the words of
their Laws are,) they do ordain that every Court of Justice, shall have
Ministers of Justice to attach and fetch, and set Persons before the
Magistrates. Edicts. and Arrests. de Savoy. An 1574.


And is likewise in practice in some Nations that are more remote, and have
only the light of Nature, Laws of Genoa Printed at Milan. 1576.
and some information of Reason to direct them, as namely in the Region of
Mallabor, where if the Debtor do break his Day with his Creditor, Laws of
New England Printed at London. 1641.
and often disappointed him, he went to the principal of the Bramenes, of whom
receiving a Rod, he goes to the Debtor, and making a Circle about him,
charge him in the name of the King and the Bramene, not to depart from thence
until he has satisfied the Debt, and if he do not, he must Starve in the
place, Purchase Pilgrimage lib. 5.
for if he Depart, the King will cause him to be executed.

And when that which has been here so truly* and Irrefragably asserted, will
never deserve to be thought a Postulatum conclusion or principle begged, but is
de facto apud multos and de Jure apud omnes, so done and practiced, by very
many Nations, and of right ought to be by all.

CHAP. V. The Process of Arrest and Vtlary, are a more gentle way of compelling
Men to pay their Debts, or to appear in Courts of Justice then that which was
formerly used.
EVery man that would entitle himself to any reason, or not wilfully divorce or
separate himself from the company thereof, and shut out that light which the
wisdom and practice of former Ages have tendered unto him, may give way to so
many cogent Arguments and acknowledge, the course and way of our process of
Arrest and Utlaries, to be a more gentle way of proceeding, in the doing and
Execution of Justice, Deuteronomy. 25. v. 1. and 3.
then that of the forty stripes, which in the most righteous Laws of God were
in cases of controversy betwixt men, ordered in none of the greatest sort of
offenses, to be given to him who was condemned by the Judges, 2 Reg. 4. v. 1.
and 2.
then the taking away of the two Sons of the Widow, of one of the Sons of the
Prophets by a Creditor, Matthew. 18. v. 25.
to be Bondmen for their Fathers Debt, the selling of a Debtor and his Wife and
Children, and all that he had by the Creditor in use amongst the Jews; or
taking them by the Throat, saying, Pay me what thou owe, and Haling him to
the Judge, who cast him into Prison, mentioned by our Savior Christ; Gellius
noct. Attic.
the cutting of Insolvent Debtors in pieces, after a Sentence and small
limitation of time; and giving every Creditor a piece learnt by the Romans,
from the Athenian and Grecian Laws, but never put in practice for the cruelty
thereof; the Nexus and taking of Debtors prisoners by the Creditors own
authority (until they had by some good Laws been taught a less fierce, Livy.
and cruel way of recovering their Debts) and keeping them bound in Chains in
their own houses; Plutarch in vita Luculli and Solonis Dionisius Halicar. lib.
6.
the making the Children Slaves for their Fathers Debts, by the People of Asia,
that large Quarter or fourth Part of the World; and the like Customs used by
the Athenians and Romans, or the usage of the Longobards who, LL. Longobard
tit. 21.. 1. 7, 8.
if the Debt were not paid after the third time demanded, did suffer the
Creditor to pawn the Debtors Body, or take by order of the King or Judge, his
Men or Maidservants Prisoners; or that of the Wisigothes, LL. Wisigothorum in
Liudenbrogio l. 2. cap. 88.
the Spaniards Ancestors, whose Laws ordained a penalty of three pounds of Gold
to be paid by the Offender, or such as contemned the Kings Command and
Authority, and if he were not able to pay it, was to endure Quinquaginta Ictus
Flagellorum, Fifty lashes with a whip; or of the Russians beating with Cudgels
their Insolvent Debtors, Fletcher de Republica Moscoviae.
upon the Calves of their legs, and bottoms of their feet; or if the Debtor be
poor, set him under a Crucifix, and cause the Plaintiff to take his Oath over
his head, that his Debt is true, which being done the Duke causes the
Defendant to be brought home to his house, puts him to labor, or lets
him to hire until he be redeemed.

Or of the Egyptians in not permitting the bodies of the Debtors to be buried,
but to be left as a pawn to their Creditors, Quenstadt de Sepultur. veter.
Valor. Maxim. l 5. cap. 4. and Covarruvias de variorum Resolut.
Donec Haeredes Aes alienum integre solverent, Until their Heirs or Executors
paid the Debt, and was so imitated by the Athenians, the wisest Nation of the
learned Greece, as the brave Cimon was constrained to yield himself a Prisoner
in Chains, as the manner then was, to the end that his glorious Father
Miltiades (who had deserved better of them) dying a Prisoner for a Debt owing
to the Publicque, might be buried; And by the Goths, and some other Nations
under their large Dominions, until by a Constitution of Theodorico, Goldastus
Constitut. Imperial.
King of the Goths, and some other Princes, Tanquam inhumanum and erudelitati
proximum; It was prohibited under severe penalties (which in these times used
to be more then threatened) as Inhumane and too near bordering upon cruelty, and
is notwithstanding yet at this day used in some parts of the Lower Germany*
Philip Albert Orthen de Regali Conducendi Jure, cap. 4. 9, 13. Impress.
Norimbergae Anno 1672.
as Holstein, Brunswich, and Holland (that great Monopoly as they think of
Liberty, when they do but dream of it) for Debts or Money owing to private
Persons.

Or not so rigid or uncompassionate, as the way of prosecution for Debts is, in
the vast Empire of the Great Mogul, where if the Debtor do not pay his
Creditor, according to the time limited by the Judge, he is severely whipped,
and his Wife and Children sold for Slaves by the Creditor; or the Merciles
manner of poinding Horning, or Outlary, Skeneus Reg. Majest. and Craig. de
Feudis.
and Caption for Debts, upon short and almost impossible prefixions used in
Scotland.

When our Writs of Pone or Attachment, by the favor and unwillingness of
Sheriffs, to execute the extremities and rigor of Writs, and Process of Law, or
their kindness procured by some other persuasions of rewards or power; were in
the moderation of our Laws, and Courts of Justice; which Canutus by his Laws
desired to be ad Divinam Clementiam temperata, LL. Canuti. 2.
not so exactly executed, or the Defendant enforced to put in real Pledges and
Security, as formerly.

And the Distringasses have only small, or little issues returned upon them,
nothing near amounting to the Rents and Proffits of the Lands, Goods, and
Chattels of the Party prosecuted, betwixt the test and return of the Writ.

And the Writs of Capias, when made out are very often easily satisfied by an
Attorneys undertaking, to appear to the Action, or if Bond be given to the
Sheriffs by two Sureties, for the Defendants appearance, are not one in many
hundreds enforced to give special Bail afterward; and if the demand in the
Writ specified, be under 20. pounds, are by the Rules and Custom of the Court
of Common Pleas not to be insisted upon, or if above, not at all in the Case of
Defendants, being Executors or Administrators; and if the Defendant, for want
of Bail for his appearance, do continue in Prison three terms, and no habeas
Corpus be brought, or declaration given, or further prosecution made, he is to
be delivered by a Writ of Supersedeas, made of course upon the appearance to the
action only, without any special Bail put in before a Judge, or Bond given to
the Sheriff; and where special Bail is very seldom given, it is but that if
Judgment be obtained against the Defendant, he shall render his body to Prison,
or satisfy the condemnation.

Our Writs of Arrest ad respondendum, being ad Cautionem and custodiam non ad
poenam, but to enforce a gage or pledge, or to detain, or put a Debtor or
Defendant into the Custody of the Law, to the end he may give Bail Judicatum
solvere, to abide the Judgment of the Court, or if no Bail be required to
appear to the Action.

And the Process of Utlary, LL. Edgari 11. and 67.
which although they were not ordinarily used in Actions of debt, LL. Canuti 30
and 61.
before the making of the Statute of 25 E. 3. LL. Edwardi Confessor 45.
was notwithstanding in cases of trespass for breach of the Peace, and for
Contumacy, and Contempts in not appearing warranted, Bracton de Corona cap. 11.
by the Laws of King Edgar, Canutus, Edward the Confessor, Stamford lib. 3.
cap. 35. tit. forfeiture.
and the practice of our Saxon Ancestors borrowed, and deduced from the Ancient
Customs of other Nations, is not now so dreadful as it was in former Ages,
when, as Bracton, and Stamford do agree, the Party outlawed did forfeit
Patriam, Amicos, and omnia terras and tenementa bona and Catalla sua, all that
he could entitle himself unto, was out of the protection of the King and his
Laws, and could not bring any action, until he had rendered himself to Prison,
obtained his Charter of Pardon, brought his Writ of Error, and given Bail to
answer the Action; but may now without Bail, unless specially required, be
admitted to reverse the Utlary before Judgment, upon defect of Proclamation
only, or some small Error without a Writ of Error, or the Record certified into
the Court of Kings Bench, or Errors assigned, with other the many troubles and
charges which that way produced.

The Plaintifs for fear of obstructing, or narrowing the ways of Justice, are
not put as they were anciently to find real Sureties, to prosecute and make
good their actions, or to pay a Fine to the King, if they do not as our Laws do
intend they should, or to make Oath of their debts, or de non calumniando, that
the Action is not prosecuted in malice, or upon sinister ends as the Civil Law
enjoined.

And the Statute of Westminster, Westminster 2. c. 18.
the second does in Writs of Execution, against the Goods and Chattels of a
Defendant, except Boves and Affros de Caruca sua, Oxen and Horses of Husbandry,
and the Writ imports as much in the tenor of it, the Judges do without any
Inquisition or proof, that there were not other goods sufficient to satisfy
the Execution, permit for the Creditors more speedy attaining to his
satisfaction, all the goods to be taken in Execution, which in more Ancient
times was so unusual, as a Defendant has brought his Action against the
Sheriff* and the Plaintiff for taking them in Execution, when there was other
personal Estate sufficient: And do also suffer the Plaintiff to prosecute the
Sureties upon a Bond, when the Principal has not been sued, and was sufficient
to pay the Debt or damage, which by the former course, and practice of the Law
was not allowed.

And our Writs of Exigent, and Outlary were truly, and properly only to be made
use of, where the Defendant refuses to appear in contempt of a Court of
Justice, and the Process thereof is fugitive, or uncertain where to be found,
taken, or arrested, has no visible or certain Estate, or lurketh in some
Liberty (of which there are many in England and Wales, where the Kings ordinary
Writs, and Process do not run, or have any power or force) and a Capias
utlegatum carries with it, in the same Writ a Non omittas propter aliquam
libertatem, and impowereth the Sheriff to enter into any Liberty, and arrest
the Defendant, and by a special Capias utlegatum to seize, and take at the same
time all the Defendants Lands, Goods, Chattels, and Estate into the Kings
hands, as forfeited for his Contempt; and that seizure transferred into the
Court of Exchequer, brings the Plaintiff an advantage, to take a Lease of the
King of the Lands so seized, at a very low rent, until the Defendant purge
himself of the Contempt, reverse the Outlary, give Bail, and appear unto the
Action; which being so consonant to the Outlawries Bannes, and proscriptions of
Germany, and other Nations, Kings, and Princes in the like Cases, to preserve
their own Authority in that of their Courts of Justice, and requiring some
severity, and a more then ordinary Process has been all the means, which
without force and violence, and a greater disturbance of the People our Laws,
and a long Custom, and usage of time have hitherto prescribed, can contrive to
bring unwilling Men to Judgment.

CHAP. VI. The delays, and inconveniences of the Process of Summons, Pone, and
Distringas were a great, if not the only cause of the disuse thereof.
FOr the way and Course of Summons, Pone, and Distringas, so much in use before
that Statute of 25 E. 3. was unto Plaintifs as full of delays as they were of
increase of Charges, and trouble which a view of the old Records of the Court
of Common Pleas, before the making of that Statute, by the many Writs of Alias,
and Pluries Distringas with issues, forfeited and returned upon them,
occasioning a great pro^it to the King, and less to the Subjects, and the many
Writs of testatum Distringas made into other Countries, where the Plaintifs
averred that the Defendants had Lands, and Estate suffi^ient, and Writs of
Averment and Enquiry, made out upon too small issues returned, directed unto
the Justices of Assize, to certify if there might not be more issues returned;
and such a Writ of Enquiry to be executed in the Lent, or Summer Vacations,
could not but cause a more long, chargeable, and troublesome delay, to get
better issues to be returned, may help to attest the more necessary, and better
use of the Process of Capias and Arrest and that Writs of Exigent and Outlawry,
will in the Cases aforesaid, propter inevitabilem necessitatem be everlastingly
necessary; especially when in the same Parliament of 25 E, 3. wherein Process of
Outlawry in Actions of Debt were granted, Rot. Parl. and Petitions in Parl. 25
E. 3.
a great complaint was made, that the Steward and Marshal of the Kings House,
or their Deputies did upon Actions attach, and distrain men by ten Marks of
their Goods one day, and by as much the next day, to their utter ruin and
undoing.

And the Goods and Chattels must be such as the Sheriff can be confident, the
Defendant has a property in, for otherwise he will require Bonds, or Sureties
of the Plaintiff, to be saved harmless; and where the Estate does lie only in
Goods and Chattels within an House, the Sheriff may in a Town or City, where
are many Inmates or Lodgers, and three or four sometimes in an House together,
be not a little puzzled, to know into whose Room he shall enter, or upon whose
property he seizes, and his Sergeants or Bailifs may be afraid to enter and
distrain, for fear of Actions to be brought against them: And many of the Goods
and Chattels, may be such as the Law does not allow to be distrained; or if the
Defendant has Lands and a Distringas issues out against him, and has no
Stock or Cattle upon it, or they shall be beforehand eloigned, or driven away
(as it may often happen) there will be little profit made of the Land, betwixt
the Test and return of the Writ, especially if it come to be executed in the
Winter season, or that much of it is in Lease: And then he must do as well as
he may to get Tenants, whereby to raise the profits, or let it lie for Crows
and Trespassers to raise it for him, for Tenants (such as wish well to the
Defendant, or are depending upon him, being not likely to be willing to take or
Rent it at all) will be hardly got; and those that do malice or malign him,
will (if they may not have it at cheap Rates) be unwilling to adventure the
hazard of actions of trespass, or other inconveniences for a small term or time,
which can be no longer then until the Defendant shall appear, or make his peace
with the Plaintiff; or if the Plaintiff should himself take a Lease of it, for
such a short term from the King, if he may not have it at a very easy rate, he
will be as little a gainer as the Defendant by it, and as far from the recovery
of his Debt, as those that had lately Writs of Distringas, against the Company
of the Vintners or Grocers, in Actions of Debt for very great sums of Money,
whose Lands though it was well known they had a great proportion of them,
belonging to their several Companies, were so invisible as the Sheriffs or the
Bailifs of the County where they lay, could not discover, or would not tell
where to find them.

And if they did or could find any Lands, would to avoid the trouble of an
Actual Eecution of the Writs of Distringas, whereupon they were allowed no
pondage Fees, return small or petit Issues, and but such as they could easily
answer, take off, or procure an Indemnity for, to save themselves harmless.

Or if a Tenant be himself in Debt, and be distrained, and his Stock taken
away, he is sure enough to be undone, and his Landlord not a little prejudiced
also by it, when for want of Stock he cannot menage, or hold his Farm any
longer, which the Statute of Westminster the 2. made in the 13th. Year of the
Reign of King Edward the First, did as well believe as foresee, when it
prohibited the taking in Execution the Cattle and Utensils of Husbandry, now
not at all as to that particular obeyed or observed.

And the Writs and Process of Distringas will be much more inconvenient, and
destructive to Trade and Tradesmen, when they become Creditors, or shall be
made Defendants, and be distrained by Process of Distringas for Debt, or in any
other personal Action, for then such a Defendant may suddenly be ruined in his
credit, and not only himself; but ten or 20. of his Creditors suffer not a
little by it: And it may be when all is done, the Action may appear to be but
upon some malicious pretense, or upon Covenant, or Action of the Case battery
or trespass, where in no adjudication of the value of the Action can be, had
before a Trial or Writ to enquire of damages, and one hundred Pounds worth of
Goods may be taken or spoiled, upon an Action of less then so many Shillings,
for the Sheriff to have enough will not fail to seize more if he can come at
it, then the Demand of the Writ or the Plaintifs suggestion amounts unto, and
the Defendants Estate will thereby become ruined and racked, as far as the
greedy, unconscionable, or knavish pretenses of a Plaintiff (for all are not
likely to be conscionable or reasonable) shall carry him unto, and after he
shall be thus pulled in pieces, or condemned and executed before he be heard or
come to his Trial, or can well know what it is for, will be left afterward to
make himself up as well as he can (which to a Tradesman was never easy) and
seek his revenge or remedy, by as many suits in Law or equity, as himself, or
his Friends, or necessities shall put him upon.

And when he has appeared to the Action, after he has been undone a great
deal more then the Action comes to, cannot easily restore, or so make himself
up again, as to be in the same plight, or condition of Credit which he was in
before.

And it is not also unusual to some Tradesmen, when they find themselves
sinking, or to be in any desperate condition, or likelihood of breaking, to
endeavor more then they should, to be most commonly beforehand with their
Creditors, make away their Goods and Wares, lodge them in other Men's hands,
cover them under some secret, and never to be discovered trusts, and putting as
much Money as they can into their Purses, retire themselves into some Place
incognito, shut up their Shops, and leave little or nothing therein, and as soon
as they can make it their business to compound, and give their Creditors for
very great Sums of Money owing to them, no better a satisfaction then three or
four Shillings in the Pound, and keep the overplus for their labors; and a
setting up again, which they could not so unawares or advantageously, to their
evil ends, have done or contrived, if they had been arrested.

All which or many more mischiefs, and inconveniences happening to that kind of
Dilatory Process, may appear to be no over nicely guessed or strained
consequences, if if shall be but considered what an abundance of hideous, and
remediles mischiefs, and inconveniences, would every day, and long ago have
happened to Shopkeepers, and Men of Trade, and Credit in the City of London,
and the Suburbs thereof, if the Process issuing out of the Courts of Common
Pleas, and Kings Bench, and the Courts of the City of London, against them had
been not to Arrest Defendants, but to distrain, and seek after their Goods and
Wares, when the property of the Defendants Wares and Goods may be so concealed,
or disguised by Bills of Sale, fraudulent deeds or contrivances, (the Wares in
a Tradesman Shop being many times other Men's, who upon some allowance of
share, have employed or trusted them to Trade withal) as there would be a
necessity of Suites in Chancery, to discover the right Owners.

Many or some of which inconveniences, being before the making of that Act of
Parliament of 25 of E 3. experimented, or well understood, or foreseen, might
cause our Forefathers to forsake, and disuse the former way of Summons, Pone,
and Distringas, and betake themselves to the more useful, and expedite way of
Process of Arrest or Outlary, which has been since evidenced, to be much more
accommodate to Trade, and the good and benefit in general of the Nation.

And was not denied to be truth, and reason by Mr. Charles George Cock, who
being something of a Common Lawyer, but nothing at all of a Civil, and advanced
in the times of Usurpation, to be one of the Judges, in the then so called
Court, for probate of Wills, and granting Administrations, could in his Book
printed in the year 1651, entitled the Household of God upon Earth, or an Essay
of Christian Government, dedicated to the Family of God over the whole Earth,
but more especially to them of the Household of Faith, in the Commonwealth of
England, after a Rhapsody of Whymsical Propositions for Reformation, and
Invectives with ill will enough, against the proceedings in the Courts of
Justice, Arrests, and Outlaries, delivered his opinion, concerning the Writs of
Capias and Arrest, Charles George Cock Essay of Christian Government in Anno
1651.
in these words: That anciently first Goods, then Lands, then liberty was to be
seized for Debts, etc. Upon a just and proportionate rule, necessity found
ways to evade, Quaere the Goods, and they were others; Quaere the Lands, and
they were aliened; and to run through the difficulties of all those Trials, the
burden was found too great, and therefore the Law of Imprisonment at first by
Arrest was brought in.

CHAP. VII. The Writs, and Process of Arrest, and Outlary have increased,
preserved, and encouraged Trade, better secured the Creditors Debts, and made
the borrowing of Money more easy then it was before.
ANd therefore the Process, and Writs of Capias, Arrest, and Exigent, the latter
not being able to subsist without the former, having been both of them, in
their several kinds, so very beneficial and avantagious to the Lawful increase
of Trade, now almost every man's desire and concernment, and in that and all
other matters, as well concerning Debtors as Creditors, should not be turned
away when they have so long, and faithfully officiated in our Gates of Justice,
and assisted in the Execution thereof; and although they are now Gray, and
hoaryheaded, and full of years, are not grown Impotent or feeble, but having a
perpetual youth, and spring attending upon their endeavors, have made the
borrowing of Money more easy, and the Creditors better secured then they were
before, the making of that Statute of 25 E. 3. and the more general use of
arresting of the Body, or relying upon it, as the better security; and not only
in the reason, but the long experimented good effects and use thereof, made
good, and verified the design, and expectation of the Act of Parliament, for
the increase and continuance of Trade, made by King Edward the 1. at Acton
Burnel, Stat. of Acton Burnel 13 E. 1.
in the 13th. year of his Reign, which to prevent the loss of Foreign
Merchants Debts, which did greatly impoverish them, and caused them to withdraw
themselves, for want of a speedy way of recovering their Debts, did ordain the
taking of Recognizances, before the Major of the Staple, for the security of
their Debts, and that upon failer of payment, if a Writ of Execution had been
sued forth, and the moveab^es, and personal Estate should not be sufficient to
satisfy the Debt, the Debtors body should be taken, put, and kept in Prison
until he had made agreement, or his Friends for him.

And time and experience have in the change, and vicissitude of the Manners,
Customs, and affairs of the Nation, and the inundations of necessities upon the
lower, and poorer ranks of the People, brought them to a very great Assurance.

CHAP. VIII. The pawn, and engagement of the Body, is most commonly a better
security then Lands, or personal Estate, upon which the borrowing of Money was
not only very troublesome, but difficult.
THat the pawn of the Body, and liberty of a Debtor being so dear and precious,
to which the real and personal Estate, if they have any, or shall have any,
being as it were annexed and concomitant, are most commonly the Essentialia
consecutiva, and the Collaterales sequelae and appendices, to the Person of the
Debtor; and as to what is in his immediate possession, or are other ways in
his dispose or power, are as incorporate and consocate with it, as the Contenta
are in, or with the Continens; (the Goods and Chattels being, as it were ipsa
vita hominis and tanquam alter sanguis, as the life and life blood,) Juxta Gl.
in l. 14. and C. de advocat. diverse. Judic.
was the Instar omnium, the most easy, most certain convenient, and obligatory
kind of security.

And must needs be so, when the taking of Pledges or Pawns had such a restraint
laid upon it, by Gods own most righteous Laws, given to his chosen People of
Israel: Exodus 22. v. 26. and 27.
Not to keep the poor man's Raiment or Covering, after the Sun was gone down,
D^ut. 24. v. 10, 11, 12.
for that it was to be his covering. And he that was to take it, was not to go
into his house to fetch it, but stand abroad, and the man was to bring the
pledge unto him.

And by the necessity of the making of several Laws, by diverse Kings and
Princes in other Nations, did appear to have been very troublesome, and
inconvenient both to the Borrowers and Lenders, when Horses, Oxen, Swine,
Sheep, Men Servants, Maid Servants, and Children, were either voluntarily given
as Pledges by the Borrower, or violently taken by the Lender; and were the
causes of making many a Law or Constitution, LL. Alamannorum in Lindenbrogio 86.
for the taking away of grievances, or abuses happening by it.

As when a Man gave an Horse, or a Servant for a pledge, LL. Wisigothorum lib.
5,. 2.
he was to pay any damage which it did in that time; if Gold, Silver, or any
other Ornaments were pledged, and happened to be burnt, LL. Longobard. tit.
21.. 5. and 16.
the Creditor was to purge himself by his Oath, that he was no cause of the
damage; If a Pledge was given, and a Surety with it upon the Debtors Oath, and
the Oaths of the Neighborhood where he was born, the Party pledging desiring
to have it again, was to allow the Creditor the curiosity of his choice; of
one, two, or three Sureties none were to take Pawns or Pledges; Edictum
Theodorici Regis 122, 123, 124.
without license of the Judge; and they which assigned it over unto others,
whereby to exact more then was due, were to loose their Debts; and if the
Creditor did take more then was pledged, he was to pay four times the value, if
he were sued for it within a year; If a Creditor took it against the Law, LL.
Frisonum tit. 9. and in additamen. sapient* Ulmari.
and a Man taken in pledge were killed, or any other damage were done, the
Creditor, and not the Owner of the Pledge, was to pay it: If any Man took a
Freeman as a Pledge by force, and shut him up as a Prisoner, LL. Bajuvariorum.
24
he was to pay forty Shillings penalty; If the time for the Pawn was expired,
and it was not within that time redeemed, he was to bring it before the Judge,
whereupon an Apprisement made by three honest Men, LL. Wisigothorum lib. 5.
tit. 3.
he was to be licensed to sell it, restoring to the Owner the overplus. If Men
or Maids were taken in pledge, and being kept in the Custody of the Creditor,
had stolen any thing, he was to endure the damage. If Oxen, Horses, Minuta
Animalia, or smaller Cattle, Vestments, Jewels, and Vtensils of Husbandry,
remained as pawns with the Creditor, by the space of twelve nights; and they
were not redeemed, he might make use of them as his own: And if he that owed
the Pawn or Pledge; complained that they were misused, he could have nothing
but the Creditors Oath concerning it. If any did pawn a Man or Maidservant, of
another Man's by a mistake, he was to procure them to be released; LL. Longobard
tit. 21.. 3.
And if the Creditor was questioned for it by their Master, he was to take his
Oath that he thought the Debtor had pawned them. If any Debtor did against the
Law, LL* Baivar. ti^. 12.. 1. 3, and 4.
give any Man in pawn or pledge without License, he was to pay forty Shillings
penalty; And if the Creditor took Hogs in pledge without order, both he and the
Driver were to undergo severe penalties.

And the grievances and inconveniences, did by pawning and pledging grow so
high and burdensome, Constitut. Theodoric. in Goldasto. 95.
as by Theodorico, King of the Goths and Italy, the pawning of the Children by
their Parents was forbidden. And Charles the Great, or Charlemaine, added to
his Lombardy Laws concerning pledging, that he Et ille cujus est causa, the
Emperor and the Creditor Would as they please show mercy; and ordained that No
Judge should cause Men to pawn any thing contrary to Law, especially their
Oxen, Quia audivimus mu^^a damna and afflictiones propter hoc Populum nostrum
sustinuisse, LL. Longobardorum tit. 21.. 26.
For that he understood, that his People had lain under many losses and
afflictions by it.

And the borrowing of Money by Pawns, and Pledges, and securing of it, though
with less usury and Brocage then now, was in the former Ages so very difficult,
and upon hard terms, as upon the putting in a Fidejussor or Surety: For a Debt
or Money amongst the Burgundians, LL. Burgundionum. 9. and 19.
he That became the Surety, carried home to his house the Debtor, there to
remain as his pledge for performance; LL. Bajuvariorum tit. 3.. 24.
And where the Surety had not so secured himself, he was Before Witnesses to
have three times more than the Debt secured, or gaged unto him; And if the Debt
were not paid within three Months, was to retain it to his own use. And the
Old Bavarians did use, To take the Bodies of Men for Pledges or Security, and
shut them up as Prisoners in their houses.

Nor was the borrowing of Money in the Kingdom of Pegu or Brama very pleasant,
Purchase Pilgrimage Tom. 1.
where the Wife, Children, and Slaves of the Borrowers are bound to the
Creditors, who may carry them to their Houses, and there shut them up or sell
them.

And was not with us in the times of greater Charity, which was then believed
to be a Scala Caelorum very meritorious, and the most ready way to blessedness,
so easy as it is now? when in the Reign of our King Henry the Second, and long
before, and sometimes after, the Lenders of Money, if they were any thing
suspicious of the return and payment thereof, did not seldom take an Oath of
the Borrower, besides his Bond or Pledges, which gave the Ecclesiastical Courts
an occasion, or pretense of taking cognizance of Debts, and incroaching upon
the Jurisdiction of the Kings Temporal Courts of Justice; as may be seen in
many Plea Rolls, in our Kings Courts of Justice, in the Reigns of King Henry
the 3d. Edward the 1, 2d. and 3d. where Prohibitions were sent into the
Spiritual Courts, by our Kings and their Temporal Courts of Justice, and
Actions were brought upon the disobeying of them by the Parties grieved, as
well against the Ecclesiastical Judges, as the Parties therein prosecuting:
Pryns Historical Collections in the Reigns of King John, H. 3. and E. 1.
Quare traxerunt eos in placitum in Curia Christianitatis, in placito debiti
contra prohibitionem Domini Regis; And then there was no doubt, but that a
Sentence being given for the payment of the Debt, an Excommunication was upon
the non prrformance denounced, and a Writ de Excommunicatum Capiendo often
granted by the Secular Power, to arrest, and take the Body of the Defendant;
which kind of Writ and Process was as early as the Constitutions or Parliament
of Clarendon, in the tenth year of the Reign of King Henry the Second.

Insomuch as King Edward the First, Rot. Pat. 25 E. 1. intus.
to preserve the Privilege of his Menial Household Servants, and prevent their
Arrests, and Imprisonments upon Excommunications, held it necessary to make and
issue out his Writ, De promulgatoribus Sententiam Excommunicationis in
Ministros Regis capiendis and imprisonandis, to take and imprison such as
excommunicated any of them.

CHAP. IX. The difference betwixt borrowing of Money, upon Lands and real
Estate, and the procuring of it upon personal security, and that without trust
and personal security Trade cannot well or at all subsist.
ANd the difference betwixt the borrowing of Money upon Lands and real Estate,
and the procuring of it upon personal security, may by the Borrowers sadly be
evidenced.

When, security by Lands is now most commonly by way of Leaf and Release,
being a dark way of assurance; and within the memory of man, at first only
purposely concontrived by Sergeant Francis Moore, at the Request of the Lord
Norris, to the end that some of his Kindred or near Relations should not take
notice by any search of public Records, what conveyance or setlement he should
make of his Estate; and by the sad experience of sometimes double or treble
Mort-gages, has not appeared to have been so safe as the former, which was
more public and of Record.

And when for a Security of two thousand Pounds, the Borrower must upon strange
scrutinies, and almost a Spanish Inquisition (the torture of the Body only
excepted) have his Estate, Evidences, and Credit put upon the Rack, and be
bound with an abundance of over-jealous, hard-hearted, thorney Covenants, and
unmerciful provisoes, and conditions too near of Kin to the Scottish moveable
Bonds, mort-gage Lands worth four or five thousand Pounds or more, give his
answer upon Oath to a Bill in Chancery, what Judgments, Statutes, or
Encumbrances are upon it, and so embroil that and the residue of his Lands and
Estate, with Statutes, Judgments, and Recognizances of great penalties, for the
performance of those Covenants, as he shall hardly be able to have any more
Credit by it, or Money lent upon it; or if the Creditor, who to be sure to keep
him in the Chains, or thraldom of his power and threatening, will seldom give
him time for above one year or two, for the repayment of the principal money
and Interest, under the severity of a forfeiture, will, if he be a Nabal, more
eagerly then he needs or should, call for his Money; upon a pretense of the
Interest not being duly paid (of which the back wardness and delay of the
Tenants may be many times the only cause) or of his want of the principal
Money, which upon a due Examination may appear to have more of a contrivance,
then truth in it; or if that will not trouble or disturb the Debtor enough,
will do all that he can to affright him, to quit his right in the Land, and
permit him to have a cheap bargain of it, by suggesting some flaw and defect to
be in the Title; and tells him that otherwise he must call in his Money, for he
dares not continue it any longer upon so weak an assurance: And if he thus gets
it at a lamentable cheap rate, can notwithstanding assure himself he has a
very good title, and such as needs no confirmation; but if that will not do his
business, and accomplish his griping design will exhibit his Bill in Chancery
against him, to enforce him to pay the Money, or loose his equity of
Redemption, whereupon a six Months, or some not very long prefixion given unto
him by the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, he must either upon that short
warning sell the Land at low and unreasonable Rates, and great disadvantages
and loss to a Stranger, or take what pittance or little Sum of Money the
Mortgagee will find a conscience to give him, upon a Release of his claim and
interest in the Land, which is twice and many times more worth then the Money
lent, upon some short prefixion or time of Redemption allowed; And that
affording him but some small parcel of relief, and he being not also at that
time able to procure a Redemption, must lie down under his sorrow, and let the
Mortgagee enjoy the Land, for scarce half the value.

A due consideration whereof might either in equity or compassion become a
Court of Equity, in such a case to order the overplus of the just price or
value of the Land, after the principal Money, Interest, and costs of Suite
satisfied, to be paid to the poor Mortgagor, and his Wife, and Children, and be
much more agreeable to Justice and good conscience, then to deliver up the
distressed Mortgageor, to the greedy appetite or gripes of a merciless Creditor
or Usurer bruise the broken Reed, add affliction to affliction, and strengthen
the hands of the Oppressor; which the Prophet Ezechiel says, was one of the
crying sins of Sodom, in a time especially when too many of the loyal Nobility
and Gentry have so abundantly suffered in their endeavors to rescue their
King, Country, Laws, Religion, and Liberties from the pretenses and oppression
of a factious and disloyal part of the Nation, who by plunder and
sequestrations did too well know how to enrich themselves by the ruin of their
betters, and having after all their villainies received his Majesty's mercy, in
being themselves pardonned, cannot tell how to allow a Christian forbearance to
the sick, and languishing Estate of a Mortgageor, who has been so much undone
by them.

And whether he can be able to Mortgage the residue of his Lands, or sell that
which is already mortgaged, must take along with him as new additions to his
heart breaking miseries, the fall or enforced abatement of Rents, as much if
not more then twenty per Cent, and to give the fuller weight or measure to his
troubles, be constrained to sell it after that abated Rate and Rent at sixteen
years purchase, when it would before have yielded eighteen or twenty, and could
neither procure two thousand Pounds upon the former Mortgage, or the latter, if
he could attain unto it without one hundred Pounds, given for the procuring of
each two thousand Pounds, and walk a great way, besides toward forty or fifty
Pounds Charges more, in the contriving and preparing the assurances; and after
many a scruple and Rock of the Lenders, never to be satisfied fullness of
security, passed over many a weeks attendance and charge, in the humoring of
his many times purposed procrastinations, to drive him into greater
necessities, whereby the easier to procure his unjust advantages, and render
him the more patient to endure that Strappado, may, being bound hands and feet,
and abundantly wrapped in Sheep-skin, engagements, and encumbrances, sit down at
Weeping Cross; and wonder there was no express Prayer in our Litany, against
unmerciful Creditors, and such as make more necessities then they find, with a
good Lord deliver us.

And if that now over trodden way be not taken, to dig down and demolish the
Borrowers Estate, and foundations of livelihood, will apply himself to as
destroying a course, by extending the mortgaged, and all other Lands which the
Debtor has at a low rent; and keep it so in his possession, and a careless
management, and with so great a loss to the Debtor, as the fiftieth year of
Jubilee may come, before the Lands by the unjust account of the mean profits, be
able to shake of that burden, and bring an Action also against him, and
imprison him for the not performance of his Covenant, to pay the mortgage
Money, or for breach of some other Covenants in the deed of mortgage; and if he
has any other Lands of his own, or his Wives, that can escape the fury of such
a Creditor, shall not by reason of the former encumbrance, be able, without
great difficulties and cost, to borrow any more Money upon what remains
unmortgaged. And if the Money could be borrowed of a Citizen of London upon a
mortgage, it must be of Lands near London, or in some adjacent County,
otherwise his Nicetyship will by no means be entreated to lend any Money upon
it; but he must be as unlikely as a poor Scholar or Poet, or borrow any more
Money, and may dream of a Credit, and believe he has a right unto it, when he
is never more like to come in sight of it.

When a Country Gentleman, whose Credit has not been tainted, could heretofore
with ease enough sometimes upon his own single Bond, or at the worst with a
Friend or two, and one of them but his Tailor joined in the Bond with him,
borrow fifty or one hundred, or two hundred Pounds; and the Farmer or
Countryman wanting Money to pay his Rent, could upon a short warning procure
forty or fifty Pounds, upon his own Bond or Bill; and a Citizen of London, or
some other trading Town, can with a small Estate in Money and no Land, but a
great care of his Credit and performances, be trusted upon his Word, Bond,
Bill, or personal Security, with ten or twenty times more then he is ever
likely to be worth.

And it is very well known, that a multitude of London Merchants, Retaylers,
Tradesmen, and Artificers, in or about that vast City, and the overgrown
Suburbs thereof, being in their number about six hundred thousand Men, Women,
Children, and Servants could not maintain or uphold themselves, in their
several orbs and stations, without a trusting of their Customers; and being
trusted themselves, or a confidence on both sides in personal Securities,
Bargains, Contracts, and Promises; which is very often done, and necessitated
to be done without Pawns or mortgage, security in the course of Commerce and
interchange of affairs one with another, by all Merchants, Seamen, Retaylers,
Farmers, Tailors, Laborers, Husbandmen, and all sorts and degrees of People in
the Kingdom, and other Parts of the World; and even the landed men and
Freeholders, who are not the fortieth part of the Nation; and the
Copyholders, when they do not deal for so great Sums of money, as to surrender
and engage their Copyhold Estates, cannot in the multitude, diversity, speed,
and management of their almost daily and hourly business one with another; and
at Markets and Faires, and elsewhere, avoid the taking or giving of personal
Securities or Contracts, which cannot primarily affect those that have Lands,
or concern their real Estates, but are to follow the Persons of those that are
Debtors, for the performance thereof.

So as it would be no Problem, or Criple assertion, to aver that the
forbidding of trust or giving days of payment, by which the Citizens and
Tradesmen of London, do gain more then they should do by enlarging their
price, and Items to a very great excess, and in some, as it may be feared, to
more then a double or larger Interest, and the taking of huge Sums of money
with Apprentices, now more then formerly, become a part of their Trade; and a
public Registring enjoined of all money and debts, which they do owe and are
engaged for, by Credit or otherwise.

Would quickly manifest how Trade would be undone, if it were not for trust
upon personal securities, and performance, and the benefit, and necessity of
Writs of Arrest, enforcing their Debtors to make payment, or to be the more
careful of it.

And by so speedy a way of enforcing a Defendant to appear to the Action, make
the Merchants and Tradesmen so punctual in their payments, whereby they do get
great Credit and Riches, and have given a confidence to all Trade and Commerce,
which since the Reign of King Edward the 3. has been hugely increased, makes
the poor man, which has no great Stock or Estate, to be as good security for
what he undertakes, as those who have greater; and gives us the reason, why
those that do lend Money unto Country Gentlemen, or Men of great Estates do
usually require a Citizen, though he have but a very weak and small Estate, and
is more in danger of breaking then the Gentleman, to be bound with him, and do
think their money not to be very safely lent without such a security. And that
great City and Emporium, which sits upon many waters, and stretches out her
lines to the utmost ends of the Earth, would certainly languish and decay, if
she should be deterred, or bound up from trusting, or being trusted; and there
would be none, or a very little Trade and Commerce in the Nation, if it should
not be driven by personal securities, when our Merchants that do Trade into
Persia, the East Indies, Turkey, the Levant, and Norway, with as much Money as
Commodities, having neither Pawns nor Lands to morgage, do not seldom deal upon
personal security; Foreign Merchants being in that manner contented, to do as
they would have done unto them, and do many times borrow money in their own
Countries, to give day and time of payment unto Merchants, and their
Correspondents in other Countries.

And there would not be wanting, very great and many mischiefs, inconveniences,
delays, disturbances, and obstructions in the universal Trade, and affairs of
our Nation, both at home and abroad, if that great and daily manage of our
Commerce at the Royal Exchange of London, for vast sums of Money or the value
thereof, twice every day, in every week, of every year, Sundays, great
Festivals, and public and extraordinary days of Fast, or Thanksgiving only
excepted, should by a jealousy and distrust, in all Merchants and Men of Trade
therein every day concerned, and the Actions and Estates of one another,
forsake their accustomed, and very laudable ways of trust, and confidence in
the credit, and punctuality of performance of one another, and not believe a
Bargain or Contract to be well and securely made, or Bills of Exchange safely
answered, without an almost infallible certainty, of the Estates of those with
whom they deal or correspond, and in their diffidence thereof (when as to the
Sea and Foreign Trade, the Winds and Tides will not be entreated to tarry, and
opportunities of vent and benefits, if not suddenly laid hold on, cannot be
easily or at all times met withal, or gained) adjourn the conclusions, or
certain engagements of their Bargains, Contracts, Undertakings, or Promises,
until they could consult with their Lawyers of some of the Inns of Court, some
not easily to be satisfied, Conveyancers, Scriveners, or Men of scruple, how to
make their Contracts, Charte^, Parties, Agreements, Partnerships, or Insurances
to be without any, or very little, or seldom hazard or danger, or procure some
Perspective glasses to afford them a clear intimacy, or visibility into the
Estates of Men, or a possibility of Accidents, Shipwracks, Piracies, or Sea
misfortunes, or the breaking or knavery of Retaylers, and render them as safe
in their Trade, and adventures against all contingencies, as any moral or
worldly probability, or security can make them.

And that their great concernment, and height of reputation, guarded by the
wakeful Eyes of public Notarial Protests (which is sometimes tromped upon
them, by some of their Forre^gn Factors or Correspondents, inadvertencies or
over charging them, is of so britle and tender a nature, as a small gust of
misfortunes, or adversities, overturns, and sinks it; or a malicious or foolish
report of being broke, or likely to break, shatters it all in pieces, and puts
the not long before prosperous Owner of it, to recover as well as he can the
damage sustained by it, and the Shipwreck of Credit can be no otherwise then
exceedingly ominous, and dreadful to men that are to make much of their
livelyhoods, and hopes to raise their fortunes by it; when besides the many
other disasters attending and lying in Ambuscado, the Statute of Bankrupt made
in the Reign of King James, does in the Character of a Bankrupt 21 Jas. ca. 19.
(amongst other things declare, any Merchant, Retayler, or any other seeking to
get their living by buying or selling, to be a Bankrupt, who being indebted to
any Person, in the Sum of one hundred Pounds or more, shall be arrested for the
same, or lie in Prison two Months or more, for that or any other Debt, or
afterward escape out of Prison, or gets forth by common or hired Bail, shall
be accounted and adjudged a Bankrupt to all purposes and intents: And provide
that such a one should have his Goods and Estate seized, and divid^d amongst
his Creditors proportionably to their debts, and be liable to the penalties of
the said Act, and the orders and provisions therein contained.

For certainly without competency of trust and confidence in Trade, and
dealings one man with another, and a pawn or security of their Bodies, subject
to Arrests, compulsion or disgrace, all Commerce and Traffic would be
destroyed; no Merchant or Chapmen will, or can give day for his Wares, when he
neither knows, whether his Customers have Goods sufficient to pay for what they
buy, or where to find them, when the Wares that he sells may either be used, or
sold away again to another; or if they could be met with again, will not be of
half the value they were sold for.

No man without personal Security, Contract, or Promise will lend any money to
Merchants, because their Goods are either at Sea, or in Foreign Countries, and
sent out so often, and upon so many adventures and hazards, as if they do, they
will not know how to get it again.

Young Tradesmen, and Men of hope and industry, that have none or very little
Stocks of their own, will have no Money lent them; or if they have, it must be
upon such other Cautions or Security, as may starve, and take away the hopes of
their preferment.

Moneys given to Charitable uses (as they are many times) to be lent upon
security to poor Tradesmen, or young Beginners, that have little or nothing in
Estate or their Shops, cannot without Bonds or personal Security be lent or
distributed, according to the mind and intention of the Donors (mortgage of
Lands not being likely to be had) for otherwise it cannot be done, but to such
as are rich already.

No Merchant, or whole Sale-men, will adventure to trust or sell to Retaylors,
upon one, two three, or ^ix Months, as they shall be able to make or return
it; nor Retaylers to Retaylers, as they do often use to do, if they do not give
personal Security, whereby to be arrested, if they do not pay the Money
contracted for.

No Country Vintner will without it be furnished by the London Vintners or
Merchants; no man shall know how to do good to a Friend or Servant, or set up a
young man, if personal Securities shall not oblige their Process of Arrest.

No Tradesman shall be able to Trade as they do now, and get his living and a
comfortable subsistence, by retailing under other Tradesmen; nor any Mariner,
Soldier, or Servant be trusted, because they have nothing but their Bodies to
be answerable for it.

Many Lawyers and Ministers, who do carry much of their Estates in their
brains; the Arti^an in his hands, and a few Tools; the Soldier the most that
he has by his side; Unlanded men or untrading Batchelors or single Men, all or
the most part upon their backs; and the smaller sort of Farmers and Country
Cottagers, having very little Goods or Household Stuff, may bewail their want of
Credit, when personal Security cannot help them; and all the Trade and
Commerce, good will and charity of the Nation, that was wont to flourish more
by the Care and Credit, and honesty of Men, then any certainty or visibility of
Estate, must, if necessities and occasions cannot be supplied as they were wont
to be by Bonds, Bills, or personal Security, now be turned into a way of Pawns
and Bro^age, and three times more given then the value of that which is bought
or borrowed, where ready money is wanting.

And all Credit and Industry fall to the ground, especially if it shall be
considered that not long before our late times of Troubles and Confusion, the
money of some Dutch and Foreign Merchants lodged here, being estimated to have
been as much as five Millions Sterling, have been much of it by reason of our
bringing down of Interest to six per Cent, and other disturbances called home;
and that the money Current in the Kingdom, is by no very random computation
verily believed to be scarce enough to pay the Interest of the Capital, of what
is owing by the People one unto another; and if the course and way of Credit
should be now stopped, and turned out of his Chanel, we may not expect to see
any more happy effects of trusts and Credit, as in this Age of ours we have
done in a rich Sir John Spencer, Sir William Craven, Sir William Cockain, and
Sir Paul Bayning, who beginning their World with no Original Riches, have gone
out of it with the comfort and honor, of laying the foundations of several
noble Families, and every day in the hopes and flourishing of many young
Merchants, is ready to proclaim the great benefits of trust and Credit, and
that, which not seldom happens, by the only employ and advantage of another
man's money: And the sad and ineluctabile fatum dismal, and not to be overcome
disasters, which do fall upon those whose former props of trust and Credit have
failed them, when their Friends stand afar off, and look upon them as Lepers
and Persons infected, do by the ill government of their tongues and censures,
debar them more then they should, of all the opportunities of fortune, or means
to a more happy condition.

It was Credit and the care of it, not Lands or a visible Personal Estate,
which made our Prince of Merchants Sir Thomas Gresham; in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, to be able to lame the King of Spain and his Indies, in his design
of subduing England, by draining of his Banks beyond the Seas with his personal
security.

It was personal Security, Credit, and the care of not having any man come
twice to his house for money, which made Sir Abraham Dawes, one of the Farmers
of the Customs, in the Reign of King Charles the Martyr, able to take of those
who voluntarily offered it, one thousand Pounds at a time upon his single Bond
or Bill, which to support he did always (as he himself acknowledged) keep five
thousand Pounds at a time in a Chest in his house at Interest, and when he had
paid out any considerable part of it borrowed, and took in as much to replenish
it.

It was an imaginary Credit, and an heretofore punctual performance of our late
handy dandy men the Bankers of London, paying one man's money with another that
decoyed, and enticed almost all the money of England, into their running,
ebbing, and flowing Cash, upon their or their Servants single notes, for some
years and under their only hands, for five hundred or a thousand Pounds at a
time, for some years, after upon the Masters single Bonds.

And it was Credit and personal Security, not so much any real Estate in Lands
or Houses, that have made the Banks of Lions and Amsterdam so to flourish, in
the midst of Wars, and abundance of Taxes, and enabled the Dutch, those mighty
men of Trade and money; whose Lands and Territories, in all their Seven United
Provinces, do in quantity scarce equal our Yorkshire and Lincolnshire, to
ingross almost all the Trade of the Heathen and Christian World, to raise five
Millions Sterling at home, upon no more then as many Weeks short warning, and
to manage at a vast expense, a long and lasting War with the greatest Kings and
Princes of Christendom.

It being certain that Securities, or Cautions for money or Credit, cannot in
the general be so safe possible, or ready at hand to be had, as personal
Security; which as our Bracton and Fleta, Bracton lib. 3. de actionibus ca. 3.
Fleta lib. 2. ca. 6.. 22, 23.
in their Divisions of Actions into real, personal, and mixed* have informed us,
do inducere Actionem in personam, make an Action to be personal, for that the
individual and very same money is not, nor can by the Plaintiff be expected to
be restored, but the value of it or damages; and it does oblige the Person,
but not at the first the Lands, Goods, or Chattels, as our Statutes Merchant,
or of the Staple, or Recognizances in Chancery, or elsewhere taken, do when
they do carry in them a condition upon default of payment, to leavy the money
upon Lands, Goods, and Chattels, and upon the Body, if the Lands, Goods, and
Chattels be not sufficient to satisfy; and in a Bond the words obliging are,
Obligo me Haeredes, Executores, and Administratores meos, the Land being
chargeable in respect of the Person, but not the Person in respect of the Land;
and the Goods and Lands, if any or the properties thereof are many times more
invisible, then the Persons of men; for Bonds or Contracts do bind, and engage
the Person as much, as if he did thereby undertake to pawn his Body, and
subject it to an Arrest or Compulsion, to appear in Judgment, if he should fail
in the performance; for all Contracts and Promises, Fleta.
says Fleta, have in them Vinculum Juris such a Bond or Obligation, as ties us
to the performance of them, Bronkhorst tit. Reg. Juris, and Commentar. ad loc.
Bracton lib. 1. ca. 5.
and is so personal and inseparable; as it does sequi personam obligati, go
along, says Bronkhorst, with him that made it like the shadow with the Body:
And generaliter, says Bracton, Jus gentium se habet ad omnes Contractus, The
Law of Nations binds us to the performance of them: Grotius de Jure Belli lib.
2. ca. 6.
For, says Grotius, he to whom the promise is made, has by the dictates of
natural reason a right to compel it by lawful means.

For a man may be known where to be found, when his Money, Goods, or Estate
cannot, or what Estate he has at home, or abroad in his own or other men's
hands in trust for him, or otherwise: And the Pawn or Pledge of the Body must
needs be the greatest tie upon a Debtor; for if a Peddler traveling with a pack
of Pedlery upon his Horse, has his Horse distrained and taken away, and he be
put to carry his pack upon his back, or if the Debt be so much as to lay hold
on both, that cannot so disturb or trouble him, as an Arrest will do of his
Person: Or if a poor man shall have his only Cow, and the Instruments and tools
of his daily labor taken from him, that will not so much affright or beggar
him, and his Wife and Children, if he do not take care to prevent it, as an
imprisonment of his Body will do.

And our Bonds, are not so rigourous, severe, or jealous, as the moveable Bonds
in Scotland, as they there term them are, which even for small Sums of money
with us (but great with them) can be so distrustful as to enforce the obligor
to renounce beforehand, All manner of exceptions to the Law, Scottish Records
in the Tower of London, whilst they were there imprisoned by Oliver Cromwell,
and Parl. James the Sixth in Anno 1600.
which may be proponed to the contrary, and all Privileges and Jurisdictions,
with a clause and consent inserted of Registration, Horning, and Outlary, and
to have the strength of a decreit to pay principal Interest and Charges,
according to the Obligees own modification, declaration of conscience or
discretion; and ten Pound Scotch money for Ilke shilling Scottish Money, which
shall be unpaid of the Principal; nor so fierce as in some Parts of Germany,
John Coppen in Rangensdorf in Decis. quaestion. 33.
where the Creditor, if he suspected the Debtor to be poor, will take
Juratoriam Cautionem, make him swear that he would pay the money again; amongst
whom and the Italians there were Ostagia or Undertakings, to give
entertainments to the Creditors with Men and Horses, at the Sureties or Debtors
charges, till the Debt were satisfied.

And the Civil Law was upon Contracts and Bonds, for money lent or trusted, so
well furnished with renunciations beforehand, of the benefits of Law in general
and particular; Butrigarius in Tract. de Renunciation.
as there is by Butrigarius reckoned up no less then fifty three several sorts
of Renunciations, which the cruelty or diffidence of Creditors did in their
Contracts and Bargains usually, and as they pleased put upon those that had
occasion to borrow or deal with them.

But our Nation keeping it self constantly to its own more gentle, and yet
binding enough constant form of Bonds and Obligations for money, used here in
England for some Centuries of years last past, has with its Process of Arrest
attending and guarding it, persuaded the People thereof justly to believe that
that kind of Process has produced such a better, more sure, and easy Credit in
the Nation then was formerly, as it has not only greatly increased,
encouraged, and facilitated the Trade and reputation thereof, but it has been
its greatest prop, and support in the for many years long and bloody Wars,
betwixt the two great contending Houses of York and Lancaster, when Estates in
Land were little worth, and where they were of any value, or enjoyed any quiet
from the furies of War, or disturbance of Seisures, Attainders, or
Confiscations were until the 27th. year of the Reign of King Henry the 8th. and
the 27th. year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth covered, and protected with
secret and undiscernable uses, many of which were fraudulent, and in the many
other also tosses, and troubles of our present and former Ages, which may
appear to be more then a conjecture to any, who shall but consult their own
reason, and observations of the difficulties and inconveniences which would
daily and hourly happen, in the borrowing, procuring, or securing of money, if
nothing but Pawns or Pledges, at as hard a rate to private Brokers many times
as twenty per Cent, or mortgages of Land would be taken for security for money,
or moneys worth, or the value of it, which in matters of Trade would so quickly
turn all into Exchange and Barter; as a Tradesman could not be able to furnish,
or stock himself, or his Shop, without either ready money, which many
Tradesmen, and not one in every twenty, are always or often able to do, or
disfurnish, or unstock themselves, and carry as much out as they endeavor to
take in; and how quickly and easy, upon the stock of Credit, Reputation, and
Opinion, one or more hundred Pounds may be borrowed upon a Bond with one or two
Sureties? and how readily, and without any more ado one or more Counter-bonds
of the Principal does serve to counter-secure them.

And where Citizens do take Apprentices, without whom they cannot manage their
Trade, and by taking too great, and in former Ages unheard of Sums of money, to
teach them their Mystery of gain, will find it to be as inconvenient to
themselves, in that their new way of Prentice Trade, as troublesome to the
Parents of the Apprentices, if they were to be satisfied with nothing but a
mortgage, by Security of Lands, or Pawns, or Pledges to be given by them for
their Childrens honesty, many times dearly discharged, when as now their single
Bonds or Covenants will suffice.

And they ought not surely to be accounted too Sanguine or over credulous, who
shall give entertainment to an opinion, that if all the money which has been
borrowed in the times of our English Troubles, lately past or long ago, or in
the now times of our unparrelled pride, prodigality, and luxury, had been to
have been borrowed only upon Mortgages, Pawns, and Gages, the vicious and
foolish part of the People of this Kingdom, which are the far greater number,
would have long ago suffered their follies, to have brought them into the sad
condition of the Egyptians, in the time of the more thrifty and forecasting
Joseph, Genesis 47.
when in a famine only of Bread, prognosticated to continue for seven years,
they were in the first year of it constrained, when money failed them, to take
bread in Exchange for their Cattle, Horses, Asses, and Flocks, and after their
Bodies offered as pledges upon the like occasion, and necessity to give up
their Lands for necessary (but no wanton) supplies.

And although the first pawn or pledge, that is mentioned in the Book of God,
the most Ancient and best of Records, to have been given in the Fore-noon of
the World, was that of Judah's Signet, Genesis ca. 38.
Bracelets, and Staff to his disguised Daughter Tamar, for a security of what
his Amors, and unlawful Contract had promised; yet shortly after his Brother
Simeon became a personal security to his Brother Joseph, for the bringing unto
him his youngest Brother Benjamin, and was in the mean time bound and kept in
Prison; and Reuben upon his return to his Father Jacob, to remove him from his
unwillingness to send his beloved Benjamin into Egypt, Genesis ca. 42.
offered his own two Sons in pledge, that he would safely return him unto him
again: And when that could not prevail, Judah, without being bound or kept in
Prison the while by his Father, became a Surety for him as it were body for
body, and that of his own hand he should require him. And the after Ages have
found so great a benefit, as well as a necessity of personal security, as here
in England long before the Statute of 25 E. 3. the Bodies of men, as well
Nobility as others, have to the great advantages of the Kingdom, and upon great
and weighty reasons and occasions of State, been given and taken as Sureties
and Hostages, for and to diverse of our Kings and Princes.

And by our Laws agreeable in that and many other particulars, not only to the
Civil and Caesarean Laws, but of the Law of Nations the Plaintiffs, when by our
Original Writs, made out of the Chancery in Actions of Debt, impowring the
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, to make process and hold plea thereupon,
Sigonius de Judiciis lib. 1. cap. 21.
the Sheriff to whom the Writ is directed, when he does summon the Defendant to
appear before the said Justices, being commanded to take Sureties of the
Plaintiff, that he will prosecute and justify the Action, was to take it by
personal security, and not by any pawn or pledge.

So as if there were not so many irresistible Arguments, Reasons, Examples,
proofs, and necessities for the ancient, long continued use of the Writs of
Capias and Outlary, beyond a prescription and memory of man, and many ages.

That which has in all Ages been allowed, as the best expedient to secure from
doing or suffering wrong, in case of lesser or greater Crimes, as Trespass,
Felony, Manslaughter, Murder, Treason, or suspicion of either, where the less
favors are to be showed, propter atrocitatem criminis, for the horridues of
the Fact, until Offenders can be brought to Judgment: For whom Plegii sint
donec se defenderunt Carcer and Gaola, Bracton lib. 5. de exceptionibus ca. 8.
31.
The Goal and the Prison were to be Securities, says our old and learned
Bracton.

And that old rule of Law not used, to be denied, kicked, or spurned at eadem
ratio eadem lex, that a parity of reason in one Law or Case, may be the
foundation of a like Law in another; and that other maxim of Law, Qui non
habet in Aere ^uat in corpore, Where a man has nothing in his purse to answer
the Law, he ought to suffer for it in his Body, the punishment of Contempts of
the authority of Courts of Justice; and the securing of men's Debts, where there
is A suspitio fugae, Any suspicion, likelihood, or signs of the Debtors running
away (which the old Almans were so careful to prevent, as that rather then fail
they suffered the Plaintiffs themselves to take and imprison them) may be
called in as Assistants, to maintain the right reason and necessity of Writs of
Capias, and Outlary in matters of Debt, and other the like personal Actions.

And those very good effects of our said English Law proceedings, and the
consequences thereof, and benefits ad^rewed thereby, are and may be
demonstrable by the less difficult way of borrowing money, more safe lending of
it, and more speedy way of recovering, and getting it in with little damage
and loss, when in this last Century, and present Age of about one hundred and
fifty thousand Capias, or Process of Arrest and Outlary, sued out or prosecuted
in a year, there are little more then one housand of them if so many so
arrested or unbailable, as to be carried to Prison, or being destitute of
Friends or Money, do remain in Prison a quarter or half a year at the most; or
if any do continue any longer, they are so very few in respect of the far
greater number, which were threatened or might have been there; as if the
Prisons of the Fleet, Kings Bench, Marchalsea, Ludgate, the Compters in London,
Newgate, the Gatehouse at Westminster, and the Counties, and every other City
Goals, or Prisons belonging to Liberties in England and Wales, shall be truly
searched and examined, either as to those who are actually in every of those
Prisons, or are out upon Writs of Habeas Corpus; or how many new Prisoners are
every year, half year, or quarter of a year brought in upon Actions of Debt,
Trespass, or other Civil Actions? And how long or little while they did or do
there tarry the product of that account, may truly testify that the terrors,
and continual affrights, and trouble of Arrests, with the Tristis poenae
expectatio paena molestior, often sad apprehensions of the many inconveniences
of imprisonment, which do inevitably follow as to the Charges, loss of Estate
and Credit, do so summon and call together all their cares, and so gently and
best of all conduce to the ends of Justice; and those that seek it, as it
verifies and gives us the benefit and right use of that moderation, and care of
our Laws in that rule and maxim of it, to threaten more then execute ut metus
ad omnes poena ad pauco^, that the punishment of a few may operate as much as
if all did partake thereof; the affright being most commonly that which makes
the suffering to be so disproportionate, and less then what was necessarily or
otherwise threatened.

For if four thousand Writs of Exigent be awarded, and issued out of the Court
of Common Pleas in the year 1674. which is very near an exact account taken
thereof, not much above one thousand of them do come to be returned, filed, or
outlawed: But the residue, and those very many which are not, are either stayed
by Agreements, or Retraxits, and Compliance betwixt the Attorneys, or in order
to appearances upon new Originals, without returning and filing the Writs of
Exigent: And may be taken to be no fancied Calculation, when the number of all
the Capias utlegatums, special or general, made by the Clark of the Outlaries
in the year 1674. were no more then 1034. the Outlaries reversed no more then
27. And the Outlaries certified into the Exchequer no more then sixteen. And
all the Prisoners that were for Debt, and other actions not Criminal, in the
Prison of the Kings Bench (being the greatest in England and Wales) either in
the Prison or the Rules, or abroad by Writs of Habeas Corpus, the third day of
May 1653. were under the hand of Sir John Lenthal Knight, Marshal of the Court
of Kings Bench, with the several times of their Commitments, certified upon the
special order and command of the then miscalled Parliament, to be no more then
three hundred ninety one; of which there appears to have been committed in the
year 1616, -- but -- one. In the year 1631-one. In the year 1633 -- one. In the
year 1636 -- one. In the year 1637-one. In the year 1638-one. In the year
1639-one. In the year 1640 -- nine. In the year 1641 -- five. In the year 1642
-- two. In the year 1643 -- three. In the year 1644 -- four. In the year 1645
-- seven. In the year 1646 -- fourteen. In the year 1647 -- fiveteen. In the
year 1648 -- twelve. In the year 1649 -- fourty-six. In the year 1650 --
thirty-two. In the year 1651-fourty-one. In the year 1652 -- one hundred
thirty. And in the year 1653 -- fourteen.

And it must needs then be a wonder, and none of the smaller sort or size of
wonders, how or upon what ground, cause, or reason, that so very ancient,
rational, legal, necessary and useful way of Capias, Process and Outlary,
derived and deduced from the Laws of God, Nature, and Nations, should either
deserve or come into so ill an opinion with some of the People, or that it
should be called or understood to be an Illegal, Iron sharp and cruel, Law, a
Tyranny, thraldom, mischief, slavery, lamentable bondage, terror, and sorrow of
heart, and utter ruin^ of the free born People of this Nation, founded upon a
misconstruction, and inadvertency of the genuine sense of the Common Law it
self, and contrary to thirty Acts of Parliament, made in Confirmation of Magna
Charta; or should be repealed by the Act of Parliament, made in the 28th. year
of the Reign of King E. 3. ca. 3. and by the Statute of 42. E. 3. (...) 3. Or
should now in its old age have no better a title then a grievance; and those
unjust Rabsheka railing reproaches, (when it has been helpful to multitudes of
men in several Ages) cast upon it.

CHAP. X. The way of Capias and Arrest is no oppression or Tyranny exercised
upon the People, since the making of the Statute of 25 E. 3. ca. 17. or has
been hitherto, or may be destructive to their liberties.
WHen as Tyranny in the known and general definition and understanding of it,
is a cruelty or power executed by one or more at pleasure, contrary to Laws
Divine and Humane, and inconsistent with the Laws of that Place or Country
wherein it is exercised: For Laws do or at the least should intend to prohibit
things unjust, and to order things good and useful, for that People and Nation
unto which they are applied: The intent of a virtuous and good Lawmaker being
as Aristotle says, To make the People good, and conduct them to virtue.

Or how it can be called Tyranny, when it is no less then right reason, which
should be the Parent and Director of all Justice, when as God himself the most
just and rational Lawgiver, the Watchman of Israel, and the Keeper of the
liberties thereof, Exodus 22. 7, 8.
that gave unto Mankind a reasonable Soul, and that great blessing of reason,
which is the Divini luminis radius, A beam or ray of his own Excellency, did in
the Laws, which he gave to Moses when he talked with him, enact and ordain,
That if a man shall deliver unto his Neighbor money or stuff to keep, and it
be stolen, and the Thief be not found, the Master of the house shall be brought
unto the Judges to see whether he has put his hands upon his Neighbors Goods
(which was nothing less then an Arrest.)

The Law of Nature that gives every man leave, and enjoyneth them to work
rather then to be idle and want, allows them not to hinder public good, or
disturb the Rules of Civil Society, and work within the City of London or the
Liberties thereof, if they be not thereunto authorized as Freemen of the said
City; or was it an oppression by an Act of Parliament, as King Edward the 3.
did in the 25th. year of his Reign? to limit Artificers, Laborers and Servants
wages; or as Queen Elizabeth did by an Act of Parliament, yet in force and
unrepealed, made in the 5th. year of her Reign; or when King Henry the 8th. did
limit the price of Victuals and Household Provisions by an Act of Parliament,
made in the 25th. year of his Reign; or an oppression of the People by
Sumptuary Laws for Apparel, made in his Reign, and of his Daughter Queen
Mary's, which otherwise in a private man according to the bent and rules of
Nature, giving every one a liberty In rebus licitis and non prohibitis, in
thing lawful, not sinful and consistent with the Laws of public good and Civil
Society, would have been within the freedom and dispose of his own will.

Neither do the People of Spain and Italy, in their submission to a Banda or
Rate, imposed upon the Sellers of Victuals and Household Provisions; or the
Natives of France, Spain, and the elective Kingdom of Sweden think themselves
to be too much, or any thing at all abridged of their natural liberty, by
yielding for public good a just obedience to their Sumptuary Laws, lately made
and ordained.

For there is no Law extant of this Nation so made, but the Subjects might
choose to incur the penalty or hardship of it, or if they should happen to be
too severe or unfit, or not so necessary, convenient, or useful, as was
intended or expected; or like unto some of the Laws of the Medes and Persians,
which were said to be irrevocable, but the People had by the grace and favor
of the Sovereign, a remedy by Parliament to abrogate, repeal, explain or amend
them by substracting of some clause, or adding some other unto it; for
liberties are both by Civil and Common Law defined to be of things not
forbidden, Bracton lib. 1. ca. 6.
otherwise vaga liber^^ as may quickly come to be misera servitus, and bring
those that would use an unbounded liberty, where it shall meet either with Laws
or a greater force, into a most miserable slavery.

And therefore just liberties do by our Common Laws, Coke 2. part. Institutes
47.
says Sir Edward Coke, signify the Laws of the Land: And that which is the
Law, cannot be called Tyranny; nor that which is against the Law, liberty: And
that ancient manner of Trial for those who were criminally accused, called Fire
ordeal (which ordained the Party suspected to walk blindfold over certain
Plow-shares of Iron heated red hot, laid at a distance one from another,
Verstegans Antiquities ca. 3.
and if the Party did not touch any of them, or treading upon them received no
harm, he was declared to be innocent) coming into this Land with the Eazons;
and the Law of Trial of Titles by Battle or Duel, continuing here long after
the Norman Conquest, and to this day in force in certain doubtful cases, though
they had very much of blood and cruelty in them, could be suffered to wear out
into better Laws, and yet be obeyed as Laws, whilst they were such; the Law of
torturing or pressing such men to death in case of Felony, as will not plead^
or do refuse to be tried by a Jury, to be so many hours in dying, Stamfords
Pleas of the Crown.
and have no other drink but Kennel-water* has enough of horror in it to be
found fault with, if it were not the Law, and the only means to preserve the
Authority of Laws and Judicature, and there were not toom enough for men to
avoid that direful way of punishment.

For there was never since the blessing of Laws, Magistracy and Government came
into the World, any legal liberty not to appear in Judgment, or not to be
compelled to do right one unto another by Judges, and those that were in
Authority commissionated by their Superiors And if ever there had been such a
liberty, it may be renounced or released by our own Acts, as in the entering
into Bonds and Contracts one with another, wherein we oblige our selves to the
performance of any thing, which the Laws of God and Nature do demand of us,
Oldendorpius in diffinit. Actionum.
the Obligees may dispense with it: And if the Law of Nature could have given
us such a vast liberty, as some would pretend a right unto, the same Law of
Nature does in civil Conversation and Society give us a power sufficient to
restrain it, and make that which at the first was merae voluntatis in our own
wills, to be postea necessitatis a necessity, and out of any supposed freedom
of our own wills or the power thereof.

Neither can any man by any rule of Law charge our Laws with oppression,
because positive, or made in terror, or binding to strict rules, to avoid
arbitrarines or oppression in the Judges, or rigor and severity (as in some
particular man's case, they may happen to be by an abuse of them) but the fault
is rather to be laid at the doors of those who do violate and break them.

For an unlimited or absolute liberty, and the liberty of the Subject are each
unto other contradictory, and there are no Laws but do retrench, or take away
some liberty which People had or took to do ill, or might be inconvenient to
the public good: For God the greatest and wisest of all Legislative Powers,
did put the Jews who were, as he says himself, as the Bracelet upon his arm,
and the signet upon his right hand, under a Law of forty stripes, and of death
if they disobeyed the Sentence of the Judge. And yet we do find them in their
Generations above two rhousand years, after in such an opinion of their
freedom, as they thought nothing could be added unto it; saying they were of
the Seed of Abraham, and under no Bondage, and are yet above sixteen hundred
years since bragging of those their Laws.

When David had slain Goliath, and might justly have expected the reward, of
having his Fathers House to be made free in Israel, as some of the promised
rewards, he did not when he durst not lift up his hand against the Lords
Anointed, 1 Samuel ca. 17. v. 25.
believe it to have been such a freedom, as might exempt him from the duty of a
Subject. When our King Athelstan by his Charter gave Lands to St. Wilfrid,
Dugdales 1. part. Monastic. 172, 173. and Blounts Nomolexic in verbo Frodmortel.
and the Church of Rippon in Yorkshire, in the words, Als frelich as I may, and
in all things be als free as Heart may think, or eych may se. And King William
the Conqueror granted the Earldom of Chester, Spelman Glossar. in diatriba de
Comitib.
to his Nephew Hugh Lupus, Tenendum sibi and haeredibus ita libere ad gladium,
sicut ipse totam tenebat Angliam ad Coronam, to him and his Heirs, to be holden
as freely by the Sword, as he did himself hold England and the Crown thereof:
Those very large Grants did neither free the Lands so given to St. Wilfrid, and
the Church of Rippon, and that Earldom to the Earl of Chester unsubject the
Owners, or give either of them (as our Records and Law Books in the course of
the after Ages will testify) any liberty not to appear upon any Summons to the
Courts of Justice, of our Kings and Princes: For legalis and liber homo,
Spelmans Glossar. in verbo legalis.
says Sir Henry Spelman, has in our Laws no other signification then, Qui
stat rectus in Curia non exlex, seu utlagatus non excommunicatus vel infamis,
etc. sed qui in lege postulet vel postuletur, who stands right in the Kings
Court is not outlawed, excommunicated or infamous, but may at Law sue and be
sued.

And it cannot be denied, but that in order to Justice a Summons or citation
only might be sufficient, and would certainly be most consonant to the ease and
liberty of the People, if they were or could be so of one mind or inclination
to Justice, as to obey the first Summons, either of the Parties complaining, or
the Courts of Justice commanding, or not make excuses or delays, hide
themselves or run away, or be loath to come to it, be so of one kind of
affairs and business as never or seldom to be absent, so always provided of
their Council, Witnesses and Evidences, as not to need any further time to make
their necessary deffences, and to be of so much sufficiency of estate, as to
have wherewithal to make a speedy answer or satisfaction: And that there were
no such pravity or incertainty in the wills and actions of men, as that the
Creditor would be always sure to demand no more then what should be just, and
show as much mercy, if there should be occasion for it, as the Debtor should
have need of, and that every man would be as willing to do right one unto
another, as it should be asked or demanded of him.

But that being not to be found in too many of the Sons of men, or the smallest
Societies, nor was always or is likely to be in the subluna^y and lapsed
condition of mankind, some kind of compulsion was necessary, and a lesser then
what is now, or has been most anciently practiced, could not be to any
purpose, unless we could content our selves, and take that to be a happiness
(which would certainly never prove to be any to have Justice (which next to the
Creation, and the mercy of all mercies, the Redemption of mankind, and the
Divine Protection and Providence, is one of the greatest blessings which was
ever imparted by God unto it, and as to the continual guard and preservation of
our lives, liberties and estates is more necessary, and less to be wanted then
our food, apparel, houses or places of rest, and is the great support of the
being, and well being of all humane Societies) to be a mere speculation or
empty word, for Scholars only to dispute of in the Schools of Ethiques; Or sit
like Old Ely in a Chair, with Why do you so my Sons? and permit every man to
deceive, and mischief one another, and render the Justice of the Nation to be
nugatory, for the restraint now used of the Body of a Defendant, refusing to
appear voluntarily, or upon a Summons or Citation, is not in vinculis or
Cippis, in Chains or Fetters, not ad poenam but ad Cautionem, and in so
moderate and gentle a manner, and lessening of their liberty as it is but
temporary, and when so done, is but after many delays, threatenings, warnings
and forbearings, and most commonly occasioned by their own default, or some
long abuse of the Plaintiffs patience, and such a remedy or course taken, is no
more, if rightly interpreted, then what common and right reason, necessity, and
endeavor of right to be done did require. And when it is but Majoris mali
vitandi causa, to avoid greater evils, is so little in derogation of public
liberty, as although it may for a time be something prejudicial to some
particular man, it proves many times to be a special help unto many men, to
recover their Debts or Money due unto them, the want whereof might otherwise be
a cause of their own imprisonment.

And so long as any man is a Member of a Commonwealth, Bacons Historical
Discourse of the Government of England.
his liberty is to attend or depend upon the good of that Commonwealth,
otherwise he may claim a liberty as a Freeman, but not as an Englishman.

Nor could our Forefathers in the necessity of bringing, or compelling men to
appear in Judgment, as well as of the preservation of the always very
necessary Power, Authority and Jurisdiction of Courts of Justice, which do
order and direct it ever, tell how to imagine that it should be understood to
be a Tyranny, to arrest, attach or imprison such as should refuse to appear
upon the Summons, or Process of a Court of Justice, or be fugitive or like to
run away, or that it ever was or can be deemed to be an oppression, to enforce
such Persons in a legal and orderly way to pay their Debts, and do that which
God commands them to do, and has no less Justice or conscience in it, then
to be constrained to do right one unto another, Psalm 15.
perform Covenants and Promises, and obey Magistrates and Laws in force, when
the Book and Dictates of God himself, do account a Man wicked, that borrows
and pays not, and the wilful deceiving of Men, in the not paying of Money due
unto them, or not performing of Promises, is by good Divines and Expositors
conceived to be a kind of theft, and reckoned to be within the meaning of the
Eight Commandment, Ursinus Cathechisme, and Majer upon the ^8. Commandment.
and to be numbered amongst the breaches and transgressions of it; and it is no
Tyranny by the Law of Nature, for a Man to stay or lay hold of one who is
running away with his Money or Goods, or for a Judge by the Common Law of
England, to commit such as misbehave themselves by word or gesture, in their
presence or a Court of Justice, or for a Creditor by the Civil Law, to Arrest
or stay his Debtor, if he be running away before he can get a Warrant or Process
from a Judge. Laws of War.
To punish Soldiers with death by the Law Military, for running away from
their Colors, straggling in their March, or going above a Mile from the Army
without license; to Arrest or Imprison such as resort to unlawful Games, 23 H.
8. ca. 9
until they shall find Sureties, no longer to use or haunt any place where such
unlawful Games are used; or to imprison Collectors for the Poor, refusing to
account: And Sir Edward Coke in his Commentaries upon that part of Magna
Charta, Coke 2. part. Institutes 52.
says that a Watchmans arresting a Night-walker, or one that has dangerously
wounded another, or that keeps Company with a notorious Thief, whereby he
comes to be suspected is lawful, and no breach of Magna Charta, 14 Eliz. ca. 15.
although it be done without the Warrant of a Writ.

By what rule of right reason then shall so gentle, and necessary a course or
way of compelling Men by Process of Arrest, to appear in a Court of Justice, in
order to a Sentence or Judgment, when he may be bailed, be styled a Tyranny or
Oppression? When it shall not be so called or esteemed, to take a Man in
Execution for not obeying or performing a Judgment, where he cannot be bailed;
or shall it be Tyranny to Arrest a Defendant, to oblige him to appear in a
Cause or Action Civil, and none at all in a Criminal? An Oppression or Tyranny
to Arrest a Defendant, to constrain him to appear in an Action of Debt, and
none at all in an Action of Trespass? Nay, rather is it not an Oppression, to
endeavor to defraud and injure Men, detain their Estates and Livelyhoods,
withhold from the Poor and needy their right, and undo the Widows and
Fatherless, by keeping away the Money which should feed or keep them from
starving, without making satisfaction? or shall it be no Tyranny to do the
wrong, but a Tyranny in a legal and ordinary manner, or way to seek to be
reliev^d against it?

Or how can it be justly accounted to be a Tyranny, when no whereelse it has
been so esteemed? but was so little believed to be a Tyranny or Oppression by
other Nations, or any thing less then right reason, as they have not only made
use of the Process of Arrest, and Imprisonment of the Body in Actions of Debt,
Sigonius de Repub. Athen. lib. 3. ca. 4.
and other the like Personal Actions in these later Ages, but long before the
Incarnation of our blessed Savior.

The Athenians had their Bailiffs, Rous. Archeologia Attica lib. ca. 4.
Sergeants, and Apparitors to bring Defendants into their Courts of Justice,
and the Plaintiff might himself hale or draw the Defendant by force into the
Court, if he would not willingly come; but if he could put in two sufficient
Bail or Sureties, he was dismissed.

And howsoever there were at the first amongst them, and the Men of Sparta some
harsh and cruel way of scourging and whipping of Debtors, and other punishments
and levetities used; and their Lawmakers and Magistrates were much troubled,
to appease and reconcile the interests of the Creditors, and necessities of the
Debtors, they could notwithstanding very well content themselves, and think
their liberties to be sufficiently provided for, by this gentle and secure way
of Process, to compel Defendants Judicio fisti, to appear in Judgment.

CHAP. XI. That the wisest of the Grecian Commonwealths Athens and Sparta,
those great Contenders for Liberty and Preserv^rs of it, did in their
establishments and Methods of Justice, neither understand or suspect any
Tyranny, or Oppression to be in the necessary and moderate use of the Process of
Arrest.
FOr the Usury being very great and excessive, Plutarch. in vita Solonis.
the Poor plowed the rich Men's Lands, and yielded the rich Men a sixth part of
their Crop, for which cause they were called Hectemory, and Servants, borrowed
Money at Interest upon Gage of their Bodies to serve it out; and were by Law,
if they were not able to pay them, delivered to their Creditors, who kept them
as Bondmen and Slaves in their Houses, or sent them into strange Countries:
Many for poverty sold their Childsen to their Creditors, or were enforced to
forsake their Country; Parellel in many things or something near to that the
Children of Israel had long before in Custom, (for from the Phenicians, or
their learned Men's travails into Egypt, they might have borrowed it) in the
borrowing and lending of Money, and forcing Men to perform their Contracts.

So as there arising at Athens a great Sedition amongst the People, to set the
men indebted at liberty, redeem those who were adjudged to be bond, make a new
division of Lands amongst them, and to trun up the whole State and Government.
Solon one of the wisest Legislators that many Ages before or after had met
withal, a contemporary with Jehojakim, King of Juda or living very near the
time of his Reign, though unwilling to meddle, or endeavor the appeasing of
it, because he feared the covetousness of the one part of the People, and the
arrogance of the other, was notwithstanding at the Request of the wisest Men of
the City content to intermeddle in it; and therefore after he had refused the
Kingdom, for fear of the name of Tyrant, and was chosen Governor, to be the
Reformer of the rigor of the Laws, and to be the Temperer of the State and
Commonwealth* by consent and agreement of all Partier ordained, That all
manner of debts past should be cleared; no man should ask his Debtor any thing
for the time past; nor lend Money to Usury upon Covenants, for the Body to
begaged for it, and raised the value of the Money and the Pound of Silver,
which was seventy-three Drachmes, up to a hundred.

Which offended the Rich, because they were enforced to cancel their Bonds, and
the Poor because all Lands and Possessions they gaped for, were not made
common; yet notwithstanding shortly after having some taste of the benefits of
his Ordinance, they chose him General Reformer of the Law, and of the whole
State of the Common wealth, without limitting his Power; whereupon he having
made many good Laws, but finding some to praise them, oehers mislike them, and
some coming daily to him to expound his meaning* and considering therefore how
it would get him envy or ill will, either to refuse or yield unto it, resolved
to get himself out of the People, and to shun their groanings and complaints,
betook himself to be a Master of a Ship, asking license, to retire himself for
ten years beyond the Seas.

But in his absence a great Sedition arising, Pisistratus a Tyrant was made
choice of by some of the People; and the City notwithstanding they kept Solon's
Laws and Ordinances, desiring a change, either Parties hoping their conditions
would mend by it, and that every of them should be better then their
Adversaries. Solon returning, speaks unto every one of the Heads of the Faction
apart, and tryes if he could reconcile them together; but though he was much
honored and reverenced by the People, seeing the Poor tumult, and the Rich
fled, for that Pisistratus coming into the Marketplace, and feigning himself
to be wounded by his Adversaries, for that he stood with them about the
Government of the Commonwealth, had put the People into an uproar, and
obtained a Guard of fifty Halbardeers, and a Mace to be carried before him, and
aspired to be King, went home to his House, took his Weapons laid them before
his Gate in the midst of the Street; said, He had done all he could possible,
to defend the Laws and Liberties of his Country; and from that time forward
betook himself unto his ease, and never more after dealt in matters of State of
the Commonwealth.

Very long after that (there being it seems no way or expedient in the mean
time found out to take away that severity) upon complaints made to Lucullus,
Plutarch. in vita Luculli.
who was Governor and Captain General for the Romans in those Parts, that the
Fathers were driven to sell their Sons and Daughters to pay Interest, and yet
were in the end adjudged to be Bondmen, and Slaves to their cruel Creditors,
who imprisoned them set them on a rack, or in the Stocks, or upon a little
brazen Horse, and made them stand naked in the heat of Summer, or cold of
Winter; He abated the Monthly Usury or Interest to a hundredth part of the
principal Debt, and ordained that the Usurer and Creditor should enjoy the
fourth part of the Profits and Revenues of the Debtor, till he was satisfied;
and that they which took Usury upon Usury should forfeit the whole: Which was
reckoned, says Plutarch, to be as a great refreshing, and deliverance of the
People, who all this while were not found to be complaining against the Law of
Citing and Compelling men to appear in Judgment; being a part of the Laws of
the Ten Tables, which Solon is said to have compiled, but observed it as a Law
of public use and necessity, giving no manner of disturbance at all unto it.

CHAP. XII. The Troubles and Seditions of the People of Rome, concerning the
Whippings, Scourgings, selling for Bondslaves, and other cruelties used by
Creditors, in the suing and prosecution for their Debts, and the Troubles and
endeavors of the Magistrates and Senators to appease them.
ANd was so little believed by the Romans to be a Tyranny, as when some
Seditions and Commotions had been amongst them, occasioned by the greatness of
Usury, cruelty of Creditors, Whipping, Scourging, Slavery, and villainous Usage
of imprisoned Debtors they did acquiesce, and submit to the use of the Process
of Arrest, to enforce Men to appear in Courts of Jnstice.

And when at Rome two hundred fifty-nine years after the building of that City,
being about four hundred ninety-two years before the coming of Christ, an old
Captain or Commander coming into the Townhouse or Marketplace, with the Arms
or Ensigns of his Ancestors, ragged Clothes, a pale famished and meager
countenance, Livi Dec. 1. lib. 2.
his beard and hair overgrown and baring his breast, shows the wounds received
in the Wars, tells the People he had lost all his Goods and Estate, Taxes had
impoverished and brought him into Debt, and he had been carried of his
Creditors not only into Bondage, but into Prison and a place of Torment, and
showed his back wounded and gored with stripes.

Whereupon a great Tumult and Sedition arising amongst the People, the Senate
were afraid to sit, and upon the News of an Invasion of the Volscians, were by
the People bid to fight for themselves: But upon promise, that no Creditor
should take away their Goods, or Sell them, or Arrest or take away their
Children, as long as they were in the Camp, they were listed and pacified; but
that War ended, and another shortly after with as good succes, they that were
bound before, were delivered over to their Creditors for Debt, as also others
that were not bound or imprisoned before.

Shortly after the People seeing a Debtor sued, and brought to the Bar, flock
together, and make such a clamor as the Consuls Sentence could not be heard,
and single out the Creditors and misuse them, so as the fear of the loss of
liberty was translated from the Debtors to the Creditors, and the People being
discontented refuse again to muster; whereupon the Consuls, by advice of the
Senate, seek to force them; but one of them being summoned by the Consul to
appear, stood still and refused, the Consul sends to attach him, the People
rescue him; the Senators cry shame of the indignity, and run down from their
Seats to assist the Sergeant: Yet for all this stir, says Livy the Prince of
Historians, it was not thought convenient to take away all keeping of Credit
with the Creditors. But Valerius being chosen Dictator, upon a promise much
like that they had before, procured them to muster: Those Wars ended, the
Dictator moved the business again in the Senate, concerning those that were
bound in Prison for Debt; but they refusing to order any thing in it, gives up
his Dictatorship, and the People thinking he did it for their sakes, follow him
home with praises: The Sedition increases again, and was laid aside; after
that they mutiny again, and withdraw out of the City into the mount Aventine,
and begin to fortify; but upon Menenius Agrippas Oration, and comparison of
the mutiny of the several parts of the Body against the Belly, they come to an
agreement, and amongst other conditions it was granted, that they should create
two Tribuns of the People, to assist them against the Consuls, and that their
authority, by an Oath to be taken amongst them, should be sacred and inviolable.

About fifty years after, the Tribuns of the People were at discord with the
Consuls, for that the Commons were not suffered to make Laws, and though both
sides agreed it, Livy lib* 3. 109.
to be a matter most equal for their liberties, that Laws should be made by the
Commons and Senators, yet they differed about the legislative power: Whereupon
Ambassadors were sent to Athens and Sparta (when they had agreed of some Laws,
but could not accord who should be the Lawmakers) to learn and get copies of
the excellent Laws of Solon, Dionis. Halicarnassaeus lib. 10. Livii Decad. 1.
lib. 3. Pomponius de origin Juris lib. 2.. 4. Isidorus 5. orig.
and the Laws and Customs of other Cities of Greece; after whose return, and
much rejoicing for the bringing of the Copy of Solon's Laws, the Twelve Tables
by them, and others well skilled in those Foreign Laws, were framed four
hundred and forty years before the coming of Christ, by Ten Men or Magistrates,
created by the People as a Committee to peruse those Laws, amongst which was
that Law brought from Athens.

Qui petebat debitorem conveniebat atque ut se in Jus sequeretur admonebat,
Sigonius de Judiciis lib. 4 1. ca. de in jus vocatione Aulus Gellius Attic.
noct. lib. 20. ca. 1. Cujacius lib. 10. ca. 10.
st is sequi noluisset eum in Jus ducebat, sive rapiebat verum no in juriam
facere, videretur ante aliquem ejus actionis testem faciebat capta, scilice^
hominis forte intervenientis aut pre^entis auricula nogahat eum licetn^
antestari, id est, possum ne testem sumere si responde^at licet, tum
adversanium frustrantem, aut fagientent injecta m^n^ ad Praetorem trahebat
atque hoc faciebat auctoritate XII. TABVLARVM, Sic (...) i^iis erat SI IN IVS
VOCAT QVEAT NIT ANTESTAMINO IGITVR EM CAPITO SI CALVITVR PEDEMVE STRVIT MANVM
ENDO JACITO: Gothofredus in fragmen 12. Tabularum.
If a man had summoned or demanded of another to do him right, and to appear in
the Court; if he refused to follow him, nulla interposita mora, immediately or
without delay, he might, least he should seem to do him wrong, take Witness of
the next man he met, manum injicere and per vim in jus rapere, lay hands upon
him and enforce him; which the Laws or Authority of the Ten Tables did warrant.
But if he was sick or aged, and not able to go, then he which summoned him was
to provide him an Horse or Wagon; those Laws directing, that SI MORBVS
AEVITASQVE VITIVM ESCIT QVI IN JVS VOCABIT JVMENTVM DATO SI NOLET ARCERAM NE
STERNITO; Sigonius de Repub. Athen. lib. 1. de judiciis. Gothofredus in
Fragmen. 12. Tabul.
That if he was sick, or so aged as he could not go, he was to have a Horse
provided for him to ride upon; Gellius lib. 20.
and if he should refuse that way to go, he was to be put up in a close Wagon,
and carried whether he would or no.

Which the Romans those grand Assertors of liberty, and the most suspiciously
impatient of any thing, which might disavantage or prejudice that high esteem
which they had of it; neither did find any fault with, or had any reason so to
do, when as those Laws of the Ten Tables (of which that above mentioned de
in^jus vocatione, or de necessitate in jus eundi, of constraining men that
refuse to appear in judgment was one) were freely chosen and allowed of by the
People of Rome before they were enacted, and with the greatest freedom of
choice that any Laws could possibly be. For, Livii Decad. 1. lib. 3.
says Livy, Ingenti hominum expectatione Populo ad concionem advocato, and
quod bonum faustum felixque Reipublicae ipsis liberisque eorum esset ire, and
leges legere propositas jussere se quantum december hominum ingeniis providere
potuerit, omnibus summis infimisque aequasse: In a huge expectation of the
multitude, the people being called together or assembled, they were with wishes
and prayers that it might be good and happy for the Commonwealth, and for them
and their Children, required to go together and read the Laws which were
proposed unto them, which they (meaning the December viri, or then Magistrates, of
which number were the three which had been sent to Athens and Greece to learn
their Laws) had so far as Ten men with all their wisdom could foresee and
provide, indifferently devised for all men: Sed quia plus pollere multorum
ingenia consiliaque in animis versarent secum unamquamque rem agitarent deinde
sermonibus at que in medium, quid in quaque re plus minusve esset conferrent
eas leges habiturum populum Romanum quas consensus omnium invasisse, nec
jussisse latas magis quam tulisse videri posset. But for as much as the wits
and heads of many men might see further, and better advise, they gave them
leave to consider and ponder every particular, and to reason together from
point to point, and deliver their opinions openly, what was short, wanting, or
superfluous in every Article; Sigonius and A. Gellius Attic. noct.
and what Laws an universal consent of the people should bring in, those should
be enacted and none other, that it might appear they were not so much to
approve of them, and give their assent after they were propounded, as to
propose and prefer them their own selves: Livii lib. 3. 110.
Cumque ad rumores hominum de unoquoque legum capite edito satis correctae,
viderentur Centuriatis Comitiis december Tabularum leges perlatae sunt, qui nunc
quoque in hoc immenso aliarum super alias acervatarum legum cumulo fons omnis
publici privatique est Juris. And when as they were thought to be sufficiently
corrected, as every one spoke to the Titles and Chapters thereof, in an
Assembly of all the Centuries and degrees of men, the Laws of the Ten Tables
were enacted and established; which even at this day, says Livy, amongst that
infinite number of Laws heaped one upon another, are the very Wellspring and
Fountain of all Justice, both public and private.

But the next year after, the people finding the December viri growing insolent,
to determine matters at home before they gave Sentence openly, and usurping
Kingly Government, begun to repent themselves, of putting the power of appeal
out of themselves, tumult and protested against the December viri, or Ten which
they had chosen; saying, They had created them Magistrates, only for the
publishing and enacting of certain Laws, but they had now no Justice in the
City: And Appius one of the Ten, having engrossed into his hands the power and
disposing of his Partners, helps on the Tumult by a business that happened,
upon his lusting after a young Maid, the Daughter of L. Virginius, a Commander
of good note in the Army, and setting Mr. Claudius to claim her as his
Bondwoman, who laying hands on her in the Marketplace, Lib. 3. 117.
cited her to appear, and commanded her to follow him, otherwise he would force
her; the People flock together, but the Plaintiff tells them, they need not
trouble themselves, for he proceeded according to Law, and would do nothing by
force, cites her again to appear before Appius, and the People persuade her to
follow, where the cause by reason of the expostulation of Icilius to whom she
was betrothed, not coming to hearing; that day she was bailed and suffered to
go under Sureties till the next; but the second day, Appius without hearing the
Defendant or her Friends, decreed that she should be a Bondwoman to Claudius,
who going to seize her finds the People resisting him, Appius sends a Sergeant
to assist him, Virginius in a rage kills his Daughter, that she might not
come into the Oppressors hands, and a great uproar happening by the People,
Kindred, and Friends of the Maid, Appius cites Icilius, the Spouse of the Maid,
as an Author of the Tumult, and for his contumacy in not coming, caused him to
be attached and carried to Prison; but Valerius and M. Horatius, two popular
and powerful Senators, thrusting back the Sergeant, said, If Appius had any
thing to charge him with by order of Law; they would Bail him; but if he went
about to offer violence he should meet with his match: After that Appius
himself is arrested, who desiring to be bailed, and not to be put in Prison or
lie in Chains, by all the Friends and pittyful speeches he could make, could
not obtain it; For that he had, says the Father of Virginia, so much against
all order of Law denied the bailing of her, who therefore commanded him to be
carried to Prison, as a person attaint and convict: The Tribun of the Commons
set him a day to plead for himself and make his answer, but Appius before that
day killed himself, his Goods were confiscated by the Tribuns; the rest of the
December viri fled and were banished, and all their Goods confiscated: And the Ten
Tables having two more added to them, by the appointment of the Tribuns, are
set or hung up openly to be seen, engraven in Brass.

The Romans having long before the compiling of the Twelve Tables, Pomponius
lib. 2. de Origin Juris.
used to Arrest and compel Men to appear in Judgment, as is manifest by their
manner of giving Bail, before such time as Appius denied to take Bail, in the
case of the Daugh-of Virginius; which was ex veteri Jure, an Old Law and Custom
amongst them, says Pomponius.

And this grand Commotion of the People having nothing at all in it the while
of complaint or action, against the Laws of citing and compelling men to appear
in Judgment, and a putting them to Bail in the interim, but a confirmation or
allowance rather of them.

Threescore and five years after that Marcus Manlius Capitolinus, so named
because he had saved the City of Rome, and the Capitol from ruin and spoil,
growing ambitiously discontented, and not contenting himself to deal in the
Laws Agraria about the Division of Lands, which had always ministered occasions
of Seditions, began to intermeddle between the Debtors and Creditors; Livii
lib. 6. 225.
and to overthrow, says Livy, all keeping of Credit.

And seeing a Centurion condemned in an Action of Debt, and carrying to Prison
upon an Execution, with a rout and crew of his Followers, rescues and takes him
from the Officers, and crying out that his merits in saving the Capitol had
been to little purpose, if he could abide to see his Fellow-Souldier carried
away captive, did in sight of the People pay down the Debt, set to sale his own
Land, and caused it to be openly cried, that as long as he had one foot of
ground, or any thing else rest, he would not see one of the People condemned,
and upon Execution carried to Prison, and stirred up such a Sedition in the
City as the People followed him as the protector of their Liberties; whereupon
the Dictator being sent for from the Army, assembled the Senate, caused the
Ivory Chair of State to be set in the Common Hall, and sent a Sergeant for
Manlius, who with a great retinue of his party presents himself before the
Tribunal; and tells the Dictator, that now he saw he was created Dictator not
against the Common Enemies, Livii lib. 6. 226, 227.
but himself and the Commons of Rome, for he did see well that he professed to
maintain and bear out the Usurers against the Commons: Whereupon, after many
insolent speeches, the Dictator commanded him to be carried away to Prison;
Manlius cries out, O ye Gods and Goddesses that inhabit the Capitol, suffer ye
thus your Knight and Defender to be misused by his Adversaries? But, says
Livy, though every man that saw it was greatly moved, the City as most patient
of all other Cities, to abide any just and lawful Commandment of the Magistrate,
so contained her self, as neither the Tribuns of the Commons, nor the Commons
themselves durst intermeddle in it, though many of them did put themselves in
mourning, let their heads and beards grow in their grief and mourning for it,
and with sad and heavy cheer kept commonly about the Goal-door; but after a
while threatened to break the Prison, continued or rather increased their
Sedition, Livii lib. 6. 228, and 229.
and never left till the Senate released him: Whereby the Mutiny was never the
more ended, but rather a Captain given them to maintain it, the People hope to
be rid of Usury, Manlius calls them home to his House, exhorts them to maintain
their Liberty, and to hinder and cry down Dictatorship and Consulship, and
Process and Course of Law for Actions of Debt; the Senate and Tribuns in Consuls
Authority, Livii lib. 6. 230.
and the Tribuns of the Commons also, seeing that in the loss of the public
liberty their own power likewise would come to an end, being much troubled at
it, by advice of the Senate resolve to Arrest him, and thereupon send and serve
Process upon him, to answer at a day appointed; which being come, he produces
four hundred men, for whom he had laid out Money gratis, saved their Goods from
Port-sale, and kept them from the Bondage of their Creditors after they were
condemned; reckoned and showed openly the Spoils of Enemies by him slain or
disarmed, to the number of thirty, gifts bestowed on him by Generals to the
number of forty, whereof there were two mural Garlands for scaling of Walls,
and 8 Civick Coronets, for saving the lives of Citizens in danger, presented
many in person whom he had rescued out of the Enemies hands, nominated
Servilius, at that instant General of the Hosse-men, stripped his breast bare
showed the scars received in the Wars, looked toward the Capirol, and praid to
the Gods, to give the People the same mind to help him as he had to help them;
but the People notwithstanding being called out by the Tribuns, and drawn out
by Centuries or Wards, into a place where they might not behold the Capitol,
for otherwise it was thought impossible for them to get leave of their love and
pity to him to find the Indictment against him: And the accusation prevailing
more then compassion, he was condemned for Sedition, holding Conventicles with
the multitude, and his over much largess, to be thrown down the Rock Tarpeja,
Livii lib. 6. 231. and Plutarch in vita Camilli.
where himself had won so great glory by defending the Capitol; his own Kindred
making also a Decree, that none of that Race should after bear the name of
Marcus Manlius.

The Tribunes after that complain, that the Senate sought to avoid the
exhibiting of public Records and Books, Livii lib. 6. 236.
which gave testimony of the valuation of every man's substance to the worth,
because they would not have the Sums of Debts to be seen or shown, which might
show that the one part of the People were eaten up and devoured by the other,
and that if the Commons would call to remembrance their Ancestors liberty, they
would not suffer any Citizen of Rome to be awarded to Bondage for Debt, nor any
musters to be taken until a view were made, and just account had of every man's
Debts, that each man might know what he had of other men's Goods, what remanied
of his own, whether his body were left free, or at the mercy of his Creditor to
lie in cold Iron or baleful Prison; on the other side the Censors alleged,
that the Debtors cautelously would not then keep their Credit and make payment:
Which hire and salary or reward of Sedition, says Livy, shortly after stirred
up a mutiny, for that when many were adjudged to be kept bound by their
Creditors, the Tribunes would not suffer those that were condemned to be led to
Prison, nor the younger sort of the Commons enter their Names in the
Muster-masters Book: Howsoever the Wars coming on they leave their mutinies;
but after the Wars ended, Tribunes Military with Consular Authority were
equally chosen, from out of the Nobility and Commons; And the year following
begins with Discords, Seditions, and Broils (for no better were they then
termed) concerning Debts, for the true Inquisition whereof, and to know to what
Sums they amounted, Sp. Servilius, Priscus, and Q. Claelius Siculus were made
Censors, but stopped by occasion of an Invasion of the Volscians,
notwithstanding the fear and terror whereof; so little were the Civil Discords
appeased, as the Tribunes of the Commons extended their power with more
violence, to hinder the leavy of Soldiers until they had indented and
capitulated with the Senate, Livii lib. 6. 239, 240.
that so long as the Wars lasted, no man should contribute or be charged with
any Impost, or be sued in any Action of Debt, whereupon the Commons are content
to muster, two new Legions were levied and enrolled, and to War they go with
the Volscians their Neighbors; but as soon as all was quiet from Enemies
abroad, they began a fresh to be sued and troubled by their Creditors at home,
and having small hope to be released of their old Usury, fell into a new
Sedition, by reason of a Contribution imposed by the Censors for making of a
Well, which they had set out to be made of square Ashler stone; but being
forced to yield thereunto, and to go to War against the Volscians and Latins,
after several Victories obtained, and the Armies returned to Rome, the
calamities of the Commons grew every day more and more, for they wanted means
and were not able to pay for the Interest, that needs must be paid; and when
nothing was to be had to make satisfaction, out of their Goods were adjudged
and awarded to satisfy their Creditors in their Bodies. Which gave occasion to
M. Fabius Ambustus, Livii lib. 6. 241.
a man of much repute with the Commons, upon the proud discontent of a younger
Daughter, not being married so well as her elder Sister, whose Husband was a
Tribune Military, plots with his unpreferred Son in Law and L. Sextius, who
hoping to compass some alteration in the State, by reason of the excessive
Debts that men were grown into, got themselves made Tribunes of the Commons;
upon which advantage C. Licinius, the Son in Law of M. Fabius Ambustus, and L.
Sextius propose Laws touching Debts, that when so much was defalked and
deducted out of the Principal, as had been paid for the use and Interest, the
residue should be paid by even portions in three years; that no man should hold
in possession above five hundred Acers of Land, and that there should be no
election of Tribunes Military but of Consular; with which the Senate being much
troubled, could find no other remedy but the negative voice of some of the
Tribuns to step between, and had wrought some of their own Brotherhood to do
it, who as soon as they saw the Wards or Tribes, called forth by Licinius and
Sextius to give their Suffrages, would not suffer those Bills to be read or
pass by the Commons; whereupon when the Nobles began to choose the Tribuns
Military, L. Licinius and Sextius crossed them, so as there was no election at
all, but of Aediles and Tribunes of the Commons, Lib. 6. 242.
for Licinius and Sextius being chosen Tribunes again, suffered no Magistrates
of the Chair, or of State to be created; After that other Wars ensue, and with
much ado an Army is levied, Sextius and Licinius the publishers of those Laws
were the eighth time made Tribunes of the Commons, and Fabius also a Tribune
Military, five in eight of the Tribunes of the Commons ernestly, and like men
bestraught of their wits, urge for to have those Laws enacted; Sextius and
Licinius with part of their Tribune Brethren, and M. Fabius the Military
Tribune being, says Livy, their Crafts Masters, and knowing well enough by
so many years experience, how to manage the minds of the Commons, demand of
them how every one of the Senate, and other Rich men, could in equity hold the
Land well near of three hundred Citizens, and a Commoner have hardly ground
enough to build him a House upon, and to serve for a place to bury his Dead,
whether the Commoners oppressed with Usury should yield their Bodies to bear
Irons and suffer Torments, unless they pay the Interest before the principal?
and that daily they should in whole Companies be had away from the bar, and
condemned to thraldom, and allege that the Commons could never be relieved,
until they make one out of their body a Consul, who might be equal in the
Sovereign command and power of the Sword, and maintain and protect their
liberty. The next year the Legions being returned home, the same Tribunes of
the Commons are chosen, and the same Laws again proposed; the Senate when they
saw the Tribes called, and none of the Tribunes step forth to stop their
proceedings, Lib. 6. 243.
began to be exceedingly afraid, and choose a Dictator; the Tribunes of the
Commons call a Common Hall, and summon out the Wards to give their voices;
whereupon after the Laws were propounded, and some of the Tribunes denied them
Camillus the Dictator, their good old successful General, formerly the Savior
of their Commonwealth against the Gauls, a man of undoubted honor and
integrity, and the Darling of the Peoples, sided with the gainsaying Tribuns,
and stickling to maintain their intercession and gainsaying authority, sent
his Lictors and Sergeants to command the Commons to depart, threatening withal
that if they proceeded thus like Conquerors to give Laws, he would take a
Military Oath of all the younger sort, and presently lead an Army forth of the
City, which put them and their Captains and Ringleaders in so great a heat of
contention, as the Dictator terrified with some unlucky signs of the Birds,
gave up his office; mean while in an Assembly of the Commons summoned by the
Tribunes, the Laws were passed concerning Lands and Usury; howbeit shortly
after it was found that Licinius had a great many more number of Acres of Land
than his own Laws permitted. After this another Dictator was chosen, who
nominated Licinius General of the Horsemen, Livii lib. 6. 245.
who with Sextius at the next Election day for the Tribunes of the Commons so
demeaned themselves, as seeming to be weary of the place, they were the more
eagerly desired by the Commons, and alleged thereupon, that the Commons
themselves were they that hindered their own good, who might presently, if they
would, have their City, their Common Hall, and places of Assemblies freed from
those Creditors, and their Lands recovered again from the unjust Landlords;
that it stood not with the modesty of the People of Rome, to require to be
eased themselves of Usury, and set in possession again of the Lands withheld
from them, and to leave those old Tribunes, by whose means they had gained
those commodities to shift for themselves without honor or hopes thereof; and
that if the Commons should not resolve to speak affirmatively to those Laws, it
would be to no purpose to choose any Tribunes, neither would they accept of the
Tribuneship, neither should the Commons have those Laws ratified, which were
already granted: Livii lib. 6. 247.
But upon an Oration or Speech of Appius Claudius a Senator, setting forth the
inconveniences of what was propounded, and that by what had been already
wrested by the Tribunes, All Credit in borrowing and lending, and taking and
putting forth of Money would be abolished, to the destruction of all humane
Society, Commerce and enter-course whatsoever. The matter was adjourned, and
the publication of those Acts cut off and deferred; but the same Tribunes
Sextius and Licinius being chosen again the Tenth time, got a Law enacted, that
of the December viri for Church and Ecclesiastical matters some should be elected
of the Commons, with which they were so well content, as they laid aside the
business of Tribunes Consular, Livii lib. 6. 248.
and gave way for the creating of Tribunes Military; and the Venerable Camillus
being almost fourscore years old, is the fifth time chosen Dictator, but after
the Wars ended with the Gauls, who had invaded them, is welcomed home with a
hotter Sedition in the City; where after many sharp bickerings and contentions,
the Senate and Dictator were forced to accept of the Tribunes Laws, and Sextius
was created Consul out of the Commoners; but by reason that the Nobles refused
to give their consent, that Camillus should leave his place of Dictator, the
Tribunes of the Commons, as Camillus was set in his Chair in the Town Hall
hearing of causes, sent a Sergeant to him, who commanded him to follow him, and
laid violent hands upon him, to carry him away by force; Which made an uproar,
says Livy, was never before seen in the Common Hall or Townhouse, Camillus
Friends driving the Sergeant behind the Chair; and the People crying out from
beneath to the Sergeant, to pull him out: Notwithstanding all which he would
not resign up his Office, but taking with him those Senators which were about
him, went toward the place where the Senate was wont to be kept, but before he
could go in, he returned back again to the Capitol, and made his prayer to the
Gods, that it would please them to bring his Troubles again to a quiet, and
made a solemn vow and promise, if those Troubles might be pacified, Plutarch.
in vita Camilli.
to build a Temple to Concord. And the matter coming after to be debated before
the Senate, there happened such an hot contention and diversity of opinions, as
the easier way carried it, which was to grant the Common Peoples desire, that a
Commoner should be chosen Consul with a Noble Man, and it was agreed, that the
Common People should be content that the Nobles might out of the Patricii
create a Praetor, or Lord Chief Justice for Oyer and Terminer in causes within
the City, which being by the Dictator published to the People, they were so
joyful as they brought Camillus home to his house, with great shouts of joy and
clapping of hands; and being the next morning assembled in the Townhouse or
Marketplace, decreed, that the Temple of Concord should be built at the
Commonwealth's charge, that some Festival days should be solemnized, and
Sacrifices made unto the Gods in every Temple of the City, to give them thanks,
and that the People should in token of joy wear Garlands upon their heads for
this reconciliation.

About nine years after upon a new Sedition of choosing of Magistrates, and for
want of them an Interregnum happening, the Commons lost their Consulship again,
and two of the Patricii began to govern, who thinking to continue it as
formerly in the Nobility, had the trouble of another Sedition, wherein the
People after many stirs and meetings not prevailing, two other Confuls of the
Nobility were elected. And though the Usury or rate of Interest was much
abated, yet the poorer sort of the People being overcharged with the payment
of the principal, became bound and thrall to their Creditors, in so much as the
Commons, in regard of their private streights which they were driven unto,
never troubled their heads at all any more with the making of Consuls. Livii
lib. 7. 262.


In the end of the next year after, Ibid. 263:
the contention betwixt the Senate and the Common People brake forth,
concerning the Election of the Consuls; whereupon the Tribunes of the People
stiffly denied to suffer any Assembly to be holden, unless they might have one
of the Consuls to be chosen out of the Commons, according to the Law Licinian:
And the Dictator as stoutly bent to deny it, the Election was adjourned, and
the Dictator leaving his Office, the matter grew again to an Interregnum, and
the Interregents finding the Commons to be always maliciously set against the
Senators, succeeded one after another until the Eleventh Interregnum, when the
discord and variance still continuing, the Tribunes called on hard for the Law
Licinia; the Commons had an inward grief that struck nearer to them, upon the
excessive Usury that still increased, and each man's private care and grievance
brake out in their public contentions and debates; the Senate thereupon weary
of such Troubles, commanded L. Scipio the Interregent for the time, being for
concord and unity sake, to observe the Law Licinia, in the Election of the
Confuls, so as P. Valerius Publicola had joined with him in fellowship of
Government, Cajus Martius Rutilius one of the Commons.

Who laboring to ease the matter of Usury, being that which hindered the
general agreement, set a course to do it, so as the long or old debts, which
were more entangled rather in regard of the Debtors slackness and negligence
then want of ability, the City out of the common Stock crossed them out of the
Book, by setting up certain Counters or Tables, with ready coin in the public
Hall, provided that good Security were given to the City, by Sureties put in
beforehand, or else the Goods of Men valued at indifferent and reasonable
prices were to discharge the Debts, so as a great number of Debts, without the
complaint of either Party, was satisfied and paid.

Two years after the Ancient possession, Livii lib. 7.] 267.
says Livy, of the Consulship was restored to the Senators; and about two
years after that, the Usury coming but to half so much as it was formerly, the
payment of Debts were dispensed, and ordered to be paid in three years by even
portions, so as a fourth part were paid beforehand, some of the Commons being
for all that pinched therewith, for that the Senate had more care to see Credit
kept with the Chamber of the City, then of the difficulties of private Persons,
which was the better born in regard of the forbearance to muster Soldiers, and
call for Tribute.

About seven years after that, upon a mutiny of the Soldiers, in the Camp a
Law was published by a Tribune of the Commons, that Usury should be made
altogether unlawful; and after many nnreasonable demands, says Livy, the
insurrection of the Soldiers, who compelled their Commanders to march against
the City, was upon a Capitulation made as once before (says that learned
Historian) the Commons, Livy lib. 7. 279.
and a second time the Army had done with the Senate, that their mutiny and
insurrection should not be made use of to their danger or dishonor, it was
appeased.

About sixteen years after, being three hundred and thirteen years before the
Incarnation or coming of Christ, Papirius Publius being bound for his Fathers
Debt, Lib. 8. 301.
and having consigned himself a Prisoner to the Creditor, who supposing that he
might abuse the young man's Body for Interest of his Money, began to tempt him
with fair words and promises, afterward to threaten him, and when that would
not serve, commanded him to be stripped naked and whipped; whereupon the young man
all wounded and torn ran forth into the Street, and complained to all he met,
of the filthy lust and cruelty of the Creditor; and thereupon a great company
of People moved with the injury of the Usurer, and pity of the young Man, as
also in regard of their own case and their Children, gathered themselves into
the Marketplace or Town Hall, and from thence toward the Senate House; and
the Consuls being upon this sudden uproar Coacti, says Livy, compelled, to
assemble the Senate; the People as the Senators entered in the Senate House lay
prostrate at their feet, as they passed by showed the young man's back and
sides; whereupon the Consuls were commanded to propose to the People, that from
hence forward no person whatsoever, unless guilty of matters Criminal or
Trespass (for noxa, the word used there by Livy, and Noxales actiones are by the
Roman and Civil Laws, and our Bracton also interpreted, to be matters and
actions of Trespass as well as greater crimes) until he were condemned to
punishment, should be bound in Fetters or Chains, and that the Goods of the
Debtors, not the Body, should be obnoxious to the payment of the Money borrowed
(which might better be ordained there than with us, or many other Nations, for
that the Romans by their Censors did keep public Registers of every man's
Lands, Estate, and Lands; so they that were in Bondage became released and
enlarged; and order war taken for the time to come, Livius in 4. Edit. apud
Francofurt ad Moenum Anno 1568. p. 411.
ne necterentur, says Livy, that the Debtors should not hereafter be bound or
chained in Prison: Which if any shall misinterpret to be an absolute freedom of
the Persons of the Debtors from Arrest, the Roman Records and Histories will be
against them.

CHAP. XIII. That this Order made to pacify a Tumult was not perpetual, or so
much as intended to extend to an absolute freedom of the Debtors from Arrest or
restrainte of their Persons, till they appeared in Courts of Justice or gave
Bail to do it.
FOr a Plebiscite or Law of the People, it could not be for they were not
called together by Tribes or Wards, under the Authority of the Tribunes; or if
they had so many Usurers, and all that were either Rich men or Creditors, were
likely to have been against it; Sigonius de Antiquo Jure Roman. 120.
And an Act of the Senate it could not be, for they were forced or affrighted
to it, and it wanted the consent of all the Peoples deliberation, and the just
solemnities of it: Joannes Sarius Zamoscus de Roman. Ant. Augustinus de S. C
Romans Bodin lib. de Repub.
For ab exactis Regibus, from the time of putting down Monarchy, till the Reign
of Tiberius Caesar, says Bodin, the Senate alone had no power to make Laws,
but only Annual Decrees or Ordinances: Which bound not the Common People
(Ordinances or Decrees of the Senate (says Dionisius Halicarnasseus, Dionis.
Halicar. lib. 4, and 7.
a most diligent Inquirer into the Roman Customs, having Nullam vim legis nisi
Populus probaret, No force or effect of Law unless the People approved of it;
Et ea quae Populus probaverat annua tantum erant, nisi rogatione ad Populum,
vel ad plebem vim legis adipiscerentur, And those also which the People did
approve were but Annual, if by rogation or asking the People's consent, being
called together by their Wards, it obtained the force of a Law, and without a
rogation or demanding the Suffrage of the People was, as Bodin says,
ineffectual so as a Law, Bodin de Repub;
it was not because all the People were not duly called nor had agreed to it,
and being no Law, could be no more then an Edict of the Consuls, or an
Ordinance of the Senate; or if a Law (because we fiud it by Paulus Manutius
reckoned for no less) was but temporary, Paulus Manutius de Legibus Romany.
and to pacify and bring to their wits again the enraged multitude.

But whatsoever it was, it extended not nor was so much as intended to take
away that necessary power of the Praetor or Magistrate, of coercing or
compelling men to appear before them in Judgment, but was abrogated or
continued but for that time or a little after, or not put in execution, a fate
which many other enforced Acts or Orders of that Commonwealth came under; as
that of the Law Licinia, or choosing of one of the Consuls out of the Commons;
that of lessening of Usury at one time, or taking it quite away at another,
which had their intermissions; the latter of which was so impossible to be
kept, as by custom and men's necessities it came to be to no purpose, which the
many Seditions of the People, which happened afterward concerning Usury, and
the more ease then abatement of it, may be enough to persuade us unto: For
besides what may be observed concerning the enforcing of that Law, and the
course taken to pacify the People, the meaning of Bona Debitoris pecuniae
oreditae non Corpus obnoxium esset, That the Goods of the Debtor not his Body
should be obnoxidus or liable to the Debts, might probably be understood to be,
that the Goods of the Debtor should be sold or taken in Execution, for the
satisfaction of the Creditor, as far as they would go, and that his Body
howsoever should not be bound or lie in chains for it, and that those that were
bound in Fetters or Chains were released from that kind of imprisonment, as may
appear by the Body of that Law, or the perclose and conclusion of it; which
only says Ita nexi soluti, so those that were bound in Fetters or Chains were
released, which must be understood to be by the Sale of their Goods; And for
the time to come, singly relating to the matter of binding in Chains or
Fetters, not as to the Sale or taking of Goods has only these words, Cantumque
in posterum ne necterentur; And for the future it was enacted, that for Money
borrowed the Debtors should not be bound in Chains, which needed not have been
if their Goods, and not their Persons had only been liable to Debts; the way of
Distringas or attaching Men by their Goods (where they were not Fugitives, or
had a certain or visible Estate, being not then unusual, as may appear by what
was done in the Case of the Senators, who had their Goods taken and distrained,
for not coming upon Summons unto the Senate House.

Which Law or whatsoever it is to be called, got so little allowance in the
opinion of Livy, that most learned and ever approved Historian, as he gives it
no better opinion in the reporting of it, but that upon occasion of an injury
done to one Man, A mighty bond or tie upon the People to keep their Credit was
that day broken: And it will howsoever be evident enough to any who shall but
acknowledge that truth, which will every where meet him in his enquiry, through
the Roman History or Customs, that they did not by that Edict or Law abridge
or take away the power of the Praetor or Judge, who though he was at first
appointed and set up at the Request of the Tribunes and People, had two Lictors
with Axes and bundels of Rods (a more terrible kind of Officer then our
Sergeants or Mace-bearers) allowed to attend him in the necessary course of
preserving that power was put into his hands, to judge and determine of causes:
For we may find Sempronius a Tribune of the People, about sixteen years after
the pretended Law of prohibitting Men to be bound in Fetters for Money lent,
Livy lib. 9. 339.
to command Appius the Censor to be attached or committed to Prison for no
criminal or heinous fact: That in the accusation and pleadiug of Scipio
Africanus, about one hundred and twenty-two years after, concerning an Account
of the public Treasures, the Court was attended by Lictors or Sergeants, Livy
lib. 38^* 1017.
and a common Crier; and that the Tribunes of the People themselves, in the
absence of Scipio Africanus, when he sent his Brothers to appear for him, but
failed to appear in Person, upon a longer day granted for the Process of the
Law against him, to cry out, saying, Dare we not now send Folk to fetch him,
being but a private Person, out of his Farm and House in the Country, and make
him appear? unto whom not seventeen years ago, at which time he was General of
an Army at Land and Admiral at Sea, we were so bold as to send Tribunes of the
Commons, and an Aedile to Arrest and bring him away; that L. Scipio his Brother
being after his death accused and condemned, for not bringing to account some
Treasures taken in the Wars, Plutarch. in vita Scipiouis Africani.
when some of Scipio's Friends had appealed to the Tribunes of the People for
their help, and remonstrated the many merits and services of him and his
Family; the Praetor or Lord Chief Justice opposed, and said. That for his part
he could not do with all, but if the Sum wherein he was condemned was not
brought into the Common Treasury. He knew no other remedy nor what else to do,
but command him as a condemned Person to be apprehended again, and had away to
Prison. And when the Tribunes of the People, all but Titus Gracchus, pronounced
alone that they would not interpose, and that the Praetor might execute his
Office and Authority, all the favor which Gracchus one of the Tribunes thought
fit to do him, was to decree, that as touching the Sum wherein L. Scipio was
condemned, Livy lib. 38. 1022.
he would not be against it nor hinder the Praetor, but that he might use his
power according to his place, and take it out of his Goods as far as they would
stretch; but would never consent, that he who had subdued the mightiest Monarch
of the world, and extended the bounds of the Roman Empire as far as the utmost
ends of the Earth should lie in Prison and Irons. Besides how little that
pretended Law, gained by a Tumult, prevailed against the Imprisonment of Men in
Chains or Irons, after Judgment in Debt or other Civil Actions, or a bare
Imprisonment without them, plainly enough appears, in the Customs and Usages
of those times, held forth in the Oration made by Publius Scipio Na^ica,
another of those famous Brothers, made to the Tribuns of the People in the
behalf of L. Scipio his Brother, to keep him from going to Prison, clearing up
unto us the usage of those times, notwithstanding that pretended Law; for there
we may find him saying, That which cannot be made of the substance and Goods of
L. Scipio, they will make good on his Body.

So that it will be abundantly evident, that all the before recited Tosses,
Commotions and Troubles of that grand Commonwealth of Rome, and that People's
humors and ignorance in that Popular Government, which made them to be restless
as the Waves of the Sea, tormenting and inquieting themselves and their
Magistracy; which continued until that Republique had, as Tacitus says, tired
it self Civilibus discordiis, and gained a rest from those public disturbances
in the Government and Monarchy of Augustus Caesar, Tacit. Annal.
were more in regard of an horrid Usury and their Debts, and being constrained
at the same time to pay Tributes, Muster, and fight for their Country then of
their being imprisoned, and more for the chains and cruel manner of Usage, then
for the Imprisonment it self, or restraint of their liberty upon actions of
Debt, which without a renouncing of Justice, and all the hopes and benefits
thereof could not be forsaken; And were therefore without the former severities
of Bondage, Chains and Fetters, to be reckoned amongst the most necessary and
excellent rules of Justice, Cicero lib. 1. Tusc. quaest. and Strabo lib. 14.
void of all Tyranny. And was so liked and approved by that conquering and
great Nation, as Hermodurus an Ephesian, who had been Assistant to the December
viri, in the Interpretation of Solon's Laws, had his Statue erected in the
Forum or Place of Justice; and were so continued and commended to after Ages,
as in Tully's time, which was almost four hundred years after the public and
universal consent of the People and their Magistrates gained, and likewise
after the pacification of the People's complaints of their burdens of Usury,
and the merciless usage of the Creditors, those Laws were had in so great a
reputation and veneration, as that part of them de in Jus vocando, Cicero lib.
2. de Legibus.
constraining Men to appear in Courts of Justice, was, as he says, a Parvis
learnt and sung by him and other Children; and after that he came to be that
great Orator and Lawyer, whose just praises and commendation the many Ages
since, and a long course of time have taken a delight to remember, could have
no other opinion of those Laws, then that if all the learning and Libraries of
the World were searched, those of the Twelve Tables, Si quis legum fontes and
capita viderit, and auctoritatis pondere and utilitatis ubertate superarent, If
any would enquire into their reason and original, their authority and benefit
considered, they would appear to be the best of all Laws.

And were so generally by after Ages well liked, Ammianus Marcellinus lib. 11.
as Ammianus Marcellinus long after speaking of them says, That Solon adjutus
Aegypti Sacerdotum satis justo modetamine legibus Romano quoque Juri maximum
addidit firmamentum, By the just and equal Laws, which he had made by the
assistance of the Egyptian Priests, was a great means of the establishing of
the Roman Laws.

And if they could have been truly charged with any Tyranny or Oppression, or
so much as a Suspicion of either of them, that Law de in Jus vocando, being a
part of the Twelve Tables, could not as well as the rest have gained as it did,
the constant approbation and good liking of the World, and come as it has done
from generation to generation unto these our present Times.

And it is a thing not unworthy of observation, and pertinent enough to be here
remembered, that the Romans abhorring the cruelty of the Diaco or Athenian Laws,
ordaining the Debtor after a Sentence or Judgment given against him, and a
certain number of days limited, and a failer of payment to be cut in pieces
and distributed to the Creditors (which cruel Law, says Quintilian, Quintilian
lib. 5. ca. 6.
Mos publicus repudi^vit, The kindness of Mankind one unto another could not
endure to be put in Execution) did in lieu thereof, appoint a seizure or
Execution against the Goods of the Debtors, and that in the course and Process
of Arrest: It was by a Constitution of the Praetor or Lord Chief Justice
ordained (which unless in Cases of Writs of Outlary, and where the Doors are
not open is to this day observed in our Laws) Ne quis ex domo sua in Jus vocari
vel pertrahi posset; Ritterhusius Commentar. ad 12. Tabul. cl. 1. Gothofr^dus
ad Tabul. de in Jus (...)*
That no man should be arrested or forcibly taken out of his House.

And the Civil or Caesarean Law, when according to the Custom of some
Countries, in Towns or Places of Trade, as in Holland and the United Provinces,
Arrests in Actions of Debt were at the first not much accustomed, where the
Debtor has a Domicilium or fixed Habitation, does not withstanding in the
notion or interpretation of a Suspectus de fuga, warranting a present
incarc^rstion or Arrest of a Debtor, if he be not a Freeholder or Man of a
very visible Estate, appear to be so willing at this day to gratify and secure
the fears and jealousies of Creditors, and avoid those Circulations,
Inconveniences and Delays, which would otherwise happen if they should tarry,
as they do sometimes under that Law, to receive the debate before a Judge,
whether the Debtor was a Freeholder, likely to run away, deserving to be
arrested, or to have his Body to be secured, as it has allowed no less then
20. Exceptions, against a Debtors not being to be exempted from it, viz. First,
That he has no Freehold or ability to pay the Debt. 2. Is a Forreigner,
Incerti Laris, or a Vagabond. 3. Has made his Estate to be notoriously worse
then it was formerly. Peregrinus Janninius Tract. de Citat. real. lib. 1. ca.
2. ab. 141. ad 199. and lib. 2. ca. 1.
4. Accepit Pecunias sub gravibus Vsuris, gave too great Interest or brocage to
borrow Money. 5. Keeps ill Company. 6. Has met with some great misfortune
since his Debt contracted. 7. Is a great Liar and Deceiver, and suspected to be
a Bankrupt. 8. Does wast his Estate, and intends to defraud his Creditors. 9.
Is a Gamester. 10. Has all the signs of a suspicious Person. 11. Makes use of
many Men to be bound or engaged for him. 12. Engages himself in many business.
13. Is looking out or providing for another Habitation. 14. Is turned Informer.
15. Keeps his Shop shut up. 16. Is a Man of ill life or conversation. 17. Or
has been so formerly. 18. Has been an Offender in Criminal matters. 19.
Lodges his Goods in some secret place. 20. And is packing up to be gone.

But they that can dream of Tyranny and Oppression in our Process of Arrest and
Outlawry, and know not how to prove it, will rather then miscarry in their
design of Metamorphosing our Laws, and putting them into as many new fashions
as the variety (...) vanity of their Cloths and Habits, w^ll, if those
accusations must vanish and never be able to make them any good return, seek
out some other way to alter or abrogate those kind of Law proceedings, and
therefore to pretend that the Statute of 25 E. 3. ca. (...)* giving Process of
Capias and Outlawry in Actions of Debt, is either by the Act of Parliament of
28 E. 3. ca. 3. or 42 E. 3. ca. 1. repealed.

CHAP. XIV. That the Statute of 25 E. 3 ca. 17. which gives Process of Capias
and Bxigen^ in Actions of Debt, and other Actions therein mentioned, is not
repealed, either by the Acts of Parliaments of 28 E. 3. ca. 3. or 42 E. 3. ca.
1. there being no ind^^venim^^ or prejudice to the public good in those kind
of Law proceedings, which might deserve a repeal by those or any other Acts of
Parliament.
WHen it cannot come within the virge of any probability, that the said Statute
of 25 E. 3. ca. 17. should in the same Parliament (those grand Assemblies being
then and long before usually shout, and of no long continuance) be made when
the Statute of 25. E. 3. ca. 4. was made* That none should be taken by Petition
or Suggestion to the King or his Council, 25 E. 3. ca. 4.
but by (...) Indictment, Presentment, or Process made by Writ original. If it
had not been believed to have been consistent with it, or the meaning of our
Magna Charta ca. 29. or if the Statute of 25 E. 3. ca. 17. had been repealed by
the shortly after following Statutes of 28 E. 3. or 4^ E. 3. ca. 1. such a
repeal should not be taken notice of, by those that lived in those times or
near unto them; or that if there had been any grievance found or perceived in
that Statute of 25 E. 3. ca. 17. or that the said Statute of 28 E. 3. had
repealed it, the Statute made by the aforesaid King E. 3. in the 36. year of
his Reign, 36 E. 3. ca. 1.
would have ordained the Confirmation of the great Charler, and the Char^er of
the Forest, and commanded that the other Statutes mode in his time, The Oath
of a Freeman of London, and Acts of Parliament for confirmation of their
Liberties.
and in the time of his Progenitors, be well and surely holden and kept in all
points; or that the Citizens of London, who in their Courts of Justice in their
City, have for so many Centuries of years last past, to their very great
advantages made use of the Process of Arrest as a lawful and beneficial Custom,
and constrained all that were to enjoy the largely comprehensive Freedom of
that City, to take an Oath to maintain the Franchises and Customs thereof,
would have made it their business to get many an Act of Parliament to confirm
them, if they had supposed it to have been prejudicial to them: And that the
People of England should, in so many several Ages since those pretended Acts of
repeal, not only have petitioned for several Acts of Parliament, for Process of
Arrest and Outlawry in several Actions, but through so many past Ages and
Generations Arrest and imprison one another in the way to Justice, and not at
all think themselves guilty of betraying their own Liberties, and never
complain of it: Or that the Justice of the Nation should in all that long
course of time be so sleepy or mistaken, as to continue and put in Execution an
Act of Parliament repealed, and maintain and continue a grievance.

O^ that our Ancestors, who were not all restrained by that Statute of 25 E. 3.
ca. 17. from the former more usual course of proceedings in Actions of Debt, In
Archivis in albo Tur^i London, and in recept. Thesaurat. Scaccarii post 25 E. 3.
by Writs of Summons, Pone, and Distringas (for there were Writs of Summons,
Pone, and Distress made use of in Debt and Account after the making of that
Statute, where there was such a visibility of Estate, as the Sheriff could not
safely return, that the Defendant had nothing whereby he might be summoned (it
having been in Easter Term, Pas 22. E. 1. London rot. 3.
in the 22 year of the Reign of King Edward the 1. declared to be a constant
rule in Law, Quod nullus qui habet terras debet arrestari per Corpus, ad
reddendum compitum set per terras cum habeat sufficientiam. No Man that had
Lands sufficient was to be arrested by his Body, in an Action of Account) as
there may be at this day if the Plaintiffs have a mind unto it, and would
rather proceed by a longer way about then a shorter.

And should of themselves have made an Election of the way of Capias, Arrest or
Outlawry, and continue it for above three hundred and fifty years without any
thing like a complaint against it, if they could have believed that that Act of
Parliament of 25 E. 3. ca. 17. had been repealed, and a long and undeniable
experience had not informed them, that it was a much better and expedite way of
bringing Men to Justice, or that if the Writs of Pone and Distress had been the
better way, the Statute made in the Seventh year of the Reign of King Henry the
Fifth, 7 H. 5. ca. 1.
which was sixty-nine years after, to give Process of Arrest and Outlawry in
Actions or Writs for forging of Charters or Evidences, would have esteemed it
to be for the Common good of the People to have enacted it; or if after the
making of that Statute, the course of Capias, Arrest, and Outlawry had not been
believed to be the most beneficial, the Statute made in the 19th. year of the
Reign of King Henry the Seventh, 19 H. 7. ca. 6.
for giving of Process of Arrest and Outlawry in Actions of the Case, which was
made 84. years after, would have declared the way of Pone and Distress to have
been the Cause of great delays, or that the Act of Parliament made in the 23th.
year of the Reign of King Henry the Eigth, 23 H. 8. ca. 14.
for giving Process of Capias in Writs of Annuity, which was made twenty-eight
years after the making of that Statute, would have said, there were many
delays in Actions of Annuities, because no Writ of Capias did lie in that
Action (Acts of Parliament in those days, and long before and after, having by
our Kings been granted upon the Petitions and Request of their Subjects, and
penned, advised or carefully perused by the Reverend Judges of the Land, and
Council in Law of our Kings and Princes, before they were passed and ratified)
and that so many of our Forefathers, who for so many years and Ages have in
every year been arrested, or voluntarily put in Bail to appear and avoid it,
should be so senseless as not to understand the said Act of Parliament of 2^ E.
3. ca. 17. to have been repealed, if any such thing had been, or deem it to be
a grievance to be compelled to appear in a Court of Justice, or that all the
Plaintiffs in those kind of Actions should be so wicked, as to continue that
course and kind of Process: Trin. 21. Eliz. rot. 113. in Banco Regis.
If they could have understood it to have been a grievance, the Dean and
Chapter of Lincoln would not have prescribed for a Liberty in their Court, to
Arrest in all personal Actions, and the Lieutenant of the Tower of London the
like, nor the Judges have allowed those prescriptions, and all Cities,
Buroughs, and Corporations where they have connusance of Pleas, Old Book of
Entries tit. false Imprisonment fol. 320.
would not upon a nihil habet returned, (for that is so always done of course
in Cities and Corporations to warrant their Arrests) have claimed and exercised
a power to Arrest as well Inhabitants as Foreigners coming thither; or that
the Judges of the Admiralty, in Seafaring and Maritime Causes would have
permitted, as they have anciently done, Arrests to be made upon Debts,
Contracts, Charter parties or the like, or have been allowed to do it, if it
had deserved to have been called a grievance, Welwade Sea-Laws 27. 63.
or that it ought not to have been done by the aforesaid supposed Acts of
Repeal.

And that none of so many thousand, or more then ten hundred thousand
Defendants should by Pleas, Demurrers, or otherwise signify so much, or so
many Advocates, and so many learned Judges, Sergeants, and Sages of the Law,
which have been since the making of that Statute of 25 E. 3. for the giving of
Process of Outlawry in Actions of Debt, should not of themselves have found out
or have sought it from our Kings and their Parliaments some remedies, or would
not have forborne the granting or acting by such kind of Process, if they had
conceived that the Act of Parliament of 25 E. 3. ca. 17. had been replealed, or
that such kind of Process had been a grievance.

And that more then one hundred thirty and seven Parliaments, which have been
since the making of that Statute.

And so many Parliaments and Assemblies of Wise Men, before and at the making
of that Statute, which met only to be wise, and find out fit helps and remedies
for grievances, and things amiss should not foresee it to be a grievance, or be
so careless as not after to procure some Law or Act of Parliament, to give the
People ease in it, or a fuller notice of the repeal thereof.

When in the Parliament of the 38th. year of the Reign of King Edward 3. the
Commons did pray, 38 E. 3. ca. 1.
that the King would not grant Protections, whereby Men could not recover their
Debts; which was as they alleged, A thing to the destruction of the People,
and against Common right.

Or that in so many Petitions in all those so many Parliaments for the redress
of Grievances, made and committed by Sheriffs, Petitions Parl. 38 E. 3.
Under-Sheriffs, and their Bailiffs, and that all Estates might enjoy their
Liberties, if no Law be to the contrary saving to all Men their rights, and the
justly denied Petitions against the payment of Fines upon original Writs,
issuing out of the Chancery; nor in that of the Commons in Parliament, in the
46th. year of the Reign of that King, Rot. Parl. 46. E. 3.
that Writs of Trespass in the Court of Common Pleas, although long before then
used, might be made as well by that Court as by the Court of King Bench; for
that the Court of Kings Bench was removeable at the Kings pleasure; and that
the Great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest, and all other Statutes made
by the King and his Progenitors, for the amendment of the Realm and
tranquillity and ease of his People, might be kept and duly put in Execution in
all points* Or in the Petitions of the Commons of the County of Kent, to that
King in the Parliament, Rot. Parl. 50. E. 3
in the 50th. year of his Reign, against his Officers of the Castle of Dover,
for arresting by their Catchpoles out of their Jurisdiction; or in the before
mentioned great Complaint of the Clergy, made in Parliament upon the death of
Robert de Hauley, in the 2d. year of the Reign of King Richard the 2d. slain at
the High Altar in the Church of Westminster Abbey, when he being arrested and
pursued by Bailiffs, had taken Sanctuary there, and the great debate thereupon
before the King, 7 H. 4. ca. 13.
or at the making of the Act of Parliament, in the Seventh year of the Reign of
King Henry the Fourth, that impotent persons outlawed might make their
Attorneys, and the Acts of Parliament, made in the 10th. and 18th. years of the
Reign of Henry the 6th. upon complaints, 10 H. 6. and 18 H. 6. ca. 9.
That Men were outlawed, and could not know where to find either the Plaintiffs
or their Attorneys, and remedies ordained; Or in the Petition in the
Parliament, in the 33th. year of the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, Inter
Petitiones Parl. 33 H. 6. n. 57.
against the multitude of Attorneys in the City of Norwich, and Counties of
Norfolk and Suffolk, for their inciting and stirring up the People to suites in
Law, there should be no mention of that supposed grievance by the Writs of
Capias and Process of Outlawry, if it had then been thought or believed to have
been one.

And that in the thirty times petitioning in several Parliaments of our Kings
and Princes, for the Confirmation of Magna Carta (which as to that part of it,
in the Chapter or Article twenty-nine, is the most excellent and the best of
all our Laws. The People of England should not understand the aforesaid Act of
Parliament, made in the 25th. year of the Reign of King Edward the 3. for
giving Process of Arrest and exigent in Actions of Debts, and other Actions
therein mentioned (if it could be interpreted, to be any violation of it) or
that in all their Petitions for redress of grievances, and procuring of good
Laws to be made, there appears nothing at all to have been alleged, That by
the Common Law the Person of a Debtor was not arrestable or that there is no
positive Statute Law in force, for the continuing of the Capias and Exigent,
against Persons in Debt and merely Civil causes, since the fancied repeal of
the said Act of Parliament of 25 E. 3. ca. 17. by the said Statute of 28 and 42
E. 3.

But they who are so loath to part with their causeless affrights or are so
unwilling to loose the content of being the Founders of a change, or alteration
in the Body politic, be it never so dangerous or of most certain evil
consequences, and are willing enough that their Fellow Subjects, of whom they
pretend to take so much care, should be at the trouble, hazard, and charge of
the experiments, may do better to understand, or if they cannot, give leave to
others to help them to understand.

That the purport intent, and true, proper and genuine signification of the
words of our Magna Carta ca. 29th. was to secure the People, that the King
might not take or imprison any Man, Nisi per legale judicium parium suorum vel
per legem terrae, which if extended to the People, in their affairs one with
another, and made to be as obligatory and binding unto them, as it is and ought
to be to the King, can have no other just interpretation then what Sir Edward
Coke has given us in his Comment thereupon (published after his death, Cokes
2. part. Institutes 50, and 51.
in the later end of March 1641. or the beginning of the year 1642. Which is,
says he, as the Statute of 37 E. 3. ca. 18. expounds it by due Process of
Law; and what that kind of Process was, has been already determined and
proved, to be as well by Writs and Process of Arrest, as by Summons, Pone and
Distress, though the latter, as the condition and course of the affairs of the
Nation then stood, was much more frequent and usual, and it appears by that
part of Magna Carta ca. 29. and the Exception therein, that there was a Process
or proceeding in Law, besides the Legale Judicium, or Trial by Peers or Jury;
and the Process where Defendants were not willing to come to Judgment, and
have their Controversies determined (which but in very seldom Cases never was
or is likely to be otherwise, there was and will ever be a necessity of
compelling them by Process to appear in Judgment, when they delayed or refused
it: For as the great and learned Grotius has said upon another occasion,
Posthuma Grotii in Epistola quadam.
The Liberties claimed from a Prince, ought to be such as competere possint
subditis, might accord with his Superiority and their duty of Subjects; for our
so eager clamours of Liberty, cannot certainly be so nailed to any of their
extravagant opinions and desires, as to induce them to think it either to be
lawful, rational or consistent with the Great Charter, to deny the King or his
subordinate Courts of Justice, a power to Imprison any that shall be guilty of
Contempt, against His Person or Authority, and to constrain them to appear in
Judgment.

For the way which the Judges and Interpreters of our Laws have hitherto used,
in the Construction and understanding of Parliaments (nothing appearing to the
contrary) has been an Inquiry into the occasion and purport of them, commonly
expressed in the preambles and reason thereof, and into the sense as well as
the words of them, for the preamble of an Act of Parliament, says Dyer,
sometimes Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, is the Key to open
the minds of the Makers of the Act, and of the mischiefs which they did intend
to remedy; Plowdens Comment. 363, 369, and 469.
and a Man ought not to dwell upon the letter, nor to think that when he has
the letter on his part, that he has the Law on his part, say the Judges in the
Resolution of the Case between Easton and Studde, in regard that the rule in
the expounding of Statutes, is to search out the mind of the Lawmakers, what
Construction they would have made of it, Ibid. 46, and 467.
if they were living: And that Acts of Parliament ought to be understood, by a
reasonable Construction to be collected out of the words thereof, according to
the true intention and meaning of the Makers of the Act; that Statutes in the
affirmative do not regularly take away Statutes precedent in the affirmative,
Cokes 5. Report. 2. part 5, and 6.
unless in some special Cases and Statutes referring to other Statutes, do not
make any alteration in Law, but unto the points unto which they do Refer, Cokes
3. Relat. Case del fines.
nor does a latter Act with Negative words, say our Laws, take away a former,
if it be not contrary in matter: And the Parliaments of this Nation have
always taken care to use, express and clear words of repealing any Statutes,
which they intended to Repeal by plain and certain mention thereof, with the
times wherein they were made and sometimes repealed, but a part of some former
Acts by a new Act of Parliament, and enlarged and proceeded further then the
former Acts did extend unto, as in the Act of Parliament, concerning Servants
and Artificers wages, made in the fifth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. 5
Eliz. ca. 4.


The words and meaning of the Statute 28 E. 3. ca. 3. being no more then, 28 E.
3. ca. 3.
That no man of what Estate or Condition that he be shall be, put out of Land
or Tenement, nor taken, nor imprisoned, nor dis inherited, nor put to death
without being brought to answer by due Process of the Law.

And in that of 42 E, 3 ca. 1. It is assented and accorded; 42 E 3. ca. 1.
that the great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest be holden and kept in
all points, and if any Statute be made to the contrary that shall be holden for
none. And being a confirmation in general of all the thirty-seven Points,
Articles, or Chapters of Magna Carta, granted in the Ninth year of the Reign of
King Henry the Third (some of which did concern the King in his profits) did
neither only intend that particular Chapter of Magna Carta ca. 29. to be made
void or repealed, or declare that what was done, or to be done by lawful
Judgment of Men by their Peers (which could not be without some kind of Process
or proceedings then in use) or that what was done or to be done by the Law of
the Land, should be repealed as contrary thereunto; but did so not at all then
intend to do it, or to affirm the due Process of the Law to be contrary unto
Magna Carta, either as to that twenty-nineth Chapter, or to any other, the
Points, Articles, or Chapters of Magna Carta.

As that some of the People being at the time of the making of the said Act of
Parliament of 42 E. 3. ca. 3. or not long before too busy in Arresting,
Imprisoning and vexing one another by false Accusations, made to the King and
his Council that Chapter or Branch of 42 E. 3. ca. 3. was made for the redress
thereof, and for the good Government of the Commons, as that Act does import,
having these words: To eschew the mischiefs and damage done by false Accusers,
which oftentimes have made their Accusations more for revenge and singular
benefit, then for the profit of the King, or his People, of which accused
Persons some have been taken, and sometimes caused to come before the Kings
Council by Writ, and otherwise upon grievous pain against the Law: It is
assented and accorded, That no Man be put to answer without presentment before
the Justices, or matter of Record, or by due Process or Writ original, according
to the old Law of the Land; and if any thing from henceforth be done to the
contrary, it shall be void in the Law and holden for error.

Both of which Statutes will be best expounded by Sir Edward Coke, Coke
Comment. super Magna Chart.
who in his Exposition and Comment. upon Magna Carta ca. 29. and all the other
parts thereof (for out of that most commendable Law those two Acts of
Parliament of 28 E. 3. ca. 3. and 42 E. 3. ca. 3. do seem to have been drawn,
and are but as Confirmations of it) says that by the Law of the Land, is to be
understood, the Common Law, Statute Law, and Customs of England; which though
they be in the Negative, have no reference or contrary matter unto that of 25
E. 3. ca. 17. and do not prohibit the former allowed, and due Process of the
Law, or declare them to be contrary to Magna Carta, or any Article or point
thereof, nor have any express words, or so much as any preamble, which may
signfie any purpose that they had to repeal it; for all that is forbidden by
those two Statutes of supposed repeal, is to prevent the mischiefs complained
of by suggestions to the King and his Council, and that no man be disinherited,
put to death, or out of his Land taken, imprisoned, or brought to answer, but
by due Process ^f the Law, according to the old Law of the Land. 37 E. 3. ca. 18.
And the Statute of 37 E. 3. ca. 18. giving an order of pursuing a Suggestion
made unto the King, does mention the great Charter, and the words therein
contained, That no Man be taken, nor imprisoned, nor put out of his Freehold
without Process of the Law. For if our Records and Law Books, and the reason
thereof, and all that has been learned and believed hitherto do not fail us,
those Statutes or either of them cannot be interpreted, to intend to take away
any lawful and necessary Arrests, and Imprisonments in Actions of Trespass,
which were in use long before the making of Magna Carta, or the arresting or
restraining of the persons and liberties of Defendants, in Actions of Debt and
the like; or for a Contempt of the King or his Courts of Justice, in not
appearing when they were summoned or cited, or when they had no visible Estate
to satisfy, or were likely to fly or run away, the true intent and meaning of
those Statutes of 28 E. 3. and 42 E. 3. tending rather to confirm and establish
that Act of 25 E. 3. ca. 17. then to repeal or take it away, the main scope or
purpose of them being only to restrain any arbitrary Government, or any Lawless
proceedings of the People one against the other; for it is impossible by any
sense or reasonable Construction of those Statutes, to conclude any the least
design in them, or either of them to take away or alter a Law or Custom of the
Nation, which was not then at all so much as complained of, when by forbidding
to do that which was against the Law, they must of necessity be understood, to
allow of that which was the Law or consistent with it.

For it has been said and never denied, to be a rule in our Common Law as well
as in the Civil Law, that Exceptio firmat regulam in Casubus non exceptis, The
exception or saving does preserve and allow of that to be the Law which is
excepted, otherwise if the exception should be (as certainly it is not)
nugatory and serves for nothing, the meaning of our Magna Carta it self, and
all those very many Statutes of Confirmation afterward enacted, must be (as
they can never be rightly taken to be) that be the matter or cause Civil or
Criminal, Treason, Murder or Felony, no Man is at all to be disseised, or put
out of his Lands, arrested, imprisoned, or compelled to answer, and the King,
who is sworn to administer Justice to his Subjects, must by Magna Carta it self
be denied, and debarred the use of means to do it, and the People thereby put
into a condition not to be able to obtain Justice one against another.

And if no Laws concerning Process in Debt, or other personal Actions, which
have been enacted or allowed by Acts of Parliament, subsequent to those before
mentioned, and supposed repealing Acts of Parliament, made in the 28. and 42 E.
3. or derived by necessary deduction from reason (which ought to be the Soul
and Constituting part of all Laws) shall not be allowed or taken for Laws, the
Parliaments of England (wherein all manner of grievances, and many times very
small and inconsiderable, were seldom omitted to be complained of or petitioned
against) have by making of the Statute of 7 H. 5. for giving Process of Arrest
and Capias in Actions of forging of Charters of 9 H. 7. in Actions of the Case
and 23 H. 8. in Actions of Annuity not only not remedied but enacted
grievances, and all our other Laws which have been since made, concerning the
taking or imprisoning of Men's Bodies, in Actions of Debt or other Civil and
personal Actions, or been put in Execution have been no other then abuses, and
transgressions of the Law, and all that so many learned conscientious and
Reverend Judges of the Law, and sworn to judge according to it, have since
those times done or permitted to be done, in pursuance of those latter Laws,
have been but as so many great mistakings to the oppression of the People.

And the Parliament of 3 Car. primi, whereof the very learned Seldom, and that
great Lawyer Sir Edward Coke, and many very worthy Men and Lovers of our
English Laws and Liberties were Members (some of which had not long before made
themselves Prisoners to secure a pretended Liberty) would have been guilty of a
great oversight and inadvertency, in not getting better Provisions in the Act
of Parliament, made upon that which was called the Petition of Right, wherein
that aforesaid part of Magna Carta ca. 29. and the Statutes of 37 E. 3. ca. 9.
17 R. 2. ca. 6. and the very Act of 28 E. 3. ca. 3. now so much insisted upon,
are confirmed. And the Acts of Parliament of 37 E. 3. ca. 18. 38 E 3. ca. 9. 42
E. 3. ca. 3. and quoted in the margent of the said Act, are declared to be good
Laws and Statutes of the Realm; and it was ordained, That no Offender, of what
kind soever, be exempted from the proceedings to be used, and punishments to be
inflicted by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm.

All those Acts of Parliament being then expounded and understood, to be only
intended against the Imprisonment of Men, by the King or his Council, without
cause shown; and the same Parliament did then procure diverse Acts of
Parliament to be repealed, but not that of 25 E. 3. ca. 17. which neither was
repealed in that nor any other Parliament, in Terms or words intelligible, or
by implication or otherwise, and did never yet deserve to be so since the
making thereof.

Nor would that Parliament, laboring so much for liberty, have at the same
time allowed of that Act of Parliament of 25 E. 3. ca. 17. for the Process of
Capias, and Exigent or Outlawry in Actions of Debt, if it had been a grievance,
or not understood as it ought, to be a legal and necessary part of the Laws of
the Land, or have omitted so often and daily happening Concernments of
themselves and their Posterity, if they could have thought that way of Proces^
and proceedings at Law, either was or could have been a grievance, when as they
did then so much believe all the grievances of the Nation, to be by that
abundantly satisfactory Act of Parliament, made upon that Petition of Right, to
be banished and their fears quieted, as they caused public rejoycings and
Bon-fires to be made for it.

And if it had not been so understood, by the Reverend and Learned Judges, and
Sages of the Law, who were then in being, and have been since entrusted with
the Administration of Justice, such Process and proceedings would never
certainly have been made when the Petition of Right prayed, That in the things
aforesaid all his Majesty's Officers, should serve him according to the Laws
and Statutes of this Realm, as they would tender the honor of His Majesty, and
prosperity of the Kingdom; and the King in his answer thereunto, and giving it
the life and power of a Law, did will that right should be done according to
the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and that the Statutes be put in Execution,
that His Subjects may have no cause to complain of any Wrong or Oppression,
Petition of Right in 3 Car. primi.
contrary to their just Rights and Liberties.

For it must be a more then an ordinary Hypochondriacal Melancholy, that can
persuade any Man to think, that if the Process of Arrest or Outlawry could by
any foresight or prospect have been believed, to have been either a grievance,
or illegal, or any Seminary of ill Consequences, that ever to be lamented
unhappy Parliament begun in November 1640. would in that fatal Remonstrance of
theirs, published to the People the 15th. day of December following, wherein
they were so willing to amass every thing that might but look like a grievance
of the People, and were so effascinated in their evil purposes, as they crowded
in amongst them many essentials and necessaries of Government, have omitted
such an important and often happening grievance (if any could with any color
of Law or reason have believed it; or that in the nineteen high and mighty
Propositions sent by them unto him in June 1642. or in the Message or Commit
of the Lords and Commons then remaining at Westminster, sent unto him at Oxford
in Anno 1643. by the Earl of Northumberland, William Peirpont Esquire, and
others; or in the Treaty and Propositions at Vxbridge for Peace, betwixt the
King and that misnamed Parliament in the year 1644. such a necessary, if it had
been thought to have been one, should have been neglected; or in the Message of
the Lords and Commons, in the then so called Parliament, sent unto him when he
was a Prisoner at Holimby in the year 1647. with propositions for Peace,
nothing should have been desired to prohibit Arrests; but on the contrary an
Act of Parliament was required, for confirmation of all Customs, Charters,
Liberties, and Franchises of the City of London, which for many hundred of
years before had been approved: Or that in the Bills and Propositions sent unto
Him in the same year to the Isle of Wight, when he was there a close Prisoner:
Vide Act of Common Council.
Or in an Act or Ordinance, made by the Lord Major and Common Council of London
in the year 1660. for the better regulating of that Cities Courts at
Guild Hall, in which notice was taken of their ancient Customs, and diverse
abuses committed by Sergeants at Mace and their Yeomen, in arresting of Men,
there should be no mention made of any original Grievances or Illegality by or
in the Process of Arrest, nor any orders made or desired to be made against it.

Until therefore this invisible and untelligible repealing Act of the Statute
of 25 E 3. ca. 17. shall be pleased to appear and show it self, the Founders of
that fancy may do well to build no further upon it, but silence their causeless
outcries against it: And when such or the like imaginations shall offer
themselves, think rather that Acts of Parliament (according to the advice and
opinion of the Judges in Doctor Foster's case) which have been established with
so much solemnity, wisdom, Cokes 11. Reports Doctor Fosters case.
gravity, and universal consent for the good of the Weal public, ought not by
any strained construction or ambiguous words (if there had any been) in any
subsequent Act to be laid aside, disused, or abrogated; and that doubtful
aequivocal words (if there had been any) ought according to the rule in
Gregory's Case, Cokes 6. Reports.
to be interpreted in the better and more likely sense.

And not trouble themselves as they have lately done for before the year 1640
and 1641. (when Liberty ran mad, and the Factious part of the People did too
much read the Books of Plunder and Sequestration, and admired the Models and
Contrivances of Hugh Peter's, Huson the Cobbler, Pride the Drayman, and every
Mechanic and Tradesman, and every Mercenary Red-coat Rebel-Souldier, who would
by his indigested conceptions be a Solon or Licurgus) they did not to subvert,
as they endeavored to do, our long experimented and approved Laws and Customs,
to make room for their own ungodly advantages, and sordidly ignorant
alterations, and at the same time allow the Caption and Horning of that by them
Conquered and once illegally Covenanting Scotland to be lawful.

Nor vex themselves and others, as they have done with the Chymeras and
phancies of that never to be found repealed Statute of 25 E. 3. cap. 17. and
their so much mistaken Gorgons head, and affrights of their Liberties being
likely to be lost by that or other our Laws, when our Laws and the due
Execution thereof are and have been by our Kings and Princes, and their just
authority the only means under God to preserve them.

Or be so over-lavish in shooting their Bolts, in undertaking to assert, That
England is impoverished more then a Million of Money Sterling every year by
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Sergeants, Marshals-men, Proces-makers, Habeas Corpus,
Rules, Writers, etc. (As a late Anonimous Champion of those kind of Liberty
mongers terms them) for which he would decoy as many inconsiderate People as he
could, into an opinion and belief, that the Creditor is not the better one Penny
for it; which is as impossible to be proved or be lieved, as that Bears are
enabled by Nature to fly and usually do it; or that the Mountains of Mountains
the Alps, those highest Hills of the Christian World, do usually at every
Jubilee leap to Rome, to obtain an Indulgence or Pardon from that Holy Father,
for being so high-minded.

And what ever far lesser Sum of Money those Officers Fees (which as to the
Process-makers are very small and dearly enough earned) do amount unto yearly,
it will be very difficult for that Man of confidence, whosoever he be to prove
that none or very many of the Creditors did not receive satisfaction of their
Debts and charges, or more then a Penny, or were not the better for it (for the
Defendant, where there is any ability to answer and pay them, do most commonly
bear the burden of them) and that the Defendants Charges in a year do amount to
a Million of Money Sterling, or any such vast Sums of Money, as his monstrous
and incredibile guess, bewixt sleeping and waking, has calculated it, and will
be as wide of any truth or probability as if he had said, That he had in a
Foreign Country seen two Phaenixes roasted, and brought to eat in a dish, and
had been in a colder Climat, where the extremity of cold was so great as the
words spoken over night did freeze, and were legibly to be read in the Air the
next Morning.

And those Sons of Rapine, who are so given to change, and do make it their
business to hunt our Laws, like the Ermyns for the booty of their skins, may
better employ their time in a sad and serious repentance of that dirt, and many
scandals which they have most injuriously flung upon them, and in throwing
amongst the People those, though foolish, yet infectious tales and opinions,
that There are now ten thousand Men in Prison for Debt, and that the Process of
Outlawry have done more mischief to the People of England, then the Writs of
Capias (which neither he nor any other can ever prove to have been primarily or
causally and per se guilty of it) or then the Bills of Middlesex or Writs of
latitat, which must either be done in his humor or natural of telling rampant
or impossible tales, or on purpose to cast those legal Process and proceedings,
into an Odium or hatred, and will appear to be as much misled by his ignorance,
as he was before in his overhasty Arithmeticque, when he adventures to say,
that a noble Man, by being outlawed, is made incapable to sit in the house of
Peers, a Clergyman may forfeit his Benefice, or a Lawyer be made incapable of
pleading at the Bar, when our Laws do remember no such matters; and a Noble man
and Peer of Parliament cannot in any Civil action, or ordinary Trespass by our
Laws be outlawed; and although some other Persons may by abuse or error happen
to be outlawed, when they should not be outlawed, and by some evil accident
never be able to find the Plaintiff or his Attorney, whereby to recover his
damages, yet it is so seldom as it is very rare; and our Laws as they did never
undertake to prophecy, or to have a prescience or certain knowledge of things
to come, so they never provided against raro contingentia, things seldom
happening, or of little consequence, neither can our or any other Laws be able
at all times, to prevent all the tricks and evil actions, which the
deceitfulness of men's hearts do too often put in practice. And that nameless
Author may, upon his better acquaintance with our Laws, inform himself, and
those for whom he so much busieth himself, that if an Outlawry should, as he
surmiseth, be indirectly gained, the Court out of which it proceeds do, when
discovered, never fail severely to punish such an Offender, and give what
remedies they can unto those that do suffer by it; and that there is a Statute,
which was made in the Tenth year of the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, 10. and
18. H. 6. ca. 9.
and renewed in the 18th. year of the said Kings Reign, yet unrepealed to
prevent and remedy it.

And is as much out of the way when he says, That Tenures in Villenage were
repealed by Act of Parliament, Rot. Parl. 5 R. 2.
when in the Parliament of the fifth year of the Reign of King Richard the
Second, the Manumissions of Villains, which had been extorted from that Kingby
Wat Tiler and his rout of Rebels, were declared to be void, and the wearing out
of that Tenure, in the many Intestine Wars and Troubles of the Nation, and the
favor and indulgence of our later Kings and Princes, and the Nobility and
Gentry of this Kingdom, is to be ascribed more thereunto, and a desuetude and
length of time, then unto any thing else, which has so washed many a jolly
Gentleman that would be, and Men of great Estates, whose Extractions and
Originals (were at the first lodged in those Tenures) in the Waters of Lethe
and Oblivion, as there are now very few or none to be found of them.

And is as little to be excused when he says, That the Mortmaines of Abbeys
were taken away by Acts of Parliament, unless that he means by the total
dissolution of them, which happened long after those Mortmaines, and is as wide
from the mark, in his impertinent Account of the Money or profits of the
Bishops Courts, as he is of any proof or certainty, that they are a burden, and
can hardly instance any one Attorney (but certainly not many) that has in one
Writ of Privilege, named or sued one hundred Defendants, and held them to
special Bail, whereas such a vexation would have been remedied by an Appeal
unto any Judge of the Court, out of which such Writ issued, who had by the Law
a power in his discretion, to order whether any special Bail should be given,
as the case required.

CHAP. XIV. That the Nation has not been base or slavish, ever since the
making of the said Act of Parliament of 25 E. 3. ca. 17.
ANd is to prove, when he can, that many Men have languished to death for fear
of an imprisonment; for some one or few melancholic Persons, may in their
retirements, sad apprehensions or multiplied fears, have endangered their
healths, which makes not the Justice or Laws of the Nation to be any more
guilty or cause of it, or deserve to be abrogated: Then the sacred Scripture is
to be blamed, for that some Persons have by the reading of it, or hearing of it
preached, been so disturbed with an affright of conscience, as they have been
distracted, or laid violent hands upon themselves.

Or that His late Majesty of glorious Memory (if not misinformed by the
concealed Author of such frivolous, feigned and false complaints, or by some of
his Proselites) had so deep a sense of his Subjects sufferings, by such Writs
and Process as he intended the enlargement of Prisoners for Debt, and the
abolishing of all Arrests and Outlawries for the future, by the then
Parliament, if he could have received any recompense for the remitting of all
forfeitures, and other profits arising to His Crown; nor does give us any
evidence for such wild imaginations, nor ever will be able to do it; or that
the Nation has been base and slavish since the said Act of Parliament of 25 E.
3. ca. 17. and other Acts of Parliament since made, which our Laws, Records,
and Histories; will abundantly confute, and our Neighbor Nations envying our
Glory, Freedom, Peace and Plenty, may decry as an ungrateful and horrid
falsity, deserving to be had in everlasting detestation.

Unto which bundle of untruths, and feverish deliriums, are likewise to be
added those giddy Assertions; that the People are unsecure in their Estates,
and that their good and welfare depends upon their being manumitted and
enfranchised in their persons, and made Noble and free by Abolishing of the
Process of Arrest and Outlary. And that such an Act of Grace will be accounted
by all goodmen and their posterities, a sufficient recompense for all the
Subjects past sufferings, and be the greatest mercy that ever any King of
England extended to his Subjects, since they were a Nation.

Which should it take effect, may be as little successful to the pretended
Advocat and his Party, and the Trade and Interest of the Kingdom; as the Eagles
carrying in another Case, the burning Cole in the Apologue to her Nest: And
until they could have been sure of a better, which they are never like to be,
might have forborne their Snarling and Barking at our Laws, of which that Act
of Parliament of 25. E. 3. ca. 17. Was accounted to be a part, which until the
Distemper which seized upon a seditious part of the people, in the unhappy year
of 1641. were* so well beloved and deservedly commended, as Thirning, Coke in
prefat' 8. Report.
Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, publicly declared in the 12th.
year of the Reign of King Henry the 4th. that the Laws of England were in the
Reign of King Edward the 3d. In the greatest perfection, that ever they were
the Judges Sage, and learneds and the pleading, the greatest Honor and
Ornament of the Law, were in that Kings Reign of that excellency as those of
former times were but feeble unto them. Fortescue de laudibus legum Angliae.
Sir John Fortescue Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Kings Bench, in
the Reign of King Henry the sixth, by comparing of our Laws and Government,
with the Laws and Government of France and other Nations, has in his learned
Book! Written on that Subject, proved and demonstrated that our Laws of
England, Do deserve the Pre-eminence over all other Laws, and do more secure
the People in their Estates, Liberties, and Properties then those of France, or
any other Nation.

Queen Elizabeth, who made it her constant and usual Charge to her Judges, to
do Justice, and not to disturb or delay it. Governed her people by her Laws,
in Plenty, Peace, and Prosperity, to the Worlds admiration, Terror of her
Enemies, and the Comfort and Support of her Friends and Allies; did so after
her death Reign and live in her peoples hearts, as they in or about London have
to this time, from the Coronation or beginning of her happy Reign, now above
one hundred and sixteen years ago, in a grateful acknowledgment of it, never
omitted to Celebrate that day, with the Ringing of Bells, some legacies having
been given in some places also, Cokes 2. Relat in prefat.
for the perpetuating thereof; King James had a great care of the expedition
and execution of the Laws, in whose peaceable and plentiful Reign, ten years
have passed without any Tax or Assessment of the people: And King Charles his
Son, made a great part of his Coin to wear the Inscription, that he fought
against a Rebellious part of his Subjects, to maintain the Laws, privileges of
Parliament, and liberties of the people, and dyed a Martyr, because he would
not betray, or deliver them up to a Lawless, unlimited, and ever to be dreaded
Arbitrary power.

So as that seducing Author, might have found a better employment, then to
throw dirt at our Laws before he understands them, and might have been able to
have given a better account of his time, if he had followed the advice of Sir
Edward Coke; Who was so much a welwiller to the Process of Arrest and Utlary, as
whilst he was Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, he did never dislike
or refuse the putting his name and Test to such kind of Writs, under the Kings
Seal entrusted to his custody; and being afterward made Lord Chief Justice of
the Court of Kings Bench, had so good an opinion of the Process of Arrest, and
the necessity and usefulness thereof, as that to maintain and support the Writs
of Latitat and Bills of Midlesex in Actions of Debt, and other personal Actions
then too often made by that Court, which had no Jurisdiction or Conusans
thereof; but in Case of a Defendants present imprisonment, or of privilege of
some of their Members to hold Pleas in such kind of actions, he feigned a
prescription to be made and used in the declarations thereupon, that the
Defendant was in Custodia Marr' Marescalli Curiae and actually a Prisoner, when
he neither was so at the time of the making of the said Writs, or the time of
the Defendants giving Bond for his appearance to the Sheriff, or at the time of
the Plaintiffs declaring against him, as he did publicly declare in Print,
That every man ought, next to his duty to God and his King, to yield a due
reverence and obedience to the Common Laws of England, for that of all Laws
humane they were most equal, most certain, of great antiquity, least delay,
most beneficial, and easy to be observed; And That he could defend them
against any Man, that is not malicious without understanding, and make it
manifest to any Man of judgment and indifferency, by proofs pregnant and
demonstrations, and by Records and testimonies luculent and irrefragable.

Which just and due value and estimation of our Laws may well be credited, when
if a Jury of the Subjects of our Neighbor Nations, Kings and Princes, or of
the Republique of Holland, that Corporation of Kings, were impannelled and
fitted with the knowledge, and understanding of the excellency of them, they
could not either as to the imposing or payment of Taxes, or to any other
particulars, refuse to give a Verdict upon Oath, that our Laws and Customs do
in their perfection, and right reason generally far excel those by which they
are governed, and that the Subjects of England and Wales are by the happiness
of a well tempered Monarchy, and our Laws as secure from any danger of
arbitrary power as any people under Heaven.

And he would find it to be a difficulty insuperable to ptocure our Merchants
of England, or any of those who do undertake to insure the hazardous adventures
of those that do go or send to Sea, and see the wonders of the deep and
adventure their personal Estates upon the choleric waves thereof, not seldom
accompanied with humerous and raging winds, to give him an assurance and
certainty, that the people shall not be ruined by that his goodly indigested
project, which in its folly and inconveniences, as to the credit, reputation
and Justice of the Nation, exceeds that of Jack Cade, that great Master of
Ignorance, who had persuaded his Rable-rout to believe, that it would be an
excellent piece of Reformation, and much for the good of the people, to
suppress all learning and dispatch all business and affairs by the help only
of the Score and the Tally.

And will howsoever be as uncertain of the success, which none but mad Men, and
such as the Turks and Men of Mecha do usually adore, can believe to be
answerable to the end of public good; as he may sooner adventure to make an
Affidavit, if any credit could be given unto it, of the possession infallible
of the imaginary Elixir or Philosophers Stone, the only Essay of the gaining
whereof, has undone and emptied the Purses and Estates of many more learned
then ever he will be, then that the People of England have either lived in
Slavery since the making of that Statute of 25. E. 3. ca. 17. or that there
will such an happiness and mercy arrive or redound, as he pretends unto them,
by the abolishing of the Process of Arrest and Outlawry, when seven parts of
eight, the whole to be divided into no more, shall be ruined in their present
Estate, and future hopes of a better for want of credit and trust: And all the
Men of Money lent out and trusted, which are the smaller number, shall be in
danger enough of loosing it; And the Freeholders of Lands, which
comparatively, are far the smaller part of the Nation, shall be only the Men,
and perhaps not half, or a quarter of them, that may be trusted or compelled to
appear to any Actions of Debt, or for Money which shall be commenced or brought
against them; And the Trade of the Nation which is now not so much outward as
it either should or ought to be, shall be very little stocked, or driven with
ready Money for want of trust, or such a Process as may with any certainty, or
expedition compel the performance of it.

Or that His late or now Majesty, when our Kings and Princes were wont in many
of their Writs and Rescripts, to acknowledge that they were Debitores
Justitiae, Debtors to their people in matters of Justice, and Astricti, bound
and obliged unto it by their Coronation Oaths, could ever think it to be
agreeable to their interests, or correspondent to their Oaths, and other
obligations to God and Man, to throw the Justice of the Land, with which they
have been by God entrusted, into a Chaos and confusion, to gratify the humors
of a smali or inconsiderable number of his Subjects, the quondam Rebels, and
most factious and ignorant part of them, and ruin the multitude, who are as
much committed to their cares as the other, Ne cum parti alicui placeant
reliquas deserant, Least when they seek to please a few, they do forsake and
abandon those who are much the major part, and greater number.

Howsoever let Sir Edward Coke say and write all that he can, in the never to
be denied just praises and commendations of our Laws, those that without any
cause or knowledge do too much malign and hate them, adore a resolved
infatuation, and believe their Fort of Phansies to be impregnable, and out of
the danger of any Assaults, or being taken, will by their good wills, rather
then forsake their designs, and the hopes they have of some new employments,
oblige and tie him to his former mistaken opinions, delivered in the aforesaid
Sir William Herberts Case, and likewise in his Comment* upon Magna Carta ca.
29. That the Imprisonment of the body for Debt, unless in the King Case, was
not by the Common Law before the making of the Statute of 25 E. 3. ca. 17.
although in all his Reports and Comments, and other his learned Writings, he
has not at all inveighed against the Process of Arrest and Outlawry in Actions
of Debt, or other personal Actions, or declared or made any mention, that they
were either illegal or a grievance: And when he said, That Imprisonment of the
body for Debt, unless in the Kings Case, was not before the making of the
aforesaid Act of Parliament, did no where say, that it was not before that
time, upon Contempts of Courts of Justice, or the Writs or Mandates thereof, or
upon a probability of a Defendants running away; and are the more pertinatious
in it by Sir Edward Coke's being so much enamored on a Manuscript, called the
Mirror of Justice, which as to the Copy, which he follows and cites in his
aforesaid Comments upon Magna Carta, and that so called Mirror of Justice,
which was afterward printed and published in the year one thousand six hundred
forty-six, by William Hughs of Grayes-Inn Esquire, Flagranti bello, when the
Laws and Liberties of the People were by a wicked Rebellion, under a pretense
of Reformation of Religion for some years before endeavored, to have been
destroyed, and said to be translated out of an old French Copy, which has been
justly suspected, and in many important matters proved to be fictitious, and to
Men of Learning, and those that have traced the paths or fields of Learning and
Manuscripts, and observed the contrariety, omissions, additions,
transcriptions, mistakings, interpolations, annotations, impostures and words,
therein creeping out of the margent into the Text; and those many counterfeit
Books and Manuscripts, which even in the primitive times of the Church and
after Ages, have been imposed upon Posterity, and too often are and may be
seen; will administer no matter of wonder.

They therefore who do so cherish and delight in the novelty of opinions, and
are most pleased with those which are likeliest to answer their expectations of
gain and profit, or may serve to engage the protection and favor of some
hopeful and prevailing Party and Faction, may do an Act of Justice to
themselves and others, to pause a while and look a little more, into the
aforesaid opinions of Sir Edward Coke, although he must be acknowledged to have
been a very great Rabbi in our Laws, and consider well the Grounds, Authorities
and Reasons, upon which he has founded them, before they do Jurare in verba
Magistri, and espouse or build upon them.

CHAP. XV. An Examination of the opinions of Sir Edward Coke, in his Report of
the said Sir William Herberts Case, touching the Process of Arrest used in our
Laws, and the many Errors appearing in the Book or Manuscript, called the
Mirror of Justice, and the fictitious matters and relations mentioned therein.
FOr although in Criminalibus and Capitalibus causis, in Criminal and Capital
causes, an Arrest or real Citation, as the Civil Lawyers call it, is and has
ever been used by the Laws of God, Nature and Nations: There shall not be such
gentle Process or Proceedings, by way of Attachment as is usual in other Cases,
but such Malefactors are presently to be arrested, and the Goal or Prison is to
be their Sureties, until they defend or clear themselves; yet* those kind of
necessary proceedings can have no other original or ground to support or
warrant them, but what proceeds from the before recited grounds or causes, or
some of them; because until the Fact be tried, it is but an accusation, and not
always so much as a probability, but a change or suspicion that it was done by
him that is accused, and there will be always a magis and minus, and variatioe
of Circumstances in such kind of Offenses, which may either lessen or heighten
them; Nor do those Rules which are given by Bracton* for the reason of Arrests
or Restraints of liberty in personal Actions before judgment, that a Habeas
Corpus, which amounts in effect to a Capias or Restraint of the person or his
liberty, Bracton lib. 5. ca. 33.
is presently to be granted propter privilegium eruce signatorum and
mercatorum, in respect or favor of those that were to go to the Holy War, or
were Merchants; or propter causam sive necessitatem, for some urgent cause or
necessity of dispatch; or in Trespass, propter atrecitatem injuriae, the
horridness or evil of the Offense, or propter personam contra quem injuriatum
est, ut si injuriatus sit Domino Regi vel Reginae, vel eorum liberis, vel
Fratribus, vel Sororibus, vel eorum Parentibus and Propinquis, in respect of
the Person against whom the wrong is done; as the King, Queen, their Children,
Brothers, Sisters, or their Parents or Kindred; come up to the Rules of Justice
for urgency of Affairs, necessities, or occesions, considerations, or respect
of Persons, can of themselves be no cause of making Justice, which is not to be
a respecter of Persons to be Eccentrick, or go a step out of her way, or to do
any thing in one case, which should not or ought not to be done in other Cases,
having the like ground of reason and justice, attended with the same
circumstances; neither can atrocitas facti vel injuriae, the grandeur and
oughliness of the offense, be the sole cause or ground of Arrest, in common or
petty actions of Trespass, or for words, if there could properly be any
atrocitas or hainousness in them, or where it is done involuntarily; as in
Cases of Trespass, or damage done by a man's Cattle, for Trespass may be greater
or lesser; and if every Trespass could be understood to be of the greater size
or magnitnde, and so horrid and enormous; yet there can be no reason to make
the Caption or Arrest to be in part of Corporal punishment, before the Judge or
Magistrate be ascertained of the guilt of the Party, or instructed how to keep
the order which the Laws of God, Nature and Nations, and our Magna Carta have
enjoined; that is to say, to punish only secundum quantitatem delicti,
according to the nature of the offense.

And that supposed ground or reason given by Sir Edward Coke, will be as
deficient that the Common Law of England, abhorring all force as the capital
Enemy to it, subjects the body to imprisonment until it has made agreement
with the Party, and fined to the King, bring any better reason with it.

For if the King shall (as he conceives) punish force by a Capias to Arrest
the body before the party be permitted to defend him-or a Trial had by Jury,
whether he be guilty or not, that would be more against Magna Carta, then any
Process of Capias or Arrest in Debt can be dreamed or fancied to be, and a
Capias pro fine, after a Trial and finding guilty, will either show that it was
not the arresting of the body in Trespass, which was intended or inflicted for
the punishment, but the Capias pro fine; and if both, the Capias in Trespass
before Judgment, and the Capias pro fine after Judgment, should be inflicted
for one and the same offense.

They would not be secundum modum sive quantitatem delicti, proportionate to
the offense, and the Capias to Arrest would be before the King or his Courts of
Justice, could be ascertained that there was an offense.

Nor will that other cause or ground given by him in the Report of the said Sir
William Herberts Case, that the King may by the Common Law arrest the body of
the Debtor, for that Thesaurus Regis est vinoulum and bellorum nervus, The
Money and Treasure of the King is the Bond of Peace, and Sinuwes of War obtain
the conclusion which he aims at: For that were to make a King or supreme
Magistrate, which ought to be Lex viva, and Justice it self, to destroy that
which he was sworn to protect, and give him license to break Laws, who is not
in ordinary Cases against the Rules of Justice, and right reason, to give such
a liberty to himself or any others, or to do an act for an advantage or
necessity, which the even and adequate Rules of Justice, common right, or right
reason cannot allow.

So as by the favor of so great an autho^^ty in our Laws as Sir Edward Coke
is, and with as much reverence as is or can be due to so great a lover of the
Laws of England, and the veneration which he justly merits: I must of
necessity, by what appears in the Cabinet and Treasury of time and Antiquity,
and what is clearly to be perceived in those pure streams, which the Fountains
of Justice and right reason have imparted unto Mankind, assert what I have
done, and conclude that he was a man, and has as the best Authors may in their
Books sometimes do, which are not Scripture and Canonical, erred in averring
that there was no Process of arresting the body of a Debtor, either before or
after judgment, until the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. which gave Process of Outlawry
in Actions of Debt.

When in allowing Process of Arrest in debt in the Kings Case, as he does in
Actions of Trespass, he must acknowledge the same reason and necessity, (which
is a just and rational coertion to appear before the Tribunals of Justice, and
of caution to be given to abide their judgments, to be in Actions of Debt, and
other personal Actions.

And he himself in many of his Books and Writings has as well as the Civil
Law, and our Common Law, and the Law of Nations affirmed, that the same Reason
may claim the like Law; For the reason that Joseph would have imprisoned his
Brethren, upon a suspicion that they were come to epsy the Land, Genesis 42.
v. 16, and 36.
and kept Simeon a Prisoner until their words (and denials) were proved, gives
us the reason, necessity, and justice of arresting in personal Actions and
Debt, as well as Trespass, until cause or caution be given of appearing in
Courts of Justice, and performing the judgments.

And that learned Judge could, if he were now living, very well remember, that
he has often said as well as found, that many of our Acts of Parliament are
but declaratory of the Common Law, and that which was long before used, and
understood to be as it was reasonable.

That the matter or thing excepted in an Act of Parliament, is not included in
any purvieu or provision of it, but is out of the reach and gunshot thereof;
and that when in the Statute of Magna Carta made in 9 H. 3. ca. 29. it is said,
That no Freeman shall be taken and imprisoned, or be disseised of his Freehold
or Liberties, or free Customs, or be outlawed or exiled, or otherwise
destroyed, but by lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land. And
by 25 Ed. 3. ca. 4. That no Man shall be taken by Petition or suggestion, but
by Indictment or Presentment, or by Process made by Writ original at the Common
Law.

He is in his Comment upon Magna Carta, Sir Edward Coke in Mag. Chart. 50, 51,
53.
and that Statute of 9 H. 3. of opinion, that the words Per legem terrae, do
refer to all the procedent matters in that Chapter or Statute, that that
Statute was but declaratory of the old Law of England, That a Commitment by
Lawful warrant either indeed or in Law is accounted in Law a due process or
proceeding of Law, and by the Law of the Land as well as by force of the Kings
writ: and that if a man be suspected, and he flies or hides himself, it is a
good cause to arrest him, that in many cases a man may be by the Law of the
Land taken and imprisoned by force of the Kings writ upon a suggestion made;
and that against those that attempt to subvert and enervate the Kings Laws
there lies a writ to the Sheriff in nature of a Commission ad capiendum
impugnatores juris Regis, Register 64. Rot. pat 21. E. 3. part 1.
and ad ducendum eos ad Gaolam de Newgate, to arrest the Impugners of the Kings
Laws, and to bring them to the Jail of Newgate, and if he had not been of that
opinion, the words of Magna Charta in that Statute of 9. H. 3. can if they were
put upon the rack and tortured, bear no other genuine sense or interpretation
then that no man shall be taken or imprisoned but by lawful judgment of his
Peers, or by the law of the land, And those words of the Statute of 25. Ed. 3.
ca. 4. that no man shall be taken by petition or suggestion, but by indictment
or presentment, or by process made by writ original at the Common Law can
receive no other construction, but that a man may be taken by process made by
writ original at the Common Law, of which nature are the process or writs of
Capias in the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, which are made upon
original writs issuing out of the Chancery, have been in use upon occasion, and
are matters of record before the Justices in this Kingdom, long before the
making of those Statutes. And such an universal approved Ancient long and
continued Praxis founded and fixed upon the Laws of God, Nature and Nations, in
order to the preservation of Faith and Justice; those grand Supporters of
humane Societies, should need no Advocate to plead and justify the necessary
use thereof, but be sufficient to persuade the opponents to acquiesce in the
reason and legality of it.

And that great Lawyer Sir Edward Coke, might have had more laurels to have
encompassed and grown up by his urne, and had not so much Eclipsed that great
reputation which he had gained in his Studies, and Profession of the Laws as he
has; if he had not without a due and serious examination so much taken upon
trust, Caressed, Magnified, and recommended to posterity that Manuscript,
called the Mirror of Justice, and some other Manuscripts so often by him
appealed unto, and vouched in his 2. part. of the Institutis, or Comment upon
Magna Charta: In which Consarcination called the Mirror of Justice, that Mirror
of Justice, Maker or Deviser dreameth truly to have recited some exemplary
Judgmeets, or direful punishments inflicted by King Alured, or Alfred, upon 44.
Judges of his; times for supposed Errors and Misdemeanors by them committed,
And hanged them, who with great probability may be believed not yet to have
been hanged by that King or any other, for that if any such remarkable things
or Examples of Justice, had ever been done by him, they could not in all
likelihood have escaped our old Historians, Symeon, Dunelmensis, Ailredus Abbas
Rievalensis, John Brompton, William Malmesbury, Henry Huntington, Roger
Hoveden, Henry Knighton, Matthew of Westminster, Ingulphus, and all our other
Ancient times, Remenbrances, nor would have been unrecorded by Asser
Menvensis,, who for the fame of his Learning being sent for out of Wales, to
come and live with him, was preferred by him and made a Bishop, and residing in
his Court, Wrote his life and recommended to Posterity, his most memorable
Actions, excellent Qualities and Endowments, but was so far from the Registring
of any such Severeties, as on the contrary he does make mention of the
extraordinary clemency and lenity of that Virtuous Prince, who although he was
a most diligent inquisitor of any male administration of Justice by his Judges;
yet says Asser Menevensis, Leniter Advocatos aut per scipsum, aut per alios
suos fideles quoslibet Interrogabat quare Ita, nequiter, Judicassent utrum per
ignorantiam aut propter aliam malevolentiam: id est utrum pro aliquorum amore
vel Timore, Asser Menevensis de Alfredi rebus gestis 21.
aut aliquorum odio aut etiam pro alicujus pecuniae cupiditate. Gently calling
them to him, he did by himself or others whom he might trust demand of them:
Wherefore they had given such Judgments, whether ignorantly or for any ill
will, or for love, fear, hatred, covetousness, or love of Money, Denique si
illi Judices profiterentur propterea se talia Ita: Judicasse eo quod nihil
rectius, de his rebus scire poterint tunc ille discrete, and moderanter,
illorum imperitiam, and insipientiam redarguens aiebat; Ita inquiens nimirum
admiror vestram hanc insolentiam eo quod dei dono and meo, sapientium gradus
usurpati sapientiae autem studium and operam neglexistis. But if those Judges
did confess that they had so Judged, or done because they knew no better, then
he did discreetly and moderately show them their ignorance, and say unto them,
truly I do very much wonder at your folly; for that by Gods guist and mine, you
have taken upon you the degree of my wise men and Judges, but the study of the
Laws you have neglected. Qua propter aut terrenarum potestatum ministeria quae
habetis illico, dimittetis aut sapientiae studiis multo devotius docere and
studiatis impero: Wherefore I command you either suddenly to leave your
places, or give your minds more unto study. Quibus auditis verbis perterriti
veluti pro maxima vindicta Correcti Comites and praepositi ad aequitatis
discendae studium totis viribus se vertere nitebautur, ita ut mirum in modum
illiterati ab infantia Comites pene omnes prepositi and ministri litteratoriae
arti studerent malentes insuetam disciplinam quam laboriose, discere quam
potestatum ministeria dimittere. Whereupon they viz. His Earls and subordinate
Judges, being as much terrified as if they had been actually punished, did
wholly addict themselves to the study of the Laws, so as to a wonder the Earls
and Judges aforesaid; many of whom from their youth were ignorant and
illiterate, did by study endeavor to make themselves more able, choosing
rather the hardship thereof then to be put out of their places.

And the names of those Judges, which were said to have been hanged, do if
there were any such very much favor of later times, or if any of them were
Earls (for so most of the provincial Judges then used to be) should if guilty,
by the custom of this and other Nations, unto which this of ours may in that
and many other things be found not to have been altogether a stranger, not in
all likeilhood have been subjected to so vile and vulgar a punishment, and the
offenses for which those imaginary Judges are by that Author said to have been
hanged, were such of which there were then for ought appears no Laws, in being
to make them guilty of the breach thereof.

For all the Laws of King Ina, which have come unto us who reigned here in the
year of our Lord 712. and next preceeded King Alfred, LL. Inae ca. 6.
and most of the Laws of King Alfred and the Saxon and Danish Laws of their
several Kings, which reigned after him did ordain and inflict their punishments
by pecuniary mulcts with relation to their Capitis estimationes valuation of
their Qualities and Estates, and there were certain known and appointed Rates
for the redemption of Lahshlite or Manbote for Manslaughter, or the death of a
man, he which killed a Stranger forfeited 2. parts of esiimationis Capitis to
the King, and the 3. part to the Children or kindred of the party slain. Theft
was punished by the Laws of King Alured, who reigned in the year 871. ratione
60. hidarum, so as if the offender had been the owner of 60. hides of Land he
which stole any thing out of the Church was to pay the value of the thing, LL.
Alured cap. 6. ^3.
and to have his hand cut off and there was a Capitis estimatio, for a Nun
taken by force out of a Nunnery, or Killing a woman great with Child, a man
having for some Criminal offense forfeited his liberty, or being adjudged to be
a Slave for Felony was not to be hanged until the 2. offense, LL. Inae. ca. 23.
and it was in the accusers option or choice to have him only beaten; of which
book compiled out of many fragments, the Author does not seem; to be well
pleased with our Magna Charta, and appears to be a great fault finder and
complainer of the abuses of too many things in the Laws of the time wherein he
lived, and does not well agree with himself in some of his own positions: as
where he says it was forbidden that none should be distrained by their move
able Goods, Mirror of Justice cap. 1.. 3. and cap. 5.. 5. and Articles upon
the Statute of Westud. 2.
but by their Bodies or Fees. In another place concludes that the Imprisonment
of the Body of a man is an offense if not for tortious Judgments. That no man
is imprisonable for Debt, and none to be utlawed if not for mortal Felony and
menmentioneth the use of Justices in Eire when Sir. Henry Spelman says,
Mirror of Justice ca. 5.. 2.
the Justices Itinerant, or in Eire, Spelmans glossar' in verbo Justicia and
Eire.
were not here instituted until the reign of our King Henry the 2.

And might have remembered if he had been so conversant, as he pretended with
King Alfreds Laws, LL. Alured cap. 1.
that Imprisonment of the body in Civil actions was not unusual in the time of
his reign; For that by one of his Laws, if a man had given a pledge upon oath
and promised (which was not then infrequent) quod just and legitime praestare
potuisset neque prestiterit arma fortunasquae, suas omnia amicorum fidei
concredito ipse in custodiam Regiam per 40. dies mittitor subiturus supplicii
quod ei Episcopus pro meritis imposuerit sin spatio haud plene confecto fugam
agitarit fugientem que ante verterunt per 40 dies in Carcerem ut quidem antea
fieri oportuit conjicitor verum si fuga elapsus fuerit ab omni legis patrocinio
destitutus habetor: atque in omnibus Christi Ecclesiis Anathema esto. Quod si
quisquam alius pro se fidem dederit penas fide jussonis violatae dato and
imperatum subito. That which he might justly, perform, and did neglect, and not
do it, his arms and all his Estate and Fortunes should be sequestered into the
hands of his friends, and himself imprisoned in the Kings Prison, by the space
of 40. days, there to undergo such punishment as the Bishop according to his
desert shall impose upon him, but if before that time elapsed, he shall escape
and be taken again, let him be imprisoned for 40. days as he should before,
And if he shall again escape, then let him be out of the protection of the Law,
and excommunicate, but if any have been his surety let him pay the forfeiture.

CHAP. XVI. That the late incessant needless complaints against our Laws, and
the proceedings in our Courts of Justice, had in the bottom of it a design of
overturning Monarchy and Government, and to create offices places and
employments, and profits to, the contrivers thereof, and their Party.
BUt there must be something else that has made all this stir and inquietude,
in the minds of those Causeless kind of Murmurers, and has so far transported
themselves out of themselves, as to forsake the reason of mankind; for
otherwise it cannot easily get admittance into any man's apprehension and
belief: That Land-Souldiers, Seamen, Mariners, Merchants, Mechanics and, some
Tradesmen for of some of every of those sorts were too many, of our late Church
and State, and Law reformers composed, should if they would not be at leisure
to consider that public utility and neeessity, do in many Cases both by the
Laws of God Nature and Nations, sometimes Curb restrain lessen or take away
the free use of properties, so patiently and willingly without any mutining
endure the rigorous penalties, forfeitures and severities of the Laws of War
and Navigation, and the arbitrary exactions and impositions of their Companies,
and Governors of Trade; And not at all rear the cry of Oppression and
Invasion of their Liberties, and yet so kick and wince at the legal and far
more easy Rules of Justice, and may therefore require some search to be made
for the fountain and rise of that popular Frenzy and distemper, and that so
much mistaken late outcry against the Writts, and Process of Arrest, and
Outlawry, when the arguments which are framed and brought by that vulgar and
leveling race of people, do abundantly declare that they have not much troubled
themselves with the reading and true understanding of those Laws, which they do
so labor to scandelize, and the Records of the nation who do bear witness of
them.

In the Inquest whereof the late pious Martyr King Charles, has pointed out
the way unto a more full discovery of their designs, when he did foresee it,
as in a Declaration published for the better satisfaction of his people, in
December 1641. After that the house of Commons had made their aforesaid unhappy
Remonstrance, he did not omit to give them to understand that he feared that a
malignant party in that house did go about by discountenancing the present
Laws, Exact Collection of the Kings Speeches and Declarations.
to loosen the bonds of government; to the end, that all disorder and confusion
might break in upon him.

And in his answer to the above mentioned 19. propositions sent unto him by
both houses of Parliament the 2. of June 1642. Declared unto them that those
that had the conduct of that affair, Ibidem.
thought fit to remove a troublesome rub out of their way, viz. (the Law) to
the end they might undermine the very foundation of it.

Which every day after grew more and more visible, when they being called
together to council and advise him, could not by their Votes, which they would
make as binding and obligatory, as if they were Laws made and established by
their Sovereign, wrest and take from him the Militia, or Sword wherewith he
should protect and defend his people; took it to be not a little advantageous
to their purposes, to ravel and dislocate the method and proceedings of his
Laws and Justice; By which his Throne was established, that by overturning the
long approved Laws and Customs of the Kingdom, upon which the best Monarchy in
the World was built, they might open a passage to let in that gain and Anarchy
which they aimed at, which being once made known to their Emissaries, and so
much encouragement given by their members of that which was then untruly called
a Parliament, who rather then fail of Petitions unto them from the sons of
Zerviah and Shimei out of every Country, City, Corporation, and Market Town,
caused Printed Bills to be affixed upon the Posts and Corners of the Streets in
London, whose multitudes of Inhabitants in Masters, Apprentizes, Tapsters, and
other Illiterate and Vulgar kind of people could readily afford them good store
of such, as had been borne or lived in every County, City, and Corporation of
England and Wales, to give a meeting at a place appointed to some Members of
Parliament, for the framing of Petitions unto it; And thus the Hounds being
uncoupled and let loose to chase the Royal Heart, and the Presbyterian Ministers
like Huntsmen busied in the ha loo, lo ho, ha loo loo, so ho. Whooping and
following to cheer and set them on, and busying themselves to remove all things
that might hinder the pursuit of their Petitions, for the presenting whereof
Pulpit Granado men were employed to procure them to be brought with 100 or 200
or more of the factious on Horseback, with the Petitions ready printed, or
Tackt to their Hats or Hatbands, with Swords by their sides: The London
Porterswere set on to Petition against the Militia, when they were only told it
was against the Watermen for carrying Trunks and other Burdens by Water. And a
Schoolmaster at Stamford, was so wickedly Ingenious as to make his Boys
subscribe a Petition to that Parliament against Episcopacy* as if their Parents
had actually done it.

In the mean time, the Diurnals, News Books, and seditious Pamphlets the
Stationers: Arrows and Artillery were day by day shot to wound him, and
incense the people against him; and some of the Parliament men were heard to
say, That they could not do their work without them; And the design was carried
on so prosperously, as too many thought their time best of all bestowed, to
pull down or take in pieces either all our old Laws, or such a part of them, as
might not only undermine the frame and constitution of the Monarchy, but
innovate and introduce so much of their own Modells and Inventions, as might
either directly lead to a republique, or some new devices of Anarchy.

A Book called the pollution of University Learning, printed in 1642. Marched
in the van, together with another Book called the Observator and his Jesuitical
principles, Quod efficit tale est magis tale, and that the King was singulis
Major, but universis Minor, and those kind of Engines, were greatly encouraged
in their attempts by a Book; of Junius Brutus, his vindiciae contra Tirannos,
translated out of Latin into English, to infect the people with Treasonable
Doctrines. And a Book entitled Maxims Unfolded, That the Election of the Kings
of England; ought to be by the consent of the people. The Royal and politic
power in all Causes, and over all persons, is properly the Parliament The Oath
of Supremacy, binds not in Conscience to the King against the Parliament, but
the Pope: And another book written by Mr. William Prynn, Prynns sovereign
power of Paliarments.
an utter Barrister of Lincolnes Inn; Entitled the Sovereign power of
Parliaments and Kingdoms, Printed at London in the year 1643. Wherein with
heaped quotations, and much Learning, and reading the wrong way, he was willing
to invite his Readers to believe that the Court of Parliament had a lawful
power to question the Kings Patents, Charters, Commissions, Proclamations,
Grants, Warrants, Writts, and Commandments, whether they be legal, and to
Cancel and repeal them that be illegal or mischievous and onerous to the
subject, not only without but against his consent. It is lawful for the people
submitting themselves to prescribe the King and his successors, what Laws they
please; the Sheriffs of every County were anciently elected by the Freeholders,
and had power to raise the Militia, that the Navy, Ammunition, Arms, and
Revenue of the King, though they be in his possession, are the Kingdoms; That
Kings and their great Officers, Counselors, and Justices, were at the first
created and elected by the people, that the King has an absolute Negative
voice in the passing of Bills of common right and Justice for the public
good, that the Parliaments present necessary defensive war is just and lawful,
both in point of Law, Divinity and Conscience, and no Treason or Rebellion: the
Parliament has a right and Jurisdiction to impose Taxes and Contributions upon
the subjects, for defense of the King in case of the King his wilful absence,
or Arming against them. Seconded by a Book entitled Lex Rex, written as
believed by one Rutherford a Scottish Divine, Printed at London by John Field,
and published in the year 1644. By the then usurped authority, wherein he
falsely endeavored to maintain against all the grounds and fundamentals of Law
and Religion: That Kings and their Families have no calling to the Crown; but
only by the people, Royalty is not transmitted from Father to Son, Rutherfords
Lex Rex.
if the people may limit the King, they give him the power, who is the servant
of the people, both objectively and subjectively, and is inferior unto them;
who cannot make away their power, but do retain the fountain power of making a
King, that to swear non self preservation, and to swear self Murder, is all
one: The King is a Fiduciary Life-Renter, not a Lord or Heritor, the conscience
of the people is immediately subordinate to God, not to the King mediatly or
immediately, the Judges are the immediate Vicars of God, not of the King; The
Parliament has more power then the King, The Crown is the Patrimony of the
Kingdom, not of him who is King or of his Father: The Parliament are not Judges
by derivation from the King: Who cannot make or unmake Judges Inferior Judges,
are more necessary than a King: Parliaments may conveen and Judge without a
King: Are coordinate Judges with him, not advisers only. Subordination of the
King to the Parliament, and Co-ordination are both consistent: The King
transgressing in a heinous manner, is under the coaction of Law: Defensive Wars
are lawful: And there may be a distinction betwixt the Kings person and his
Royal power. The Physical act of taking away the life of offending persons,
when commanded by the Law of self-defence is no Murder. Wars raised by the
Subjects and Estates for their own just defense, against the Kings bloody
Emissaries are lawful: Parliament power, is a fountain power above the King:
Who is but a noble Vassal of the Kingdom: Is not head of the Church. The people
in some Cases may convene without the King: Subsidies are the Kingdoms due
rather then the Kings.

And thus provided, and the scaling ladders made ready to storm the Laws, which
were the Forts and Bulwarks of the King and Government, and heretofore made it
their business to give help or shelter to the King, the Deformers rather then
Reformers, do hasten one another to be up and doing. And therefore in a
Pamphlet entitled Liberty vindicated against Slavery. Printed in the year
1645. the Author declared that Imprisonment for Debts, is against the
foundamental Laws of England. Propositions were shortly after made unto that
company of Monarchy underminers, called the Parliament for the laying aside the
six Clarks in Chancery, and the employing their under Clarks at Cheaper Rates.

In the year 1646. Mr. John Cook of Grayes Inn, who sufficiently deserved to
be hanged, drawn, and quartered, as he was afterward as a Traitor, in a Book
dedicated to the most high and most honorable Court of Parliament, the supreme
as he calls it Judicatory of the Kingdom, says that the alteration of
fundamental Laws, as Sir Edward Coke says, produces many inconveniences, as
in that statute of imprisoning men's bodies for Debt. And there must needs be
good work in that their sport of pulling down and setting up, when it has been
as truly said as verified, that the Kings Parliament began in 1640. and
continued with some freedom of Votes, until December 1641. From thence it was
governed by the City of London and their Tumults, Propositions, and Petitions,
unto December 1643. And from thence by the Scots and their rebellious League
and Covenant, unto the Month of June 1647. When the Presbyterians had the
ascendant and predominancy, and that was not unjustly called the Apprentises
Parliament; And after that Sir Thomas Fairfax his Parliament, which was
governed by his Army, and their Addresses, Declarations, and Proposals, wherein
the Independent party were Superior, and ought to be called the Agitators
Parliament.

The King in the mean time, in his great desire of peace with those whose
wicked designs never intended it, not making that right use which he otherwise
might have done, of the successes which God had given him in the just defense
of himself and his Loyal Subjects, and the Laws, Liberties, and Religion of his
People, tired with the treachery of those that too often betrayed, and sold his
just advantages, and overpowered with an Army of Covenanting Scots, who came to
assist their brother Rebels of England, and believing himself to be something
safe in their Oaths and Promises, and flying to them for Succor, was by a
party of them contrary to the Laws of God and Nations, sold to the English
Rebels, for two hundred thousand Pounds Sterling, Too great a sum of Money
to be restored again, as Judas did the thirty pence, the wages of his sin for
the betraying of our Lord and Savior, and by tricks and devices carried
Prisoner from place to place, until he was barbarously Murdered. And the
Heir and Royal Issue driven out of their Inheritance, and then every Mechanic
head was set on work to frame a new Government, in which there were as many
diversities of opinions, as there were Ignorances and Sinister ends, to advance
their particular ambitions or advantages, and a mart being kept of Whimsies,
some being much in love with the Balletting box used at Venice, others with the
Rota and Mr. Harringtons Oceana, and all or too many thus busied, Sedition and
Ignorance sat in their Triumphal Chariots with the Laws* Learning and Religion
of the Nation like so many Captive Kings in Chains attending, all which did not
fully correspond with the Votes and expectation of the Presbyterians, when as
Cromwell the g^^at Encourager of the Independents or Fanatic party, then the
more numerous, feeling his own strength and having a prospect of a better
design of establishing himself, did so delay and trifle with the Parliament his
Masters in their desires of disbanding the Armies, as the Presbyterian
Soldiers in the mean time selling their Debenturs, the wages of their
Rebellion and wickedness, at 16 d. or 18 d. a pound, with a long Interest, to
the Independents, who were thereby easily enabled to buy King, Queen and
Princes, the Bishops, and Dean and Chapters, Nobility and Delinquents Lands, as
they mis-called them; and that party being so well gratified, were not
afterward unwilling to Lacquey after his hypocrisy, and permit him to frame
and make his own Instrument and method of a more arbitrary Government then our
Laws permitted, or any of our Kings or Princes exercised, and to be as a single
person Protector of all the Knaves and Fools in England, Scotland, Ireland and
Wales, withal their fancied and supposed Liberties, which as they used them
were but to hunt and chase all that were loyal and honest, and thought they
might do any thing to the Amorites, Moab and Amalek, and that all the Scripture
was contained in Gain, being [as they supposed] Sanctified into a pretense and
outward semblance of Godliness.

In the later end of the year 1648. some thousands of Well-affected, as their
Sedition persuaded them, inhabiting the Cities of London and Westminster,
Borough of Southwark, and Hamlets, supposing the Time to smile upon their
purposes, did Petition that which when the King was murdered was no
Parliament, that they would consider the many thousands that were ruined by
perpetual imprisonment for Debt, and provide for their enlargement.

In the year 1649. one Thomas Faldoe of Grays-Inne Esquire was so loath to have his
Conceits and Opinions lag behind, as in a Pamphlet entitled, Reformation of
Proceedings at Law, published on the behalf of himself and the Commonwealth of
England, he complained, That the Law of Property was depressed and useless, by
the color of the Statute of Imprisonment, and sacrificed to all the Birds of
prey, even to Covetousness the mother of Cruelty, in the several Offices and
Instruments of Justice.

And in the same year came out a Representation of diverse as they called
themselves Well-affected persons in or about the City of London, petitioning
the Parliament, That all tenures in Capite, and all inferior Jurisdictions,
being great grievances and oppressions, might be taken away, the Laws
translated into English, the Six Clarks, Head Registers, Masters of Chancery,
and the Petty-bag, Affidavit Office, Prothonotaries, and all other grand
Monopolies and Patentees, might be abolished, no man's life taken away for
Felony, unless accompanied with Murder; that the eldest Sons in every Family
might have a double Portion in the Fathers Estate, and the rest be divided
amongst the younger Children; that no Fines be paid to any Cursitor, or upon
any Original Writ, but may be quite abolished; that no man's person might be
imprisoned for Debt, but his Estate made liable to satisfy the same: it being
more suitable to the Turkish or Heathenish practice, then to Christian English
Professors of the Gospel, to rack and grind the bodies of men in prison.

At the heels whereof was brought to that Assembly at Westminster, (who named
themselves a Parliament, and to cherish such doings seldom failed by their
Speaker to give thanks in the name of the House to all Petition and
Declaration-drivers) a Petition of the Well-affected in the County of
Buckingham, said to be a Representation of the middle sort of men within the
three Chilterne Hundreds of Disborough, Burnam and Stoke, and part of Alesbury
Hundred, declaring, That they had waited eight years in the pursuance of their
just Rights and Freedom, with which God had invested them and the whole Nation,
kept from them by Arbitrary power and Tyrannical factors of the Nobility,
Courtiers, Episcopal Priests, cheating Lawyers, Impropriators, Patentee men,
Lords of Manors, and all illegal Courts, and other diabolilical interessed
parties, and desire that all Licenses, Commissions, etc. and Grants from the
late King, whose first predecessor was that Outlandish Bastard William the
Conqueror, from whence proceeded the original of all their slavery both in
Tenures, Laws, Terms, Customs, etc. in an Outlandish tongue, the Lawyers being
the chief Instruments of their misery, might be abolished; and protesting
against all arbitrary Laws, Terms, Lawyers, Impripriators, Lords of Manors,
Privileges, Customs, Tolls, Tithes, going to the Terms at Westminster, payment
of Heriots, Quit-Rents, Head-Silver, Lawyers Fees, and the whole Norman power,
being a burden too intolerable to bear; did invite all men to enter upon
Commons, and cut and fell the Wood growing thereon, and desired (which they
would not be willing to do if they had been Lords of Manors, and other the
parties struck at) to go by the golden rule of Equity, viz. to do as they would
be done by, not to tyrannize over any, or to be tyrannized over.

Another Pamphleteer feared he should be taken to be ill affected to the babe
of Sedition, if he also should not be doing somewhat, in a Modest Plea as he
terms it, dedicated to the High Court of Parliament, which he would have to be
the Supreme Authority of the Nations, prayed, that there might be an equal
Commonwealth against Monarchy; wherein there is a Lift against the
Universities, College Lands, Tenures, Hereditary Nobility, Church Revenues,
Churches and Bells, Mercenary Lawyers and Tithes, with an Apology for Younger
Brothers, and desires a restitution of the Tenures in Gavelkind.

In the same year, the Lord General Fairfax, Lieutenant General Cromwell, the
Lord Mayor of London, Colonel Harrison, Mr. Francis Allin, Colonel Martin, and
others, were empowered to place and displace any Judges of the Courts at
Westminster, and all Officers thereunto belonging, and all Sheriffs and
Justices of Peace.

Mr. John Hare being unwilling to stay behind such Company, in a Pamphlet sent
out upon that design, desired, that the Norman yoke might be taken off; and
says, that the Norman Innovations are destructive to the honor, freedom, and
other unquestionable Rights of the Nation.

In the same year, the Officers and Soldiers in the Regiments of Colonel
Scroope, Sanders and Walton, and the Soldiers in the Garrisons of Arundel, Rye
and Chichester, did petition the Lord General Fairfax, that the abuses in the
Courts of Justice be reformed, that there be a Registring of Deeds and
Contracts, Tithes abolished, Six Clarks in Chancery taken away, and their
Clarks sworn Attorneys.

Mr. Sadler a Lawyer, and a man in such favor with the Usurper, as he was by
them made one of the Judges for the proving of Wills and Testaments, in his
Book entitled, The Rights of the Kingdom, and Custom of our Ancestors, says,
that the Writs of Capias as now used were very mischievous, did not lie at the
Common Law in Actions of Debt; cites Sir Edward Cokes opinion in Sir William
Herberts Case, and declared, that in Debt the Mirror of Justice did pronounce
the Outlawry to be a great abuse.

In the year 1650. S. D. then an Attorney, (but since his Majesty's happy
Restoration and the altering of the Scene, Knighted and put into several
places of Honor and Trust,) having convened and gathered together some
Tides-men, and small understanding Clarks and Attorneys, that were well
inclined to set their Watches by Cromwells new Court-Dial, did in order to the
Regulation of the Law, propound a Law to be made against Fines to be paid upon
Original Writs, for that (the best reason that they could give against it) it
was against the reason of the Fundamental Laws of England, which never imposes
any Fines but against offenders; and the like against Vtlaries, which were
unnecessary, and did tend only to Charges and delay; and that a second Summons
being served upon a Defendant and left at his house, and by the Sheriff or his
Officer returned upon Record, the first Summons being made seven days before
the day of Appearance, in which time the Plaintiff may enter his Declaration in
Court, and if no Appearance entered within eight days after, then a new Summons
in the nature of a Scire facias to be awarded upon the Imparlance roll, to
summon him to appear at a certain day to come, when not appearing and pleading
within eight days after Judgment shall be given by default.

Mr. John Jones of Nayoth in the County of Brecon, in a Book printed and
published in the same year, entitled, Judges Judged out of their own mouths,
or the Question resolved by Magna Charta who have been Englands Enemies,
King-seducers, and the Peoples destroyers, from King Henry the 3d. to King
Henry the 8th. and before and since, stated by Sir Edward Coke late Lord Chief
Justice of the Court of King's Bench, wherein that mighty Cambro-Britain in his
own opinion does with as little Law as Reason charge the Judges and Professors
of the Law, with the destruction of honest men whom it should save, and the
saving of all those whom it should destroy or punish for unlawful respects and
considerations, tending to their own profits and ends: And that by Prerogative
Statutes devised by mercenary Lawyers to steal from the people their
Birthright, contrary to Magna Charta, and the Common Law of England, they are
become an intolerable mischief to the Commonwealth, and do deserve exemplary
punishments; and cites the said Sir Edward Cokes opinion in his Comment upon
Magna Charta, cap. 29. that the Custom of England declared by Magna Charta does
not extend to the imprisonment of any Debtors but the Kings.

And assisted those his wicked and false Rabshakesmes with another little Book,
called the Cry of Blood, dedicated to Oliver Cromwell, General as he styled him
of the puissant Army of the Parliament of England, wherein charging the crime
of Murder, and of the blood of the righteous Abel, as he is almost frantickly
pleased to fancy it, upon the Process of Arrest and Outlawry, and that innocent
and most necessary way of compelling men to Justice, he styles them a course
of Sin, and the Offices of those who do make them the gift of the Devil, and
the Lawyers liars; although Mr. John Cook of Grays-Inne, before the Devil had
entered into him and engaged him to be a prosecutor of his Sovereign, even to
the Murder of him, did in his Book printed in the year 1646. entitled, A
Vindication of the Professors and Profession of the Law, dedicated to the then
Parliament, declare, that he was confident that the Common Lawyers of England
are as understanding rational men, as any Practisers of any Profession
whatsoever in the world; and he durst say, that there are more Godly religious
Lawyers, Attorneys and Sollicitors in England, then in all that habitable part
of the world called Christendom.

Mr. William Leach of the Middle Temple proposed, that no Defendant should be
enforced to appear unto any Action, before a Poenal Summons, and a Declaration
first filed, unless in case of likelihood to depart the Land, or to make away
his Goods; and in such case, upon an affidavit to be made before a Justice of
Peace by any Officer to be arrested.

Isaac Pennington the younger, the Son of that man of Faction his Father,
offered in a Pamphlet to assert, that the Rights, Liberties and safety of the
people were in themselves, and derivatively in the Parliament their Substitutes
and Representatives, and that the people ought well to look to their rectifying
right, that it may have its free current.

Mr. Henry Robinson in his public Proposals for a cheap and easy distribution
of Justice, would have a public Country Registry for Lands, and another for
Debts, and that in every City, Corporation and Division in each County, Judges
may be appointed with an yearly Salary.

By a Petition of many calling themselves a Free-people, promoted by John
Wildman and John Lilburne Gent. they do require that all the Laws, Process and
Inrolments of England be written in English, and a Roman or Secretary hand.

Hugh Peter's, a Prompter at a Playhouse long before he was a my mick Preacher
and the abuse of the Pulpit, having made many a Renegado Voyage from England to
Holland, thence to New England, and from thence in the company of other Birds
of Prey pearching here again in England, was so unwilling not to be as busy in
the ruin of his Country, as other men of the Trinkets and new Fangles were, as
in his Book entitled, Endeavors (as he says) aiming at the Glory of God,
that Peace and Truth may meet together, undertaketh to prove, that Government
by succession from Father to Son was none of Gods institution in the first and
purest Times, that Custom has worn out Truth, but we were to enquire for the
old and good ways, and Christ says it was not so in the beginning.

And in June 1651. in his Book entitled, Good Work for a Good Magistrate,
would have Registers to be settled in every Parish of all Mortgages, Heugh
Peter's Good Work for a Good Magistrate.
Alienations, etc. and from thence transmitted to the County or Shire-Town;
that in every County every Hundred do choose three men to be Peacemakers for a
year, to determine all common controversies without Appeal; Wills and
Testaments to be acknowledged before two next Justices, and entered in the
Parochial Registries; five or seven in every Town or Hundred to be yearly
chosen to determine all Debts or Strifes, whereof three to give sentence
without Appeal; that Summons instead of Arrests may be left at men's houses,
none to distrain for Taxes or Debts, but the Debtors outward doors to be taken
away and carried to the Townhouse, and as many other new doors as shall be set
in the place; every man plead his own cause, and if he think himself too weak,
let him have liberty to take a Friend or Neighbor to plead for him, but no
Advocates or Seriveners to plead for any man; if any Lawyers be continued, let
them be allowed and paid by the State; all Suits in London and great Cities to
be determined in a week. Which being done, it was very advisable to burn all
the old Records, even those in the Tower, the monuments of Tyranny.

And had so in a short time after haled on his design of destroying all the
Records and memorials of the Laws of England, to make way for his new
contrivances, as a Sergeant at Arms of the then miscalled Parliament, or one of
their Mock-Majesty Mace-bearers, had an express order (happily diverted by some
other affair when it was ready to be put in execution) to throw all the Records
remaining in the Treasuries at Westminster into the River of Thames.

And the Law that it might the better be baited and abused, (as if no
Foreigners could ever have occasion to read, understand, or make use of them)
must with its Writs, Records, Process and Proceedings, for the time to come be
written in English, many of the Law Books being in order thereunto, by the
factious and greedy avarice of many of the Booksellers and Stationers,
procured to be mercenarily translated into English, and exposed to the rude
eyes and hands of the ignorant, and the little reason that the Owners of it do
use to have, whereby to make it a Ludibrium, and the wonder of their lesser
Intellect, which might easily happen where they wanted the keys and assistance
of other Learnings; and every thing their shallow apprehensions could not reach
or fathom, was by them supposed to be Norman slavery, Antichristian, or
Idolatry; the Records must no more be written in the long-lasting and durable
Court and Chancery hands, or manner of writing, made out of the old Saxon,
Gothic, and Reunick Characters, as they were wont to be, and had been for many
ages before, but in a Secretary hand, not that strong and legible hand
heretofore used, but a kind of Jack-an-Apes hand, composed of Antic frisking
undistinguishable letters, so written with the side of a Pen and small slit, as
that scratching rather then writing has been often seen, not to be able to
keep company with the Parchment it was wrote upon, the small period of Oliver
Cromwells wickedly usurped Dominion.

Which needless change and novelty, with other the doings of the Factious and
Rebellious, so wrought upon the minds of the ruder sort of the people, to the
joy and comfort of those who thought themselves to be specially Godly, as the
Lawyers could not pass in the Streets without many reproaches, and not always
without the scorn of being asked if they had any Latin, by those that did never
understand it, or were ever likely or in a capacity to do it. And Pride the
Drayman, turned by an accursed Rebellion into a Colonel, could say, that he
hoped shortly to see, or it would never be well until the Lawyers Gowns were
like the Scottish Colors hung up in Westminster hall. So great was his and his
partisans malice and hatred to those Laws, which once they seemed to be so much
in love with, professed and covenanted to maintain.

In the same year that so remarkable Thomas Elsliot, calling himself a member
of Jesus Christ, and of the English Commonwealth, a freeborn person of the
English Nation, Esquire at Arms, Conqueror of the Gentlemen of the Long Robe,
now or late the Satan of the Commonwealth, in his Book entitled The true
Mariner, with his Metaphorical and Hieroglifical Ship demonstrating the way to
Paradise, dedicated to Oliver Cromwell, says the Prothonotaries and Registers
in the Courts of Justice are immense Foxes, the Attorneys and Clarks
Kindle-coals, the Bum-bailiffs, Sergeants at Mace and Marshals-men, Serpents,
Toads, Rats and Mice.

James Stocall Colonel of a Regiment of fifteen hundred men in the Isle of
Jersey, proposed, that if a man be overburdened with Debts and imprisoned, and
his Estate not able to pay, he ought if he come into Court and affirm it upon
his Oath, to be freed of all his Creditors, so as he do leave them what he has
whereby to satisfy every Creditor according to the priority of every man's Debt.

Shortly after followed Proposals by some Chancery Clarks, aiming to hurt their
Masters the Six Clarks in Chancery, and make what benefit they could for
themselves, that twelve ancient practicing Clarks to be chosen two out of every
Office, by the major votes of the Clarks, and presented to the Lord Keeper,
Lord Chancellor, or Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal, and out of them to
be chosen some Overseers or Superintendents, and to have an Annual stipend; the
Subpoena Office to be nulled, and those Writs to be made by the Chancery
Clarks; the Affidavit Office to be taken away, Lawyers Fees to be ascertained,
and none to take any more Fee in that Term for any particular Cause, and no
matters to be referred to Masters of Chancery but Accounts.

Charles George Cock would have Vtlaries abolished, and no Arrest, and that
there be only a Summons without a Writ or attaching the person, and if twice
summoned let him be proceeded against upon his Goods.

In the year 1652. Gerrard Winstanley published his opinion, that the Kings old
Laws cannot govern a free Commonwealth, and it is not possible for a people to
be too free; and in a Book entitled, The Law of Freedom, or true Magistracy
restored, complains, that Tolls in the Market are a burden, that the Gentry
do oppress the Common people, live idly upon their labors, and carry away all
the comfort and livelihood of the Earth; that the powers of Lords of Manors do
remain still over their Brethren, requiring Fines and Heriots, beating them off
the free use of their Commons; the Commoners have cast out the King, therefore
they are in equity free from the slavery of that Lordly power, and that it will
blast the power of the Parliament and Army to see the Government of the
Commonwealth to be built upon the Kingly Laws and Principles; and that all
slaveries and oppressions which have been brought upon mankind, have been by
Kings, Lords of Manors, Lawyers, Landlords and Divines, who ought to be cast
out; and prays that there may be a Judge in every Shire, Peacemakers in
every Town, Overseers and a band of Soldiers attending them.

Another proposes, that instead of an Arrest a Summons might be sufficient,
and if no Appearance Judgment and Execution to pass.

In the year 1653. in a Book entitled, a supply to a draught of a Systeme
proposed by a Committee for the Regulation of the Law, it was desired, that
none be arrested, attached, molested or troubled by any Original or other Writ.

And thus whilst too many addle-headed Reformers were laboring to establish
wickedness by a Law or Authority, and the major part of the Members of the
miscalled Parliament having as they thought reared their designs to that height
and nearness of accomplishment, that they took themselves to be Officers of
Righteousness, elected and chosen to do wonderful things, that Gods will might
be done on earth as it was in heaven, that every one might be holy, and the
Pots, yea the Bells upon the Horses, as they were pleased to phrase it, might
be holiness unto the Lord, and that God might reign and be all in all; they
(did in that hurry and fit of Zeal, without any solid or rectified reason,
cause or consideration, without the hearing of any defenses to be made against
their supposed to be infallible Judgments, (Vote that the High Court of
Chancery, and all the other Courts at Westminster Hall, should be dissolved and
no more made use of; and a Member of that Society, and a Burgess for the Town
or University of Cambridge, who might have done well to have dissuaded his
Election until he had learned more wit, was so willing to have the Civil Laws
here used to be destroyed, or set packing with the Common Laws, as he could not
forbear crying out, Mr. Speaker, one word I beseech you, for Jesus Christ let
the Civil Law also be put down. But that not well according with the sentiments
and purposes of Cromwell their man of Sin, who had designed to trepan them to
deliver up their fancied Parliamentary Government, and to bless God for the
yoke and Instrument of his own making, whereby he as a single person had with
many curbing contrivances a future absolute lawless and unlimited power and
Authority, he did for the better preserving of the Justice of the Nation, for
the administration whereof he intended to make himself an allowance of Two
hundred thousand Pound, per annum, and well understood to be as necessary in a
Commonwealth as it had been in the best of Monarchies, and some other his
reasons of State, whilst those Dreamers of Godly Reformations had upon his
Summons and Command refused to dissolve or come out of their opinionated Senate
or Parliament House, cause some of his Janisaries or Red-coat Soldiers to pull
them out of the House, and lock up the doors.

And their ungodly and particular interests having thus enticed the vulgar and
less considerate part of the people, too many of them made all the have they
could to pull in pieces the frame, and the noble ever to be admired
constitution of our Government, where they could be sure of hopes of gain, and
losing nothing by it, and joining with some Lawyers of the smaller size that
wanted Practice, and expected employments by a Renverse of our Old Laws and
setting up New, the finews and foundations of our Laws were endeavored to be
cut, Monarchy, Justice and our Laws enforced to dwell in the Tents of Mesech
and Kedar, and lying amongst the Pots, and the Wolves made the Guardians of the
Sheep and Lambs; the Tenth Commandment in the Decalogue was bid to stand off,
and not trouble it self with their business, until they could be at more
leisure to talk with it or understand it; every one was rooting up the
foundations, and like those that are too busy in breaking bulk, or taking the
spoil of a distressed wreckt Ship, the wild Boar brake into the Vineyard, and
the Swine into the Garden and Bed of Spices, unto whom the Rose of Sharon and
the Lilly of the Vallys, the charming Hyacinth and Tulips, and gloriously
adorned other flowers, and the filth of a Dunghill were in their grunting
capricious sense of an equal if so much value and estimation.

And Mr. John Dury a Scottish Minister, who had before in the reign of King
Charles the Martyr by good approbation of diverse of our Bishops and Learned men
of this Nation, and many learned and worthy of the Reformed Churches beyond the
Seas, endeavored a better agreement betwixt the Lutheran and Calvinists, had
no time or labor spare to bring his Countrymen and their mad Brethren of
England into their wits again, but for some Preferment had or promised was so
well contented to ring the Changes with them, as he could not let such things
pass without some blessing or Grace said unto them, or a box of what he took to
be a more special Balm of Gilead, bestowed upon them for the ease and comfort
of such a small number as should be troubled with tender and puling
Consciences, as he did in his Re-proposals licensed by Mr. Joseph Caryl,
declare, that God by an extraordinary way of providence had shaken the
foundations of this Kingdom, Mr. Jo. Dury's Re-proposals.
and turned in into a Commonwealth, believed that the just Judgment of God had
brought it upon those who without any respect to tender Consciences, did press
the ensnaring former Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Covenant, and
laid them as stumbling blocks before their Brethren; conceived that the
requiring a general promise from Subjects, to perform an undeniable and
unquestionable duty to the Commonwealth wherein they live, by those that have
the power of affording or refusing Civil protection, is not in the same nature
with those former Oaths and Subscriptions: And that he should pray and
intercede for such as are under the trouble of their own Spirits, and fear of
sinning, that the many years experience of their quiet behavior and faithful
services may be accepted toward a^ just degree of security and assurance for
future peaceableness.

In the same year Mr. (...) Gray, a prisoner in the Compter of Woodstreet in
London for the not payment of Tithes, would persuade as many as would be so
foolish as to believe him, that Tithes were a curse to all Nations but Cana^n,
and a vexation to all people but the Hebrews.

In the year 1654. Mr. John Rogers, once a Minister of the Church of England,
but afterward a fiery zealot of Rebellion, by his Book fuller of railing then
truth or reason, entitled, Mr. John Rogers Sagrir.
Sagrir, or Doomsday drawing nigh with Thunder and Lightning, in an Alarm for
New Laws and the Peoples Liberties, from the Norman and Babylonian yokes,
wherein he calling the Lawyers Tyrants and Locusts, says, that it is high time
and more then time for the people to know their Rights, Privileges and
Freedom, that all that are past Children and Fools should call for them, and
that it concerns all to write, print, publish and declare against the Norman
Tyranny of Laws and Lawyers, and that he does it with as much assurance and
confidence as if he had a halter about his neck, and were to endure the penalty
of the Locrian Laws for failing in what he should allege against them; that
the Lawyers are Antichrists State Army of Locusts, and that the people have
been robbed of their Rights to this day by the Income of corrupt Laws and
Lawyers, the true rise of their interest, Innes of Court, and trades by Sin;
that none are suffered to plead but Lawyers, or such as are brought up in their
Courts and Innes, in their trade, cheats and tricks, to sell the Law at a large
rate to Chapmen called their Clients; and would make it to be no small
grievance, that* men are imprisoned for Debt, every man may not plead his own
cause, and that there are not County Judicatories to hinder the great charges
put upon the Nation to prosecute their Suits at London and Westminster.

Mr* Boon an Attorney, or something of a Lawyer, with his name wrapped up in an
Anagram, in his Book entitled Examen Legum Angliae, published in the year
1656. whose reading of good Authors mentioned in his Quotations might have
better informed him, and made him of another opinion, will not allow of any of
our Laws that do not agree with the Mosaical, or were not derived from them, or
of any which were made or allowed of in the times of Popery, Boons Examen Legum
Angliae. ca. 3 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13.
but says, that the Law of England as it is now in use is a departure from the
Law of God, and a taking of a Law from Heathens and Idolaters; that the whole
body of Popery is in a manner comprehended in Littletons Book so much commended
by Sir Edward Coke, and that the old Statutes made in the affirmance of the
Common Law, and the Books and Entries whereof he makes mention, are stuffed
with all manner of impieties and errors, that Magna Charta and Charta Forestae
do not appear to be any Acts of Parliament, although they be so called; that
chiefly therein was intended the advancement of the Romish power in a
Tyrannical Government; that the Statutes of Marlebridge, Westminster the first,
and the rest of the old Statutes said to be declaratory of the Common Law, do
savor of the power of Antichrist, and do contain in them manifold impieties
and superstitions; that the Statute of 24 E. 1. concerning Ecclesiastical
Judges, and the Statute made in 9 E. 2. concerning Prohibitions, Clarks
convict, Prelates, Spiritual Courts, Excommunications, Abjurations, power of
the ordinary Fees of the Church, Superstitious Houses, Monasteries, Parsons,
Parsonages, containing sixteen Chapters, are nothing else but Popery, and the
advancement thereof; and the like may be said of 25 E. 3. ca. 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9.
concerning lapses of Benefices, Clarks convict, Ordinaries, etc. that such
causes as do chiefly require remedy in a Court of Equity, may easily be
determined by Judges in Courts of Law; Common Recoveries for assurance of
Lands, are nothing but a pack of lies; that the Theory of the Common Law, and
some of the Statutes now in force, do contain matters repugnant to the Law of
God; that most of the old Statutes, as well such as are said to be in
affirmance of the Common Law, as others introductory to new Laws, do contain in
them great oppressions and wrong to the people, and ought to be amended; that
the general execution of the Laws, as it is now practiced, is an oppression to
the whole Nation; that trivial and impertinent Suits are brought out of the
Countries to Westminster, and thereby all inferior Courts are destroyed: and
proposed a public Registry to be in every County of all Entails, Mortgages and
Statutes, that before any cause or Action ^e entered in any Court, or come
before the Judges, peace he offered by the Plaintiffs, and that wise men be
appointed to take up Controversies; that all the Tithes and Glebe Lands with
other things called Church-duties, may be sold, and a competent means provided
for the Ministers of the Gospel.

In a Book entitled Englands safety in the Laws Supremacy, and published in
the year 1659 it was amongst other things required as a Law including the
people^ Liberties, that no man be imprisoned for Debt, but that all Estates
real and personal be liable for discharge of Debts.

In the same year in a Pamphlet entitled, the humble desires of a Free
Subject, it was desired, that not any of the free people of the three Nations
and Territories thereunto belonging, should not be molested or imprisoned, or
have any violence offered to their persons, but shall have full power and
liberty to seek for their redress unto the Law, and the Courts of Justice,
according to the ancient constitutions of the Laws of the three Nations.

In another owned by one Mr. James Freez, entitled, the outcry and just Appeal
of the enslaved people of England, to be delivered from the insupportable
oppression of lawless yokes of misery, it complains, that thousands of people
are ruined and robbed in their Estates, Liberties and Lives, by Arrests and
Outlaries, and prays that the Writs of Capias may be abolished, and the
imprisoned set free, which would work the total downfall of Satan's throne of
Injustice, cruelty and oppression, even of the four Fairs kept in
Westminster Hall by the ingrossers of pretended Justice, where and by whom men
are daily bought and sold in their Estates, Rights and Liberties.

Some of the Inhabitants of Hull did petition, that the Laws by which the
Commonwealth is to be governed, may be those holy, just and righteous Laws of
the great and wise God; and declaring, that the Nobility are the Pillars and
Buttresses of Monarchy, and Citadels of Pride and Tyranny, ought to be only
during life; that the Divines, the Lawyers, and hereditary Nobility, are
irreconcilable Antagonists to a Free State; advises an Agrarian Law, that the
proportion of Lands be stinted, and a rotation of all Offices and employments,
that those which are capable may taste of rule, as well as subjection.

In a Book called A Rod for the Lawyers, they are called the grand robbers and
deceivers of the Nation, greedily devouring many millions of the peoples money;
and it alleges, that there are in England and Wales of Judges, Lawyers,
Officers, Clarks, Attorneys, and Solicitors, above 30000, (a quarter of that
number, at the largest reckoning, being not to be found of them) which
admitting that each of them do get 250 l. per annum, (very many of them not
getting 100 l. per annum, many not 50 l. per annum, and many not 10 l. per
annum, or so much as the Rag-gatherers in London-streets do, who take it to be
an ill week that yields them not 10 s.) it will says that Calculator amount
unto seven millions and an half per annum, besides the charges of riding to and
from London; whereas if ever there were such a number to be proved, there are
greater numbers of Carpenters and Smiths, who do yearly gain as much as the
smaller sort of the Law Profession do by their as necessary labors.

In a Declaration and Proclamation of the Army (as they called themselves) of
God, published in the same year, they did declare and resolve, Declaration of
the Army in Anno 1659.
by the help of God that there should be liberty of Conscience, but not of Sin;
Godly Laws to be enthroned, but not the Jews; Judges to be in every City, but
not imposed; Prison doors should be set open, to let out Debtors to labor
toward the payment of their Debts; and looked upon it as the voice of God
calling upon them, and giving them an opportunity; and therefore desiring
assistance in so great an enterprise, by as many persons of note and ability as
God has made willing and able, together with themselves, to put in sufficient
security for the performance thereof, did entreat them to send in their names
to Mr. Livewell Chapman, Bookseller in Popes-head-alley by the Exchange, who
has promised to keep them secret until by sober and frequent meetings the
matters may be digested fit to be presented to the Parliament and chief
Officers of the Army.

Where if the Propositions do prove acceptable, there will be a sum of 500000
l. ready toward performance of the same.

And in the Plea called the Armies Plea it is alleged, that the peoples safety
is the chief Sovereignty of all Laws, Statutes, Acts and Ordinances, Covenants,
Engagements, Promises, Subscriptions, Vows, Oaths, and all manner of
obligations and expressions thereof, and are only binding to the Public
safety, and not to the persons of the Governors or forms of Government, but
with reference thereunto, and as principles of truth and right reason brought
to light by the late Parliament.

And one being willing to come on as fast as he could, and keep company with
those goodly assertions, says, that it is not lopping the branches, or cutting
off the Top branch of Monarchy, that will deliver a Nation from bondage, unless
the Axe be laid to the root thereof, to the evil root of bitterness whence
springs all our misery, to the root of every usurping and domineering Interest,
whether in things Civil or Divine.

The number of Freeholders being much increased, has had a natural and strong
tendency toward a Commonwealth; no Government can be fixed in this Nation, but
according to the Balance of Land; that Prince that is not able neither by his
own or the public Revenue, in some measure to counterpoise, if not
overbalance the greater part of the people, must necessarily be Tenant at
will.

Another in his Arguments and fancied Reasons against the office and title of
Kingship, published in the year aforesaid, says, that the Office of a King
makes way for an Act of resumption, and the unsetling of men's Estates; that the
abolishing of Episcopacy and Peerage, and the establishing of Liberty for
Tender consciences, were not the ground of the Wars, for nothing appeared at
the first but the Militia, the Negative voice, and the removing of Evil
Counsel, the other things were brought into the quarrel in the progress of the
contest, by an higher hand of providence then man's purpose.

One of the same company and School of contrivances desired publicly, that no
man should be imprisoned for Debt, except such as are doubted to be running
away, and then not above three days, and to be maintained by the Plaintiff at 3
s. a day in the mean time.

In a Book styled the Good Old Cause dressed in its Primitive luster, said to
have been written by R. Fitz-Brian, it was insinuated, that the distempers of
the Nation being so great, as they could not admit of a redress and conserve
still their old frame things must unavoidably wheel about and fix themselves
upon another Basis; Providence united the honest party of the victorious Army,
so as it was resolved that the poor who had nothing to pay their Debts, should
be freed from the bondage of a perpetual Confinement; the corruption of the
Laws were become at once both the shame and impoverishment of the Nation, and
some Expedient was to be had for the freeing of it from so horrid a Cheat;
Divine providence did by degrees point out a necessity of the change of
Government, and Kingship being laid aside as unnecessary, chargable and
dangerous, it was devolved into a Commonwealth: It being a certain rule, that
corrupt and degenerate States cannot be perfectly healed and regulated, but by
stepping into those forms which are the farthest distant from that wherein they
were corrupted.

Backed by an Anonymous Author, who being desirous to try an experiment, as
well projected as that of the cutting the Moon into Stars, to make the greater
light, and save the expense and trouble of Candles; and to contrive a way for
the ruining at once of many of our fundamental Laws root and branch, does in a
Book entitled a Chaos, or frame of a Government by way of a Republic, printed
by the said Livewel Chapman, endeavor a creation of new Laws out of a
confusion of his own making, wherein as a well-willer to the Public, as he
styles himself, but a greater to all at home, he does in order and respect
(which there will be no reason to believe) to the Lawyers profit, and to the
peoples enjoyment of Magna Charta, propound National, Provincial, Subprovincial
and Parochial Registries, to which Courts all causes of Civil concernment are
to be reduced; all Suits in Law or Equity to be determined in six months, upon
a penalty to the Judges, and loss of Cause to the Client, whether Plaintiff or
Defendant, if guilty of delay; the Judges in Chancery to sit de die in diem,
the Itinerant Judges to determine all Causes that shall be tried before them,
and a Term of a month to be at Westminster Hall after every Circuit, for the
determination of matters of Law, with rules to be given for the Jurisdiction of
each Registerial Court; a National Registry to be appointed at Westminster, to
consist of a Register and six Clarks Assistants or Deputies, which may have
each as many writing and examining Clarks under him as the business shall
require; each County of England to be one entire Province, and those allotted
to the Jurisdiction of the said several six Clarks and Deputies, viz. so many
Counties as are comprised within the several Circuits of the Judges; in every
Shire-Town a Provincial Register, and he to have two Clarks assistants, who
shall as to the employment divide the Province, only Yorkshire is to have three
Clarks assistants, who are to divide according to the Ridings; Subprovincial
Registers to depend upon the Provincial, and to have one Clark assistant; every
Parish, or two where one is too little, to have one Register and a Clark
assistant; every person having Estates in two or more Counties, shall enter
their Estates and Annual values in the National Registry of each Circuit; and
all that have any claim or right in possession or reversion of Lands of
Inheritance of the yearly value of 1000 l. or upwards, shall enter it
accordingly, and of the yearly value of 100 l. and under 1000 l. either in
possession or remainder, are to enter it with the Provincial Register; all
persons having Estates above the clear yearly value of 10 l. and under 100 l.
are to enter them in the Registry in the Hundred or Wapentake of the Province,
and all not exceeding 10 l. per annum, to be entered in the Parochial Registry;
all Debts exceeding 1000 l. to be entered with the National Registry, all above
100 l. and not exceeding 1000 l. with the Provincial Registry, all above 10 l.
and not exceeding 100 l. with the Subprovincial Registry, and all under 10 l.
with the Parochial Register where the Debtor inhabiteth, or his Estate lies:
And when such Entries are perfected, the National Register shall within 14 days
certify it unto the Provincial, who shall within 8 days certify it to the
Subprovincial, and he within 6 days to the Parochial Register: And where
several claims under several titles shall be made unto one and the same thing,
the Register shall give notice thereof to the several Inhabitants and Tenants
thereof; the Parochial Register shall likewise certify to the Subprovincial,
the Subprovincial to the Provincial, and the Provincial to the National
Registry; the Seal of the National Registry shall be the Great Seal of England,
to be kept by the Register and his six Clarks, and nothing to be sealed but in
the presence of the National Register, and two of his Clarks assistants; each
several Province shall have his peculiar seal, whereon shall be the Arms or
cognizance of the Province, City or Corporation wherein the Registry is, and
shall be in the custody of the particular Register or his Assistants; and in
like manner for the Subprovincial and Parochial Registries. The several
Registers where no double claim is entered, shall give Certisicates under their
seals of any Entries which shall be desired; Claims not entered within three
months, unless in case of Infancy, Death, or being beyond Sea, shall be an
absolute bar; Entry to be made within three months after the establishing of
the Registries; Certificates to be made under seal to any that shall desire it,
which shall be a sufficient warrant for the recovery thereof, without any
further trouble to the Creditor then to make his claim thereunto. All manner of
Bargains and Contracts, w^ere any Estate of Inheritance, Mortgage or Lease
shall be made, or any right transferred from one to another, all Covenants,
Conditions, Considerations, and Times of payment in the presence of the several
parties, shall be made before the several Registers, certified under his seal,
delivered to the Creditor, and Counterparts to the other parties. And Entries
made of payments and discharges of Bargains personally by the parties in the
presence of two known witnesses, unless where the parties Bargaining shall be
sufficiently known to the Register or his Deputy; all Marriages to be entered in
the Parochial Register, the Covenants and Conditions of the Marriage to be
entered and certified under the seal of the Register, who is also to enter the
Christening of every Child, deaths and burials of all persons, all Wills and
Testaments; the hiring and wages of Servants to be entered in the Parochial
Registries, and Certificates under seal given thereof; the Fees for entering any
Estate of Inheritance in the National Registry 20 s. per page, for the two
first pages, and 40 s. for every page more; for all Leases, Mortgages,
Jointures, Dowers or Debts, 10 s. for the first page, and 20 s. for the
following pages, including the Fees for the Certificates; for all Entries of
Inheritances in Fee in the Provincial Registry, 10 s. for the two first pages,
and 20 s. for every page more; for all Leases, Mortgages, Jointures, Dowers or
Debts, 7 s. 6 d. for the first page, and 15 s. for every following page,
Certificates included; for the entry of every Inheritance in Fee in the
Subprovincial Registry, 7 s. 6 d. for the first page, and 10 s. per page for
every page after; and for all Leases, Mortgages, Jointures, Dowers or Debts, 5
s. for the first page, and 7 s. 6 d. for every following page; for the entries
of Inheritances in Fee in every Parochial Registry, 5 s. for the first page,
and 7 s. 6 d. for every page more; and for all Leases, Mortgages, Jointures,
Dowers or Debts, 2 s. 6 d. for the first page, and 5 s. for every following
page: And in case any of the Entries of Debts, Leases, Mortgages, Jointures or
Dowers, shall not exceed 6 lines Registerially wr^t in the Parochial Registry,
the Fee thereof shall be but 1 s. the Fees for the Certificates excepted; the
Fees for Entry and Certificate of every Birth, Christening, Death, Burial, in
the Parochial Registry, if it exceed not 6 lines, to be only 6 d. as also for
the retainer of any Servant or Apprentice; but if it shall exceed, the^ the
Fees to be according as was allotted per page.

No money shall be recoverable upon any Bargains or Contracts whatsoever,
unless the same be entered in the Registries as aforesaid, within: he times
limited; the Fee of the Seal of the National Registry, in all cases of
settlement of any Estate, Lease, Mortgage, Jointure or Dower, to be 5 l. in all
cases of Debt, not exceeding 2000 l. the Fee to be 50 s. otherwise 5 l. the Fee
of every Provincial Seal in the cases aforesaid 50 s. in all cases of Debt 25
s. and in all cases of Debt, Mortgages, etc. to be 12 s. 6 d.

In the National Registry 3 4th. parts of the Seal shall be to the
Commonwealth, and a 4th. to the Register, and his assistants and Clarks, for
all entries of each two first pages of every particular Entry, and for all the
following pages an 8th. part only; in each Provincial Registry 3 4th. parts of
the Fees for the Entries, and for Seals also, to be to the Commonwealth, and
the 4th. to the Register, his assistants and Clarks; in the Subprovincial
Registry 2 parts of 3 of the Entries and Seals to be to the Commonwealth, and
the 3 to the Register; in the Parochial Registry 2 parts of 3 of the Seal to
the Commonwealth, and the 3 of all the Fees of Entries to be to the Register,
his Clarks and Deputies.

Every Clark, Assistant or Deputy of the National Registry, shall have six
sworn Attorneys or Messengers, whose care shall be to transmit his several
Certificates to the several Registries of the Provinces, solicit the causes in
the said Registerial Court, and have for every cause in every Court-day,
besides all charges, 7 s. 6 d. and no more; every Clark assistant in each
Provincial Registry shall have 3 Attorneys or Messengers, who are to officiate
as in the National Registry, and have for every cause in which any of them
shall be employed 5 s. for Fee and no more, besides charges and expenses; each
Subprovincial shall have 2 Attorneys, who shall do the same work, and for every
Court day shall have for Fee in every cause 4 s. besides all charges; each
Parochial Registry shall have 2 Attorneys, (which according to the number of
9725 Parishes in England and Wales, will make almost 20000 Attorneys, besides
their Clarks, which with Solicitors and their Clarks added unto them, will more
then three times exceed the number of Attorneys, Solicitors and Clarks, if
truly accounted, now in being) whose Fee shall be for every Court day 3 s.
besides charges, and shall do the like as is before directed; every Attorney
shall be punished for fraud or neglect, and make satisfaction to the Client for
all damages; and if not able to do it, shall be dismissed of his place, another
chosen, and the Client restored to his former condition; the Clarks assistants
to be chosen by the respective Registers, upon security to be given, and they
are to give directions unto them, and be responsal for them; each Clark
assistant in the Provincial Registry shall make choice of one Attorney, and the
Register of two.

The Judges in the several Parish Courts shall be the Register, the Minister,
and the Constable and Churchwardens for the time being, whereof in all hearings
two to be present, with the Register or his Deputy; the several Courts to be
kept every Thursday fortnight, and all matters to be brought to hearing the 3d.
Court day, and to hold pleas of all Debts not exceeding 10 l. principal, and
all Estates under 10 l. per annum, lying in the same Parish; 12 Judges learned
in the Law to be appointed by Parliament to attend the National Registerial
Court; 21 Judges be appointed to attend every Provincial Registerial Court,
where one Judge at least is to be present, with the Register and one Clark
assistant, when all matters are to be ^eard; every month shall be a Court
Provincial, upon the Tuesday in every week, the Subprovincial Court every
Friday 3 weeks, and the Judges to be the Register and his Assistant, and the
Minister of the Parish.

All Summons to be granted upon motion of the party or his Attorney, (giving
security to defray the charges of the party to be S^mmoned, if his Action he
not good, or cause just) by the respective Registers, their Clarks Assistants
or Deputies, in writing under their hands, unto which of Appearance shall be
given either in person or by Attorney, the Cause is to proceed; but if no
Appearance shall be given, a second Summons is to be granted under the seal of
the Register, to which if no Appearance shall be given, Judgment shall be given
the second day of Appearance, and entered in the Court Registry; and if agreement
intervene not before the next Court day, and be entered with the Register,
Execution shall be granted, and the Registers seal put thereon, not to be
reversed or any appeal admitted.

Two Vacations in the whole year to be in t^ National Registry, as to the
trying of Causes, the one from the first of December to the 10th. of February,
and from the last day of May to the first day of September.

But that Chaos-maker or good man, if any one could find any cause or reason to
call him so, or some of his Partisans, when they shall have remembered it
themselves, or have heard it from others, that the Noble and innocent Earl of
Strafford was by false witnesses and accusations; remote and improbable
inferences, strained constructions, and never like to happen consequences,
hunted to death upon a supposition of subverting the Laws, when if it had been
either possible or true, it could upon an Accumulation of all ^his pretended
Crimes have extended no farther then an endeavor to subvert one of our
Fundamental Laws, may be their own Judges, convict and justly condemn
themselves for unpardonable faults, in seeking to subvert so many of our
Fundamental Laws uno Ictu, with one stroke, and at once, which they themselves
^ave sworn to maintain and defend.

Notwithstanding all which Oliver Cromwell did so well understa^d his own
interest and single-personship.

CHAP. XVII. That neither Oliver Cromwell or his Son Richard, the second mock
Protector or little Highness, did conceive it to be reasonable, or had any
intention to deliver up the Justice of the Nation to those ignorant giddy and
ever changing kind of Refermations.
ANd that the administration of Justice was a great end, and one of the
principal parts of Government, and remembered that the men of Westminster (of
which he was too great a member and director) calling themselves after the
murder of the King, Declaration of Parliament 9 Feb. 1648.
a Parliament, did the 9th. day of February 1648 declare, that they were fully
resolved to maintain, and should and would uphold; preserve and keep the
Fundamental Laws of this Nation, for and concerning the preservation of the
lives, properties, and liberties of the people, Declaration of the Parliament
of England 17 March 1648 expressing the grounds of their settling the present
Government in the way of a Free State.
with all things incident thereunto, and required all Judges, Justices,
Sheriffs, Officers and Ministers of Justice to proceed in their respective
places and offices accordingly; and did the 17th. day of Mar^h then next
following, declare, That our Laws being duly executed, are the most just, free,
and equal of any other Laws in the world, and that they were very sensible of
the excellency, great antiquity and equality of them, and that the liberty,
property, and peace of the Subjects were fully preserved by them, did so little
believe it to be for the good and honor of the Nation to hearken or yield unto
the product of those wind-mil, giddy, and vertiginous brains; or by the
persuasion of some idle and ridiculous Pamphlets, written and contrived by such
as would for their own advantages plow up the Laws and reasonable customs of
the Kingdom, to settle and set up a Weathercock Government ridiculous to all
other Nations, as he did in his Speech to that which he called his Parliament
upon his Dissolution of them the 12th. day of September 1654. declare, that in
every Government there must be somewhat fundamental, Cromwell's Speech to his
Parliament upon his Dissolution of them the 12th. day of September, 1654.
somewhat like a Magna Charta that should be unalterable, that some things are
Fundamentals, which he should deal plainly with them may not be parted with,
but were to be delivered over to posterity, else every succeeding Parliament
would be disputing to change and alter the Government, and we shall be as often
brought into Confusion as we have Parliaments; and he and his Parliaments in
the time of his hypocritical Government did so little relish the taking away of
the process of Arrest and Utlary, as they ordered only prisoners to be
discharged out of prison, if they made Oath that they were not worth five
pounds after their Debts paid, and undertake to pay their Debts when they
should be better enabled, which to procure their liberty, made many lustily to
Forswear themselves, and had no great cause to be in love with their pretended
Reformations, when the fiery Mr. John Jones of Nayoth was after his abusing and
railing upon our Laws found guilty of deceits, and committed by them a prisoner
to the Fleet.

And when in the year 1653. or beginning of the next ensuing, Remonstrance of
the prisoners for Debts to the Parliament concerning the injustice of the
Committee fitting at Salters-Hall in London for relief of Creditors and
Prisoners.
by an Act of Parliament had for the relief of Creditors, constituted a
Committee for London and the Suburbs thereof to sit at Salters-Hall, and
several other Committees in all the Counties of England and Wales, and empowered
them to be the only Judges, though not Sworn, to hear and determine matters of
Debt, and escape to fine for breach of trust and concealments, imprison, set at
liberty, remaund to prison, adjudge to the Pillory, or house of Correction,
grant, lease, or sell the Estates of the prisoners, were to admit of no legal
forms, but proceed in a summary way, and to be responsible to none but the
Parliament, and sell dead prisoners Estates as well as if they were living,
whether the Lands were Entailed or not. It was upon complaint of some prisoners
of Note and Worth, alleged and offered to be proved that one of those kind of
Judges at Salters-Hall having two Brothers practicing before that Committee,
the one as a Solicitor, and the other as a Councellor at Law, would bring his
party with him, whisper unto his Fellow-Judges, arise from the Bench, and go
and sit by the Clark, and make the Orders as he pleased and liked those his
doings so well, as he was heard to say he did not doubt but to make his place
worth 1000 l. per Annum unto him before he had done with it, and might be in
good hopes of it, when besides those his ungodly Extraordinaries, large
Salaries were allowed to him and his Brethren of that Committee for their Sons
and Agents, and the gain which they and their Confederates might have by the
sale, or indirect purchase thereof in other men's names, that Committee were to
have distributed amongst them two pence in the pound upon the sale of any
prisoners Lands or Estates.

The pretending Gospel-Improvers in South Wales had shut up most of the
Churches, The distressed condition of the Inhabitants of South Wales.
and gathered in the mean time one hundred and fifty thousand pounds into their
private purses, and therefore both Oliver, and Richard Cromwell, and their
Council and Parliaments did only receive those unquiet Innovators Petitions,
and as they did in the determining of what should be Encumbrances fit to be put
into a public Registry, or the taking away of Tithes make a show of intending
great matters, when they only hung them upon long delay's, and an everlasting
deliberation, never to be brought to any conclusion.

And our Laws having thus long fought with Beasts like St. Paul at Ephesus,
might by his Majesty's happy Restoration have given them no small assurance
that they should have deserved some rest and tranquillity; but it seems as the
wrongs done unto them were unrepented, so were their patience and sufferings to
be prolonged.

And the professors of our, or any other good Laws should not be so
contemptible, when that blessed Apostle could be no less than a Lawyer, when he
sat and had been Educated at the feet of Gamaliel, and was afterward by his
Apostolical Office, and great Endowments in all manner of Learning, such a
darling and beloved of God Almighty, as he had in his lifetime the
inexpressible joys and wonders of the Third Heaven communicated unto him, when
they were before, and that time, and long after in better Ages of such an
esteem and usefulness amongst the wiser and better sort of mankind, as they
were justly called Sacerdotes Justitiae, Ministers that sacrificed for the
people at the Altars of Justice, their Houses were as Oracles, to which they
came for council and advice, and were accounted to be Laudabile genus hominum,
Linwood in constitutionibus Othoboni.
a praiseworthy kind of men, and being secular men, did in Campo Justitiae
tanquam Athletae militare, as their Champions labor to obtain Justice for
their Clients; but those abusers of our Laws and Lawyers were too much in love
with their projects to forsake them, and like.

CHAP. XVIII. What occasioned the continuance of the former Projects, and
groundless Complaints against our Laws since his Majesty's happy Restoration.
THe Snakes had but cast their skins, either for that the Fancies which had
brooded in the heads of these troublers of our Israel had as lesae
Imagi^nationes usually do in men oppressed with Melancholy, stuck so fast, and
brought them to such a habit or custom as they could not easily remove them, or
had a desire to maintain and uphold an heretofore contracted or espoused error,
or to add wrongs to wrongs, least they whom they had so much abused should
after seek to bring them under the censure and justice of those Laws which they
had so much injured, or were vexed that they had so unexpectedly lost their
prey, and the opportunities of building up again their Bethel, where their
Calves were well fed and worshipped for their seditious bleatings, and were the
more emboldned by his Majesty's over-easie pardoning the wickedest Rebellion
that ever was hatched in Hell, and permitting all but some few not only to
enjoy all their former real Estates, and all their personal Estates, which had
been gotten by Blood, and the Rapine and Depraedation of all the honest people
in his Three Kingdoms, but to creep into most of the profitable Employments of
the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, (which would better have been managed by
his more honest and loyal Subjects) eat the Childrens bread, and get all that
could be any ways gained or cozened from them.

And too many of them have grown so impudent as to offer to palliate their
wickedness by a base and senceless Equivocation to cover their Woolvish doings
by the putting on of sheeps clothing, and make as many as could be so mad to
believe it, that they were always for the late King the Martyr, and loved and
honored him; as if those their great Armies that fought against him in the
bloody Battles at Edgehill, Marston-moor, and Naseby, took his Towns, Castles,
and Garrisons, Imprisoned and Murdered him, were some invisible Fairies
phantasms, or specter; and became so much Elated in the success which they met
with, by getting as much or more by counterfeiting of Loyalty after their
Rebellion, as they did before in their acting and height of it as they hoped
that they had now an opportunity put into their hands of accomplishing their
wickedly designed works of Reformation preparative to a Republique, some of
their party being at this time, so more then they should be confident of it as
they keep in the expectation of their Good Old-Cause as they do dreamingly call
it, the Conveyances and Grants which they lately had of the Usurpers of the
Kings, Queens, Bishops, Deans and Chapters, Nobility and Loyal Gentries Lands,
as any other Evidences of their Estates, and do think it to be no bad exchange
or bargain too, give double or treble the value of some of Oliver Cromwell's
gold or silver-Coyn as precious Relics to put them in mind of that great
Stork, who if he had lived longer, would have taught the Frogs what they were
to expect of him; and too many of that Tribe or silly persuasions have lately
been emboldned publicly to offer to maintain the lawfulness of those their
ungodliest of all Wars, and might suppose themselves to be in no bad condition,
when they were not like the Gibeonites after they had deceived Joshua with
their moldy bread, Josh: 15,
rent and tottered garments, with old shoes* put to be ho^ers of Wood, and
drawers of Water for the House of God; but whilst they were inwardly in their
hearts and endeavors the greatest Enemies of it, did eat of the ^at of the
Flock, and enrich themselves with the most profitable Offices and Preferments
of the Kingdom, and not only deceive the Kings loyal Subjects of their Blessing
due to the Birthright of their Allegiance, and a privilege inheritable to
prosecute their actions and suites at the Common Law, Calvins's case in Cokes 7
Reports, and Lord Ellesmeres post nati Mic: 12 E. 4. 22.
but of the benefit of their ancient, good, and equitable Laws, which is
another part of their Inheritance, and did therein worse then Jacob did by his
Elder Brother Esau, who did not loose all, but had a Mess of Pottage for it.

Or did in the pursuance of the former evil designs of themselves or their
fantastical well-willers think it necessary to persecute our Laws by false
suggestions, outcries, scandals, and clamours, as Boys have used to do in
their hunting of Squirrels by noise and shoutings, and to speed as well therein
as they, or many of the Rebellious rout did in their designs against
Episcopacy, and the Militia, and to pull in pieces the Royal and ever to be
approved Monarchical Government. Or some of the Stationers having some of those
Pamphlet projects and squibs against Monarchy and Regal Government lying upon
their hands unsold, did to put them off in some approaching or sitting
Parliaments of his Majesty, cause a new date or Year of our Lord to be instead
of that which was before (some of that society or company being so egregiously
wicked, as many Books have been sent abroad in a Masquerade in six or seven
several Disguizes, or new Dresses and Titles to abuse the people and cozen them
of their money; and a Primerhinder and a Stationer may be named if an
undertaken, to be proved Information do not prove to be otherwise, that have
caused the Pamphlet that carried the Device of Summons, and banishing Arrests
and Out-laries which had been long before published, to be re-published or
printed, which like some Paper-kite with a lanthorn and candle in the tail or
end of it had not long before made the men of Novelty and Ignorance stand at a
gaze at it. And it has since his Majesty's happy Restoration been often
observed, that too many of that Trade and Faction have been very dull in the
preferring as they c^ll it, or offering to sale any Books which concerned the
vindication of any of his Majesty's Rights, or the real good of his Subjects,
but have been nimble enough to promote the vent or putting off any Books which
tended to Faction, or the unhinging of the Government.

Or the Witchcraft of their Rebellion had with their Ignorance so captivated
their understandings (if ever they were Masters of any that tended to good) as
to make them to be like too many of the Laplanders, who are said to bequeath
their Devils, or evil Spirits to their Children, Shefferus History of Lapland,
cap: 11.
or any who should succeed them, more willing then they should be, to transmit
their sins and unquietness of Spirit unto all that would make any Title to
their rude and indigested Opinions.

Howsoever from some or all of these Causes, not a few of the former wicked and
never to be justified Principles, ignorant and unwarrantable endeavors and
complaints have since Monarchical Government, and our Laws and Liberties were
so happily restored, sprung up again; and no sooner was our David brought back
over Jordan, but many a railing, cursing, and rebellious Shimei that had done
more then cast stones against him and his Royal Father, made haste, and came
with the men of Juda and Loyal party to meet him, and as if they had not
remembered all the mischiefs which they had done unto him, his Brethren, Royal
Father, Family, and good people, pretended that they had been greatly
instrumental in it, and having gained a very large and extensive Act of general
Pardon and Oblivion, (which as to treason, murder, felony, faction, and
rebellion, the Loyal party needed not) an Act of Parliament for confirmation of
what their abusive Courts of Justice had done in matters of Judicature betwixt
party and party in the inter regnum, and times of Usurpation; and another Act
of Parliament to make honest and free many Parents on earth from Adultery or
Fornication, and legitimate and un-bastar'd* many of their Children begotten in
a wrong way of Marriage solemnized in despite of the Laws and our Church of
England, before a Justice of Peace, not in a Church, but an Hall, Parler, or
Chamber, where that kind of Magistrate was a Knight, or Gentleman, or many
times in a Shop when he was a Tradesman, which the Kings faithful Subjects
abhorred; and some of them having warmed themselves by the Farming of the Kings
Revenue and those grand and ever to be detested Artifices of Advance and
defalcation, which have so much cankred, decayed, and ruined it; and others
that li^ed their consciences with plundrings and sequestrations, and Committee,
ungodly Emoluments did fall again to their former Trade and Engines of
subverting our Laws, and turning the Justice of the Kingdom into their Abortive
projects, and newfound Politiques, and hoped in the end to recompense the loss
of their possesion of the Lands of the King, Queen, Prince, Nobility, Gentry,
Bishops, Dean and Chapters, which they having purchased at an easy rate, were
taken from them, and enforced to be restored; and their hopes of gaining the
Lands and Endowments of the Universities and Colleges, which by a failing of
Providers, and some mistakes as they wickedly thought of Divine Dispensations,
or some Errors of their new lights they had unexpectedly lost.

And therefore summoned and got together their mis-apprehensions and Invectives
against that ancient, very legal and rational custom of Fines to be Paid upon
Original Writs where the Debt or Damage exceeded Forty Pounds, which from the
Year 1651. unto his Majesty's happy Return unto his Throne, had by their
Rebellions and ungrounded clamors against the payment of them, to make a
mis^lead people the more willing and able to continue and contribute to a War
against their consciences and eternal happiness been taken away, or laid to
sleep.

In order whereunto in a Book Entitled the Wants of England Printed in the
year 1667. it was among other things offered to the consideration of both
Houses of Parliament, that according to the law of God and other Christian
States, Christian clemency, gentleness and mercy, and the ancient Laws and
Customs of this Kingdom, no person be for any new debt cast in prison, but be
left at liberty to work out his Debt by industry.

In the year 1669. a Petition was exhibited to the King and both Houses of
Parliament, that in Actions of Debt there may be no Arrest or Imprisonment of
the Debtors Body, but a Summons made at his House, or hung at his door, and for
want of an Appearance his Goods and real Estate to be seized, and the like in
the year 1671. And in the same Year a Bill for an Act of Parliament was with
great Importunity desired for the Registring of all Encumbrances of Land, and
of all Debts and Engagements, then which nothing could have more undone the
greatest part of an Impoverished Nobility and Gentry by the late Wars, and
Taxes nor any thing more have Bankrupted Citizens and Tradesmen, whose Estates
do consist in a great deal more in Credit and Opinion, than in reality and
substance. But the promoters of those Innovations who endeavored to pull in
pieces our wellestablished Laws concerning Arrests and Outlaries, did in those
their Attempts speed no better then Balaak the King of Moab did by sending for
Balaam to curse the children of Israel, when notwithstanding his Erecting of
several Altars, and all his solicitations and promises of Rewards, he could
not hinder him from blessing instead of cursing them, for the wisdom of the
King and Parliament, and his Privy Council did think it to be more for the good
of the people to suspend their desires and Devises, until the King might
understand that there could be any reason, cause, or ground to alter or forsake
the old Fundamental Laws, so for many Ages well approved to comply with their
humors and ill designs, but being willing to give what reasonable content he
could to that small complaining part of the people without pre^judice and
damage to the universality and greater number of his Subjects, did as the
fittest expedient, and all that the Law could permit, and his reason and
Sovereignty persuade him to do for the allaying that distemper which had seized
upon a sort of ignorant, seditious, and unquiet spirited people whom no reason
can satisfy, but would set up their new devices which are never like to
perform their Promises and Intendments. And needed not (as touching the taking
away of the Process of Arrest and Utlary) to have troubled his Majesty and
Parliament, and themselves and others with such unwholsom and improbable
Remedies for that which their Ignorance and Vain Imaginations only told them
were Grievances, but should rather have acquiesced in a due consideration that
his Majesty did not hold it to be agreeable to Justice to abolish the Process
of Arrest or Outlary, or to change or take away the Fundamental Laws which
established or allowed of those Ancient and legal kinds of Law proccedings as
grant in the Year of our Lord 1664. by the advice of his Privy Council his
Commission for the relief of Poor and Distressed Prisoners, under the Great
Seal of England to the Archbishop of Canterbury, Bishops of London,
Winchester, Rochester, Lord Mayor of London for the time being, Judges and
Justices of the Courts of Kings Bench, Master of the Rolls Judges of the Court
of Common Pleas, Barons of the Exchequer, Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster, Masters of Requests, and Chancery, Attorney and Sollicitor-General,
and Attorney of the Duchy of Lancaster, Deans of St. Paul, and Westminster,
Lieutenant of the Tower of London, Bishops, Chancellors, with the Advocats of
the Court of the Arch Bishops of Canterbury, and Bishop of London for the time
being, etc. and diverse other Commissioners therein named, to call before them
such Prisoners and their Creditors in and upon Actions of Debt, Gase,
Trespasses, Trover, Detinue, or other Personal Actions, Judgments and
Executions whatsoever thereupon, and to treat for Compositions and Agreements,
(some of the Judges of the Court out of which such prisoners have been
committed to be privy to such Compositions and Agreements) to the end that the
said Prisoners night be relieved, and have such reasonable years, days and
times of payment for such debts and damages as they shall not be presently able
to satisfy, and with such Security for payment thereof, as in equity and good
Conscience, having respect to the ability of the Prisoners, and charge of Wife
and Children, and other incidents to pious Cases considered: And if any
Creditor should refuse to appear before them, the Commissioners were empowered
to punish them, and take such Order for their Appearance as they should think
meet, and to use all lawful ways to make them take such reasonable
Compositions as to any Three or more of them should be thought meet. And his
Majesty therein Declared, that his meaning was to be aiding and assisting with
his Grace and Fa^vour to the misery and calamity of such as be truly poor and
distressed; and not unto such as lie in Prison rather of wilfulness and
obstinacy, and out of a resolution to retain large and ample Estates to
themselves, and therefore straightly charged the said Commissioners to be very
vigilant and circumspect therein; and did in the said Commission mention that
Queen Elizabeth did upon the supplication of the Prisoners in the Prisons of
the Fleet, and Kings Bench in the Eight and twentieth Year of her Reign
Authorize certain Commissioners under the Great Seal of England for the
ordering and compounding of the Controversies and Causes between the distressed
Prisoners and their Creditors, and such others by whom tbey were detained
Prisoners, or in Execution, and contined the said Commission nntil her Decease.
And that King James being informed that certain Clauses in the said Commission
were Derogatory to the Common* Laws of England, and that by color of the said
Commission which was intended for the Charitable relief of poor, miserable, and
distressed Prisoners, certain refractory and obstinate Debtors which rather
wanted will then means to satisfy their just Debes, took occasion to molest
and trouble their Creditors, did to prevent all occasions of Inconveniences to
his loving Subjects, especially such as tended to the breach of his Laws,
forbear for many years to renew the said Commission; and finding that his
forbearance had wrought a good effect by discouraging obstinate and wilful
Debtors that sought nothing more then Evasions to avoid the payment of their
just Debts, so also that for want of that, or some other charitable course for
the relief of such as were truly and indeed poor, distressed, and miserable,
and wanted means to satisfy their Creditors, it had been occasion to pester
and fill his Prisons with the bodies of such persons whose punishment could no
way ava^l their Creditors, but rather was an hindrance to the satisfaction of
their Debts, for that during the time of their restraint they were no ways
able to go about or attend their lawful business, but must of force consume
themselves and that little that they had miserably and in Prison, did by his
Commission under the Great Seal of England in the Sixteenth Year of his Reign,
by the advice of the then Lord Chan^cellor of England, and also of diverse of
his principal Judges of his Courts at Westminster, authorize the Commissioners
therein named to proceed according to the Tenor of the said Commission for the
relief of the said poor Prisoners in the said Prisons; and afterward being
informed that his said Commission had not taken that good Effect which was
expected, renewed the said Commission, and thereby prescribed and directed such
a moderate course as that neither the Insolence of wilful and obstinate Debtors
should be thereby encouraged to the derogation of his Laws, nor yet his Grace
and Clemency be wanting unto such to whom it should be meet to Extend the same,
did upon the humble suite of the distressed Prisoners in the Prisons of the
Marshalsea and other Prisons in and about the Cities of London and Westminster,
and the places near adjoining to the same, whose Cases were as much to be
commiserated and lamented, as the said Prisoners in the said Prisons of the
Kings Bench, and the Fleet, by another Commission under the Great Seal of
England in the Two and twentieth Year of his Reign authorize certain
Commissioners therein named for the Ordering and Compounding of the Causes of
the distressed Prisoners in the Prisons within the places aforesaid; and that
his Majesty's Royal Father did by Two several Commissions under the Great Seal
of England, the one bearing Date in the Fourth Year of his Reign, and the
other in the Sixth, empower diverse Persons therein named, to the same or the
like purpose.

Nevertheless the Good Old Cause (as they are pleased to mis^name it) with all
its hypocritical tricks of State must not by any means be abandoned, but they
which did so much adore that Empusa or Witch called the Public Faith which
(like the Golden Calf made by the Idolatrous children of Israel) helped them to
great store of money* plate, and Rings, to furnish out and maintain a
Rebellion, could not now forbear to be as violent as they could to pull Down
the ever to be re^spected and honored better Publiqe Faith and Justice of the
Nation, and Disturb his Majesty and his subordinate Judges and Magistrates in
the administration thereof, and therefore some Synon or Trojan horse was of
necessity to be made use of or introduced under a color of public Good, or
some stratagem or mine prepared to accomplish that by cunning and circumvention
which by suit or force of Law, reason, and arguments they could not before be
able to obtain, and for that had as they thought a pattern or way cut or
chalked out by the beforementioned S. D. and some of his levelling Clerks and
Attorneys associating with him in their aforesaid proposals presented to the
Committee for Regulation of the Laws in the year 1650* wherein they alleged
that what they had proposed was not that the Writ of Capias should be taken
away first, Proposals of S. D. and diverse Atorneys of the Court of Common Pleas
to the Committee for the Regulation of the Laws 24 May 1650.
but humbly conceived that it would be better by finding out nearer and cheaper
ways to bring the old road to be neglected* then to deprive the suitors of the
Old before they can have experience of the new; and it was only proposed by way
of supplement not to take away the ancient course of proceeding^ by way of
Capias, and ^^igent if the case shall require it.

CHAP. XIX. That the Proceedings at the Common Law desired by the new way of a
peremptory Summons, or the old by Writs of Summons, Pone, and Distringas, or
Writs of Capias at the Plaintiffs pleasure are not consistent or agreeable one
with the other, and that Laws being to be binding are to be certain and
positive, not Arbitrary.
BUt such a State Essay, Bill of Comprehension, or rather Contradiction,
whether the ancient legal and rational usage and custom of proceedings in the
Law by Writs of Summons, pone and Distress to be legaly executed by Sheriffs
where the Defendant has a visible and certain Estate, which for Expedition of
Justice, have by alteration of Times, Increase of Trade, and a necessity of Law
and Reason not been so much used as heretofore it was, and is not yet forbidden
by any Act of Parliament, or Rule of Law, and the process of Capias and Arrest
which* for many Ages past have not only been allowed and approved by this
Nation, but the greatest (if not all) of the civilized part of Mankind as a
principal incident essential and necessary sine qua^ non in the distribution of
Justice where the Defendant has not a visible Estate to secure him from the
Sheriffs Return of a Nihil habet is a Fugitive, or likely to be such a one, or
is not to be found, and has nothing but his body to be a pledge or security,
that he will Judicio sis^i and judicatum solvere, or that the process of
Exigent in order to an U^^ary, which without (...) causing the U^^ary it self,
do offer a lesser violence to the person of a Defendant then the Writ of Capias
does, can by any rule of (...) reason be exchanged for peremptory Summons and
sei^ures, or can be for the good of the people, to cause them to tear and tire
one another (...) abundance of charges delays, and (...) in a Cirque or Circle
of Law contentions, who will certainly when they shall find the sad effects or
event of it not think themselves well used to be decayed, or enticed to abandon
their own good Laws for such new and troublesome devices* which may be to as
little avail as to renounce skilful, able, and honest physicians to drive a
trade with ignorant Empericks and Mountebanks when they are not sick, or need
them, and may time enough believe that such a Novel way of peremptory Summons
has so many symptoms or marks of Evil upon it, and so easily discernable as
their gain by it will be no more then to receive a Scorpion instead of a Fish,
or to have Co^quintid^ put into their pottage pot; and they that are so fond of
it, and willing to pro^uce such a mischief rather then a blessing for their
fellow subjects might have forecasted that evils are most commonly according to
corrupt Nature better welcome, and more likely to receive entertainment then
good, and do by their novelty or correspondence with bad humors, designs, our
interests too often seize upon or inveagle the greatest and less prudential
part of the people when cheapness or a pretense of expedition shall be some of
the perswaders unto that which can arrive to no better a construction or event
then to make the Lawmakers and Sovereign advising with his Two Houses of
Parliament so uncertain of the ^equel or product hereof as to make one part of
the Law rep^al another at the pleasure of every particular man, and to Enact it
as Adiaphorous, or indifferent this way or that way, when a very long course of
time and experience^ and the approbation of so many Laws and Ages past do
record and witness the excellency of that which some busy (...) would have to
be exchanged for (...) and seminary of not to be expressed Inconveniences and
Mischiefs, and such a device or fancied alteration cannot with our a Prophenity
(...) it persuade* the most sanguine and easily credulous that it can be
equally and fully as good as the other, or render it to be indifferent, or give
any absolute or infallible assurance* that those likely hopes will ever bring
them to their promised success, and if it be not to be ranked amongst the
indifferents, must be either better then the former ancient courses which none
have yet experimented, or worse, and then not at all to be Imposed upon the
people.

For Laws being R^cti praeceptiones and pr^^i depulsiones always intended by
God and good men to advance that which is good, and suppress that which is bad,
Aequum ab iniquo and licitum ab illicito separare, and to discern and divide
betwixt good and evil, and said to be Laws a ligando, and to be properly no
Laws if not Obligatory and binding, are to be certain and positive, not
Arbitrary as unto those which ought to obey them, and as much as right reason
will permit Immutable, especially if deduced from the dictates of nature, as
that of the preserving the Authority of Courts of Justice and their
administration of it, are to those that seek for help in the maintaining or
recovery of just rights and Properties, but not to be ambiguous in certain
latitudinarian or indifferent, for although there may be many who would be well
enough content to be Judges of their own Causes, and the Executioners of their
own Decrees, or if that would not be allowed, would be (...) to hale men to
Justice, or by open clamours cry harow as the People of Normandy were anciently
said to have done to their Duke Rollo when they cried to him for Justice who
was wont never to fail them, which after a long process of Time gave us the
Original of the word Hue and Cry yet much in use amongst us in matters of
Felony. And the like was in the early days of the world not unusual amongst
other Nations in their seeking to their Kings and Princes for redress of Wrongs
before the more happy way of Establishing a fixed rule and course by Courts of
Justice.

Yet those their unfitting desires for such an Arbitrary Act and Indifferent
Law ought to be allayed, and the more safe and sure paths of Justice kept
according to the patterns and direction of the best of Presidents, for that God
himself the wisest, greatest, and best of Legislators when he gave his
righteous Laws to his people of Israel, and commanded that a Neighbors raiment
taken for a pledge should be restored unto him before the Sun go down for his
covering to Exodus 22. v. 26.
sleep in, or the Command not to (...) the sentence of the Judge under no less
penalty then the loss of life, Deuteronomy. 17. 12.
(from whence the reason and equity for every man to be obedient to the
Authority of Courts of Justice in their legal Process may deduce its Original)
was not left as a matter indifferent but absolute and positive.

Where the Statute of Westminster (...) which gives a Plaintiff his Election
to ^ake his Execution upon a Recovery of a Debt by Writ of Fieri Facias, 13 E.
1. Ca. 18.
or Elegit, the plaintiff taking out his Elegit, (...) enter it as he ought
upon Record, for that (...) should be then debarred of any other remedy against
the person of the Defendant by Capias (...) a^iendu^^, and a man cannot by Law
have Two Writs of Scire (...) at once in a Common persons case, 1 H. 4. 6.
whereby to have Damages twice recovered against him. After an Elegit, although
the Sheriff return that he has neither Lands or Goods, 15 H. 7. 14, 15.
the plaintiff shall not have an Execution against the Body, a Capias ad
satisfaciendum does not lie after a Fieri Facias, 45 E. 3. 19.
until a Nulla bona returned, nor a Fieri Facias or Elegit after Imprisonment
of the Defendants body.

A Writ of Annuity purchased pending another, 34 E. 3. Br. 922.
was abated where two brought Writs of Quare Impedit one against the other
returnable at one and the same day, Pas. 22 E. 3. 4.
the one was discontinued, and they pleaded upon the other, Jones Reports, 255.
in the Case between Bery and Heard in the Seventh Year of the Reign of King
Charles the Martyr, it was in the Court of Kings Bench adjudged, that where a
man had his Election to seek his Remedy by the Commou Law, or by the Statute of
Gloucester that gave an Action of Wast^, he could not do it by the one way and
the other, for our Laws and Courts of Justice would never allow a Plaintiff to
have two Actions or Remedies for one and the same thing at the same time, but
were so careful to hinder it, as they suffered discontinuance of Process and
Pleas in Abatements where one Action was brought depending another for the same
matter: Bracton lib. 5. c. 17.
And Bracton says, that where a man has an Action depending, and brings
another for the same thing, Cadit breve posterius, the later is to be quashed;
agreeable whereunto at this day in Chancery where a man has an Action
depending at the Common Law, and seeks relief in Chancery upon the same
Account, he is put to make his Election in which Court he will proceed.

And therefore if such an Arbitrary Act of Parliament should be made to give
the Plaintiffs their Election to proceed by the way of the new contrived way of
peremptory Summons, the former ways of Summons, Pone, and Distrainings, or
Capias not being prohibited, the proceeding by process of peremptory Summons
ought to be entered in a Court of Record, and entered may be more prejudicial to
the Plaintiffs then they expected, for if they cannot resort or return again to
the former better ways of proceedings, they may find cause enough to repent of
their being so fond of a new way, when the old will appear to have been much
better, which to reverse or discontinue cannot be, for the Interest of the King
or his people, when it shall have no better reason or foundation for it.

For if the Proposers could give unto themselves or any of their fellow
Subjects any assurance that it will be probably for their good and benefit, yet
if the King, who is supreme and superior to all the Judges in his Dominions,
were but a subordinate Judge, Zeiglerus dicastice sive de Judicum officio
conclus. 40.. 1, 9, 46, 53
he would as the Civil Law declares, transgress the rules of Justice and Right
reason, if he should follow opinionem probabilem relicta and rejecta
probabiliori, an opinion that is but probable, when there is an opinion to the
contrary more probable; and S. D. and his then Confederates might have
considered, that a Process against the Goods and Chattcls of a Defendant, is of
a different nature from that which is against his Body, that duo contradictoria
non sint nec possunt esse simul vera, contradictions neither do or can at one
and the same time agree; and that Practica sunt speculativis praeferenda, what
is in speculation of a possibility not at all experimented, is to give place to
that which with an universal or major part of a consent has been long
practiced.

CHAP. XXI. That it will not be for the Interest of the King or his Subjects to
give way to that Design which may open a passage to other Innovations and
Designs as much if not more inconvenient and prejudicial.
FOr that all his good people by the sad and inexpressible calamities and
miseries which they have lately endured by the Wars and Tumults unjustly raised
against thc King and his Laws, are not now to learn what a deep dyed hypocrisy
and pretenses for Reformation would have, or to believe the evil consequences
which have risen from a too much yielding to those popular humors, which as
that Royal Martyr has in his Solitudes and Sufferings declared, served to give
life and strength to the almost infinite activity of those men who studied with
all diligence and policy to improve their Innovating designs, and how
dangerous the permitting of Innovations would be, and how careful all Princes
and wise men have heretofore been to avoid them; so that if there were nothing
else to make the world out of love with them, the never to be satisfied
inquietude of many of that sort of people in the matter of Religion and
Church Government, and the swearing, liking, and shortly after disliking and
hating the Solemn League and Covenant, the by too many as it may be feared
intended standing Rule of Rebellion, and their unfixedness in every thing but
their unwearied malice and ill designs against Monarchy and the present
Government, do and will abundantly proclaim that whatever has been
condiscended unto, (and by that a measure may be taken of the Future in giving
them a liberty to play the Fools with the Sacred Scriptures,) has but like the
thirst, and always craving of an Hydropick sick person, increased and provoked
a desire of having more.

Wherefore they that built upon such wicked principles of overturning the State
and Regal Government are if they had any reason, or were ever likely to have
any for their demands to be content to be denied until they shall have
renounced those pernicious ends and dangerous Tenants and positions, they began
their works and deeds of darkness withal, and shall have proved that Justice
ought to have no Sword to defend and protect her self and others, that Courts
of Justice can be to any purpose without a certain power, constraining and
punishing Authority, that the process of Arrest and Utlary are not incidents
thereof, and to be necessary Attendants thereupon, that the Eternal and
Almighty Law giver did not allow of that which the Greeks and Romans those
great Ingrossers of wisdom, after the many very many commotions of their people
for their more severe way of enforcing the paymcnt of Debts, performance of
Contracts, and preservation of the public Faith, and one man unto another,
which Tully held to be so very necessary, Cic. Offic.
as he was of opinion, that nulla res vehementius rempublicam continet quam
fides, that nothing more concerns a Commonwealth then the keeping of Faith and
Credit, and therefore advises it by all means to be preserved and kept, have
acknowledged to be the best and most contenting Expedient for an obedience to
Judges and Courts of Justice, and the Civil Magistrates, and that all the
Essaies of an Indulgence to liberty made use of by some other Nations could
never yet so far prevail as to make the most of the civilized Nations of the
world not to continue and make use of it, when time and a long usage have upon
so great and undeniable grounds of right reason adjudged the process of Arrest
and of Utlary also in case of reiterated contempts to be necessary not only to
Trade and Commerce, but to the supplying of men's necessities or occasions, or
the borrowing of money upon the pledge or pawn of the body, or liberty, and it
has through the greatest part of the world been ab omnibus, l. 37. ff. de
Legibus, l. 34. l. 114. ff. de Reg. Jur. Tob. Paurmester de Jurisdict. lib. 2.
ca. 6. number. 119.
and semper, and ubique in praxi and observatione. Et cum consuetudo sit optima
legum interpres and observantia cum praxi subsecuta, when custom and long and
constant experienced practices have followed the process of Arrest and Utlary
may certainly deserve an Approbation, which to alter, or take away, or turn out
of the course or Channel in which it has so long and happily ran, can never
answer the ends proposed, or be valid and sufficient to persuade his Majesty
and his Parliament to suffer so essential and great a part of the justice and
happiness of his Kingdom to be sullied and exposed to all the designs, fancies
and mistakes of every one, who by dislocating good and ancient constitutions,
would furnish out their hopes of procuring new Offices or Employments, and
deliver it up as a prisoner to all the Knavery and Folly of every one who shall
be either willing to deceive, or has an Ignorance and Credulity easy to be
deceived, especially when he shall thereby give opportunities and advantages to
the rich to oppress the poor, and such as are in a weak or sinking condition of
Estate, put the Lamb under the merciless paws of the Bear or Lion, snbject
every man's credit by which he lived, thrived, and was snpported, to the
domineering and tyrannical humors, pretenses, designs and cruelties of
Usurers, Brokers, or stony-hearted Creditors, who upon the advantage of some
bargain, contract, or rigor of Law, would rather ruin men and their wives,
children and families, then give a little time of respite by a Christian
patience and forbearance.

Nor is it to be expected that his Majesty would be willing to kindle and
continue contentions, assist the knavish contrivances, malice or revenge of
such as shall seek to enrich themselves by working upon the fears or
necessities of men indebted.

And disparage the Wisdom of former Princes, Parliaments, and Ages, and his own
Authority, to grant an alteration of so profitable and well approved
constitutions and customs, in order to the gratification of no body knows
whom, why, or for what, or what is designed to be the effect of such
alterations, by those who by a wicked combination with other Innovators, may by
a choice of severally managing the grand design and first intention of changing
the Government, make it their business to promote this as a part of it, and an
inset to the other designs and desires of the rest of the promoters of that
which they called the Good Old Cause, when it never deserved to be so
accounted: And a Warwickshire Rebel, and Gentleman of a good Estate and
Quality, before he was one of the murderers of his Majesty's Royal Father, was
after that horrid fact committed, heard publicly to say in the presence of a
witness whose testimony is unquestionable, that he thanked God that he had
lived to see the ruin of Monarchy, for it had been his design and endeavor
for eight and thirty years then last past, ever since he came from Geneva; and
another of that wicked party was not ashamed to say, that they fought not for
Religion, but Estates; and has so sadly as he has understood the secret and
restless machinations of that kind of people, and that his Blessed Father
suffering multitudes of sorrows, and troubles, and a Martyrdom because he would
not sacrifice the Laws of the Kingdom, and Liberties of his people to an
Arbitrary Power of his Murderers, (...), 4. in his Soliloquies upon the 19
Propositions.
had reason enough to back and Fortify his Resolution, when he declared that
he would study to satisfy his Parliament and People, but would never for fear
or flattery gratify any Faction how potent soever, for that were to nourish
the Disease, and oppress the Body. Est enim virtus constans and perpetuum quid
quod Justitia appellatur and quod perversis and deprevat^s hominum moribus and
consuetudinibus nec potest, Varsevicus de legato 22.
nec debet unquam mutari.

FINIS.

