ANOTHER ESSAY IN Political Arithmetic, Concerning the Growth of the CITY OF
LONDON: WITH THE Measures, Periods, Causes, and Consequences thereof. 1682.

By Sir William Petty, Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

LONDON: Printed by H. H. for Mark Pardoe, at the Black Raven* over against
Bedford-House, in the Strand. 1683.

The Principal Points of this Discourse.
1. THAT London doubles in Forty Years, and all England in Three hundred and
sixty Years. 2. That there be, Anno 1682. about Six hundred and seventy
Thousand Souls in London, and about seven Millions, four hundred Thousand in
all England and Wales; and about twenty eight Millions of Acres of Land. 3.
That the Periods of doubling the People, are found to be in all Degrees, from
between Ten, to Twelve hundred Years. 4. That the Growth of London must stop of
its self, before the Year 1800. 5. A Table helping to understand the
Scriptures, concerning the Number of People mentioned in them. 6. That the
World will be fully Peopled within the next Two Thousand Years. 7. Twelve
Touch-stones, whereby to Try any Proposal, pretended for the Public Good. 8.
How the City of London may be made (Morally speaking) Invincible. 9. An Help to
Uniformity in Religion. 10. That it is possible to increase Mankind by
Generation four times more than at present. 11. The Plagues of London is the
Chief Impediment and Objection against the Growth of the City. 12. That an
Exact Account of the People is Necessary in this Matter.
Of the Growth of the CITY of LONDON: And of the Measures, Periods, Causes, and
Consequences thereof.
BY the City of London, What is meant by London.
we mean the Housing within the Walls of the Old City, with the Liberties
thereof, Westminster, the Borough of Southwark, and so much of the built
Ground in Middlesex and Surrey, whose Houses are contiguous unto, or within
Call of those aforementioned. Or else we mean the Housing which stand upon the
Ninety seven Parishes within the Walls of London; upon the Sixteen Parishes
next, without them; the Ten Parishes of Westminster, and the Seven Parishes
without them all; all which One hundred and thirty Parishes are comprehended
within the Weekly Bills of Mortality.

The Growth of this City is Measured, What is meant by the Growth of London.
1. By the Quantity of Ground, or Number of Acres upon which it stands. 2. By
the Number of Houses, as the same appears by the Hearth-Books and late Maps. 3.
By the Cubical Content of the said Housing. 4. By the Flooring of the same. 5.
By the Number of Days-work, or Charge of Building the said Houses. 6. By the
Value of the said Houses, according to their Yearly Rent, and Number of Years
Purchase. 7. By the Number of Inhabitants; according to which latter sense
only, we make our Computations in this Essay.

Till a better Rule can be obtained, we conceive that the Proportion of the
People may be sufficiently Measured by the Proportion of the Burials in such
Years as were neither remarkable for extraordinary Healthfulness or Sickliness.

That the City has Increased in this latter sense, In what Measures the City
has Increased.
appears from the Bills of Mortality, represented in the two following Tables,
viz. One whereof is a continuation for Eighteen Years, ending 1682, of that
Table which was Published in the 117 th. page of the Book of the Observations
upon the London Bills of Mortality, Printed in the Year 1676. The other shows
what Number of People dyed at a Medium of two Years, indifferently taken, at
about Twenty Years distance from each other.

The first of the said two Tables.
An. Dom. 97 Parishes. 16 Parishes. One Parishes. Buried in all. Besides of the
Plague. Christened. 1665 5320 12463 10925 28708 68596 9967 1666 1689 3969 5082
10740 1998 8997 1667 7761 6405 8641 15807 35 10938 1668 ^796 6865 9603 17267 14
11633 1669 1323 7500 10440 19263 3 12335 1670 1890 7808 10500 20198 11997 1671
1723 5938 8063 15724 5 12510 1672 2237 6788 9200 18225 5 12593 1673 2307 6302
8890 17499 5 11895 1674 2801 7522 10875 21198 3 11851 1675 2555 5986 8702 17243
1 11775 1676 2756 6508 9466 18730 2 12399 1677 2817 6632 9616 19065 2 12626
1678 3060 6705 10908 20673 5 12601 1679 3074 7481 11173 21728 2 12288 1680 3076
7066 10911 21053 12747 1681 3669 8136 12166 23971 13355 1682 2975 7009 10707
20691 12653

According to which latter Table, there dyed as follows.

The latter of tie said two Tables.
There dyed in London, At a Medium between the Years.
1604 and 1605 -- 5135. A. 1621 and 1622 -- 8527. B. 1641 and 1642 -- 11883. C.
1661 and 1662 -- 15148. D. 1681 and 1682 -- 22331. E.

Wherein Observe, That the Number C. is double to A. and 806 over. That D. is
double to B. within 1906. That C and D. is double to A. B. within 293. That E.
is double to C. within 1435. That D. and E. is double to B. and C. within 3341.
And that C. and D. and E. are double to A. and B. and C. within 1736. And that
E. is above Quadruple to A. All which differences (every way considered) do
allow the doubling of the People of London in forty Years, to be a sufficient
estimate thereof in round Numbers, and without the trouble of Fractions. We
also say, That 669930 is near the Number of People now in London, because the
Burials are 22331. which Multiplied by 30, one dying Yearly out of 30, as
appears in the 94 page of the aforementioned Observations) makes the said
Number; and because there are 84 Thousand Tenanted Houses (as we are Credibly
Informed) which at ^8 in each, makes. 672 Thousand Souls; the said two Accounts
differing in considerably from each other.

We have thus pretty well sound out in what Number of Years ( viz. in about
40*) that the City of London* has doubled, and the present Number of
Inhabitants to be about 670 Thousand. We must now also endeavor the same for
the whole Territory of England and Wales. In Order whereunto, we*

First say, The People of London are about the Eleventh part of all England and
Wales.
That the Assessment of London is about an Eleventh part of the whole
Territory, and therefore that the People of the whole may well be Eleven times
that of London, viz. The People of England about 7 Millions and 400 Thousand.
about 7 Millions, 369 Thousand Souls; with which Account that of the
Poll-money, Hearth-money, and the Bishops late Numbering of the Communicants, do
pretty well agree; wherefore although the said Number of 7 Millions, 369
Thousand, be not (as it cannot be) a demonstrated Truth, yet it will serve for
a good Supposition, which is as much as we want at present.

As for the time in which the People double, it is yet more hard to be found:
For we have good Experience (in the said 94 page of the aforementioned
Observations) That in the Country, but one of fifty dye per Annum; and by
other late Accounts, that there have been sometimes but 24 Births for 23
Burials, The which two points, if they were universally, and constantly true,
there would be color enough to say, that the People doubled but in about 1200
Years. As for Example: Suppose there be 600 people, of which let a fiftieth
part dye per Annum, then there shall dye 12 per Annum; and if the Births be as
24 to 23, then the Increase of the People shall be somewhat above half a Man
per Annum, and consequently the supposed Number of 600, cannot be doubled but
in 1126 Years, which to reckon in round Numbers, and for that the
aforementioned Fractions were not exact, we had rather call 1200.

There are also other good Observations, That even in the Country, one in
about 30, or 32 per Annum has dyed, and that there have been five Births for
four Burials. Now, according to this Doctrine, 20 will dye per Annum out of the
above 600, and 25 will be Born, so as the Increase will be 5, which is a
hundred and twentieth part of the said 600. So as we have two fair
Computations, differing from each other as one to ten; and there are also
several other good Observations for other Measures.

I might here Insert, That although the Births in this last Computation be 25
of 600, or a Twenty fourth part of the People; yet that in Natural possibility,
they may be near thrice as many, and near 75. For that by some late
Observations, the Teeming Females between 15 and 44, are about 180 of the said
600, and the Males of between 18 and 59, are about 180 also, and that every
Teeming Woman can bear a Child once in two Years; from all which it is plain,
that the Births may be 90. (and abating 15 for Sickness, Young Abortions, and
Natural Barrenness) there may remain 75 Births, which is an Eighth of the
People; which by some Observations we have found to be but a two and thirtieth
part, or but a quarter of what is thus shown to be Naturally possible. Now,
according to this Reckoning, if the Births may be 75 of 600, and the Burials
but 15, then the Annual Increase of the People will be 60; and so the said 600
People may double in 10 Years, which differs yet more from 1200,
abovementioned. Now, to get out of this Difficulty, and to temper those vast
disagreements, I took the Medium of 50 and 30 dying per Annum, and pitched upon
40; and I also took the Medium between 24 Births and 23 Burials, and 5 Births
for 4 Burials, viz. allowing about 10 Births for 9 Burials; upon which
Supposition, there must dye 15 per Annum out of the abovementioned 600, and
the Births must be 16 and two Thirds, and the Increase 1, and two Thirds, or
five Thirds of a Man, which Number compared with 1800 Thirds, That the time of
doubling is here and now 360 Years.
or 600 Men, gives 360 Years for the time of doubling (including some Allowance
for Wars, Plagues, and Famine, the Effects whereof, though they be Terrible at
the Times and Places where they happen, yet in a period of 360 Years, is no
great Matter in the whole Nation. For the Plagues of England in 20 Years has
carried away scarce an Eightieth part of the People of the whole Nation; and
the late 10 Years Civil Wars, (the like whereof has not been in several Ages
before) did not take away above a fortieth part of the whole People.)

According to which Account or Measure of doubling, if there be now in England
and Wales, 7 Millions 400 Thousand People, there were about 5 Millions 526
Thousand in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, Anno 1560. and about two
Millions at the Norman Conquest, of which Consult the Dooms day Book, and my
Lord Hale's Origi^ation of Mankind.

Memorandum, 320 Millions now in the World.
That if the People double in 360 Years, that the present 320 Millions computed
by some Learned Men, (from the Measures of all the Nations of the World, their
degrees of being Peopled, and good Accounts of the people in several of them)
to be now upon the Face of the Earth, will within the next 2000 Years, so
increase, as to give one Head for every two Acres of Land in the Habitable part
of the Earth. And then, according to the Prediction of the Scriptures, there
must be Wars and great Slaughter, etc.

Wherefore, as an Expedient against the abovementioned difference between 10
and 1200 Years, we do for the present, and in this Country admit of 360 Years
to be the time wherein the People of England do double, according to the
present Laws and Practice of Marriages.

Now, if the City double its People in 40 Years, and the present Number be 670
Thousand, and if the whole Territory be 7 Millions 400 Thousand, and double in
360 Years, as aforesaid; then by the underwritten Table it appears, that Anno
1840, the People of the City will be 10718880, and those of the whole Country
but 10917389, which is but inconsiderably more. Wherefore it is Certain and
Necessary that the Growth of the City must stop before the said Year 1840: And
will be at its utmost height in the next preceding Period, Anno 1800, when the
Number of the City will be Eight times its present Number, viz. 5 Millions 359
Thousand. And when (besides the said Number) there will be 4 Millions 466
Thousand to perform the Tillage, Pasturage, and other Rural Works Necessary to
be done without the said City, as by the following Table, viz.

Annis. Burials. People in London. People in England. 1565 -- 2568 77040
5526929. As in the former Table. 1605 -- 5135 1642 -- 11883 1682 -- 22331
669930 7369230. 1722 -- 44662 1762 -- 89324 1802 -- 178648 5359440 9825650.
1842 -- 357296 10718880 10917389.

Now, That London will be at its highest growth, and eight times as great as
now, Anno 1800.
when the People of London shall come to be so near the People of all England,
Then it follows, That the Growth of London must stop before the said Year 1842,
as aforesaid, and must be at its greatest height Anno 1800, when it will be
eight times more than now, with above four Millions for the Service of the
Country and Ports, as aforesaid.

Of the aforementioned vast difference between 10 Years and 1200 Years for
doubling the People, A digression of the use of the vast difference between 10
and 1200 Years of doubling.
we make this use, viz. To justify the Scriptures and all other good Histories
concerning the Number of the People in Ancient Time. For supposing the Eight
Persons who came out of the Ark, Increased by a Progressive doubling in every
10 Years, might grow in the first 100 Years after the Flood from 8 to 8000, and
that in 350 Years after the Flood (when abouts Noah dyed) to one Million, and
by this time 1682, to 320 Millions (which by rational conjecture, are thought
to be now in the World) it will not be hard to compute, how in the intermediate
Years, the Growths may be made, according to what is set down in the following
Table, wherein making the doubling to be 10 Years at first, and within 1200
Years at last, we take a discretionary liberty, but justifiable by Observations
and the Scriptures for the rest, which Table we leave to be Corrected by
Historians, who know the bigness of Ancient Cities, Armies, and Colonies in the
respective Ages of the World, in the mean time affirming that without such
difference in the Measures and Periods for doubling (the extremes whereof we
have demonstrated to be real and true) it is impossible to solve what is
written in the Holy Scriptures and other Authentic Books. For if we pitch upon
any one Number throughout for this purpose, 150 Years is the fittest of all
round Numbers; according to which, there would have been but 512 Souls in the
whole World in Moses's time (being 800 Years after the Flood) when 603 Thousand
Israelites of above 20 Years Old (besides those of other Ages, Tribes, and
Nations) were found upon an exact Survey appointed by God, Whereas our Table
makes 12 Millions. And there would have been but 8000 in David's Time, when
were found 1100 Thousand of above 20 Years Old (besides others, as aforesaid)
in Israel, upon the Survey instigated by Satan, whereas our Table makes 32
Millions. And there would have been but a quarter of a Million about the Birth
of Christ, or Augustus his Time, when Rome and the Roman Empire were so great,
whereas our Table makes 100 Millions. Where Note, That the Israelites in about
500 Years between their coming out of Egypt to David's Reign, increased from
603 Thousand to 1100 Thousand.

On the other hand, if we pitch upon a less Number, as 100 Years, the World
would have been overpeopled 700 Years since. Wherefore, no one Number will
solve the Phenomenon, and therefore we have supposed several in Order to make
the following Table, which we again desire Historians to Correct, according to
what they find in Antiquity concerning the Number of the People in each Age and
Country of the World.

We did (not long since) assist a worthy Divine, writing against some
Scepticks, who would have baffled our belief of the Resurrection, by saying,
that the whole Globe of the Earth could not furnish Matter enough for all the
Bodies that must Rise at the last Day, much less would the surface of the Earth
furnish footing for so vast a Number; whereas we did (by the Method
aforementioned) assert the Number of Men now living, and also of those that had
dyed since the beginning of the World, and did withal show, that half the
Island of Ireland would afford them all, not only Footing to stand upon, but
Graves to lie down in, for that whole Number; and that two Mountains in that
Country were as weighty as all the Bodies that had ever been from the
beginning of the World to the Year 1680, when this Dispute happened. For which
purpose, I have digressed from my intended purpose, to insert this Matter,
intending to prosecute this hint further, upon some more proper Occasion.

A Table showing how the People might have doubled in the several Ages of the
World.
Anno after the Flood.
Periods of doubling In 10 Years 1 -- 8 Persons. 10 -- 16 20 -- 32 30 -- 64 40
-- 128 50 -- 256 60 -- 512 70 -- 1024 80 -- 2048 90 -- 4096 100 -- 8000 and
more In 20 Years 120 Years after the Flood. 16 Thousand. 140 -- 32 30 -- 170 --
64 200 -- 128 40 -- 240 -- 256 50 -- 290 -- 512 60 -- 350 -- 1 Million and
more. 70 -- 420 -- 2 Millions. 100 -- 520 -- 4 Millions. 190 -- 710 -- 8
Millions. 290 -- 1000 -- 16 In Moses Time. 400 -- 1400 -- 32 About David's Time.
550 -- 1950 -- 64 750 -- 2700 -- 128 About the Birth of Christ. 1000 -- 3700 --
256 In 300/1200 -- 4000 -- 320

It is here to be Noted, That in this Table we have assigned a different Number
of Years for the time of doubling the People in the several Ages of the World,
and might have done the same for the several Countries of the World, and
therefore the said several Periods assigned to the whole World in the Lump, may
well enough consist with the 360 Years especially assigned to England, between
this Day, and the Norman Conquest; And the said 360 Years may well enough serve
for a Supposition between this time, and that of the Worlds being fully
Peopled; Nor do we lay any stress upon one or the other in this disquisition
concerning the Growth of the City of London.

We have spoken of the Growth of London, with the Measures and Periods thereof,
we come next to the Causes and Consequences of the same.

The Causes of its Growth from 1642 to 1682, may be said to have been as
follows, viz. From 1642 to 1650, That Men came out of the Country to London,
to shelter themselves from the Outrages of the Civil Wars, during that time;
from 1650 to 1660, The Royal Party came to London, for their more private and
inexpensive Living; from 1660 to 1670, The Kings Friends and Party came to
receive his Favors after his Happy Restoration; from 1670 to 1680, The
frequency of Plots and Parliaments, might bring extraordinary Numbers to the
City; But what Reasons to assign for the like Increase from 1604 to 1642, I
know not, unless I should pick out some Remarkable Accident happening in each
part of the said Period, and make that to be the Cause of this Increase (as
Vulgar People make the Cause of every Man's Sickness, to be what he did last
eat) wherefore, rather than so to say quidlibet de quolibet; I had rather quit
even what I have abovesaid to be the Cause of London's Increase from 1642 to
1682, and put the whole upon some Natural and Spontaneous Benefits and
Advantages that Men find by Living in great more than in small Societies; and
shall therefore seek for the Antecedent Causes of this Growth, in the
Consequences of the like, considered in greater Characters and Proportions.

Now, whereas in Arithmetic, out of two false Positions the Truth is
extracted, so I hope out of two extravagant contrary Suppositions, to draw
forth some solid and consistent Conclusion, viz.

The first of the said two Suppositions is, That the City of London is seven
times bigger than now, and that the Inhabitants of it are four Millions 690
Thousand People, and that in all the other Cities, Ports, Towns, and Villages,
there are but two Millions 710 Thousand more.

The other Supposition is, That the City of London is but a seventh part of its
present bigness, and that the Inhabitants of it are but 96 Thousand, and that
the rest of the Inhabitants (being 7 Millions 304 Thousand) do Co-habit thus,
104 Thousand of them in small Cities and Towns, and that the rest, being seven
Millions 200 Thousand, do Inhabit in Houses not contiguous to one another, viz.
In 1200 Thousand Houses, having about 24 Acres of Ground belonging to each of
them, accounting about 28 Millions of Acres to be in the whole Territory of
England, Wales, and the adjacent Islands; which any Man that pleases may
Examine upon a good Map.

Now, the Question is, In which of these two Imaginary states, would be the
most convenient, commodious and comfortable Livings?

But this general Question divides it self into the several Questions, relating
to the following Particulars, viz.

1. For the Defense of the Kingdom against Foraign Powers.

2. For preventing the Intestine Commotions of Parties and Factions.

3. For Peace and Uniformity in Religion.

4. For the Administration of Justice.

5. For the proportionably Taxing of the People, and easy Levying the same.

6. For Gain by Foraign Commerce.

7. For Husbandry, Manufacture, and for Arts of Delight and Ornament.

8. For lessening the Fatigue of Carriages and Traveling.

9. For preventing Beggars and Thieves.

10. For the Advancement and Propagation of Useful Learning.

11. For Increasing the People by Generation.

12. For preventing the Mischiefs of Plagues and Contagions. And withal, which
of the said two states is most Practicable and Natural; for in these and the
like particulars, do lie the Tests and Touch-stones of all Proposals, that can
be made for the Public Good.

First, as to Practicable, we say, That although our said Extravagant Proposals
are both in Nature possible, yet it is not Obvious to every Man to conceive,
how London, now seven times bigger than in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, should be seven times bigger than now it is, and 49 times bigger than
Anno 1560. To which I say, 1. That the present City of London stands upon less
than 1500 Acres of Ground, wherefore a City seven times as large may stand upon
10500 Acres, which is about equivalent to a Circle of four Miles and a half in
Diameter, and less than 15 Miles in Circumference. 2. That a Circle of Ground
of 35 Miles Semidiameter will bear Corn, Gardenstuff, Fruits, Hay, and Timber
for the four Millions 690 Thousand Inhabitants of the said City and Circle, so
as nothing of that kind need be brought from above 35 Miles distance from the
said City; for the Number of Acres within the said Circle, reckoning one Acre
sufficient to furnish Bread and Drink-Corn for every Head, and two Acres will
furnish Hay for every Necessary Horse; And that the Trees which may grow in the
Hedge-rows of the Fields within the said Circle, may furnish Timber for 600
Thousand Houses. 3. That all live Cattle and great Animals can bring themselves
to the said City; and that Fish can be brought from the Lands-end and Berwick
as easily as now. 4. Of Coals there is no doubt: And for Water, 20 s. per
Family (or 600 Thousand pounds per Annum in the whole) will serve this City,
especially with the help of the New River. But if by Practicable be understood,
that the present state may be suddenly changed into either of the two
abovementioned Proposals, I think it is not Practicable. Wherefore the true
Question is, unto or toward which of the said two Extravagant states it is
best to bend the present state by degrees, viz. Whether it be best to lessen or
enlarge the present City? In Order whereunto, we enquire (as to the first
Question) which state is most Defensible against Foreign Powers, saying, that
if the abovementioned Housing, and a border of Ground, of 3 quarters of a Mile
broad, were encompassed with a Wall and Ditch of 20 Miles about (as strong as
any in Europe, which would cost but a Million, or about a Penny in the shilling
of the House-Rent for one Year) what Foraign Prince could bring an Army from
beyond Seas, able to beat, 1. Our Sea-Forces, and next with Horse harrass'd at
Sea, to resist all the fresh Horse that England could make, and then Conquer
above a Million of Men, well United, Disciplined, and Guarded within such a
Wall, distant every where 3 quarters of a Mile from the Housing, to elude the
Grenades and great Shot of the Enemy? 2. As to Intestine Parties and Factions,
I suppose that 4 Millions 690 Thousand People United within this great City,
could easily Govern half the said Number scattered without it, and that a few
Men in Arms within the said City, and Wall, could also easily Govern the rest
unarmed, or Armed in such manner as the Sovereign shall think fit. 3. As to
Uniformity in Religion, I conceive, That if St. Martins Parish may (as it does)
consist of about 40 Thousand Souls, That this great City also may as well be
made but as one Parish, with 7 times 130 Chapels, in which might not only be
an Uniformity of Common Prayer, but in Preaching also; for that a thousand
Copies of one Judiciously and Authentically Composed Sermon, might be every
Week read in each of the said Chapels without any subsequent Repetition of the
same, as in the Case of Homilies. Whereas in England (wherein are near 10
Thousand Parishes, in each of which upon Sundays, Holy Days, and other
Extraordinary Occasions, there should be about 100 Sermons per Annum, making
about a Million of Sermon per Annum in the whole:) It were a Miracle, if a
Million of Sermons Composed by so many Men, and of so many Minds and Methods,
should produce Uniformity upon the discomposed understandings of about 8
Millions of Hearers.

4. As to the Administration of Justice. If in this great City shall dwell the
Owners of all the Lands, and other Valuable things in England; If within it
shall be all the Traders, and all the Courts, Offices, Records, Iuries, and
Witnesses; Then it follows, that Justice may be made with speed and ease.

5. As to the Equality and easy Levying of Taxes, It is too certain, That
London has at some times paid near half the Excise of England; and that the
People pay thrice as much for the Hearths in London as those in the Country,
in proportion to the People of each, and that the Charge of Collecting these
Duties, have been about a sixth part of the Duty it self. Now, in this great
City, the Excise alone according to the present Laws, would not only be double
to the whole Kingdom, but also more equal. And the Duty of Hearths of the said
City, would exceed the present proceed of the whole Kingdom. And as for the
Customs, we mention them not at present.

6. Whether more would be gained by Foraign Commerce.

The Gain which England makes by Lead, Coals, the Freight of Shipping, etc. may
be the same, for ought I see, in both Cases. But the Gain which is made by
Manufactures, will be greater, as the Manufacture it self is greater and
better. For in so vast a City Manufactures will beget one another, and each
Manufacture will be divided into as many parts as possible, whereby the Work of
each Artisan will be simple and easy; As for Example. In the making of a
Watch, If one Man shall make the Wheels, another the Spring, another shall
Engrave the Dial-plate, and another shall make the Cases, then the Watch will
be better and cheaper, than if the whole Work be put upon any one Man. And we
also see that in Towns, and in the Streets of a great Town, where all the
Inhabitants are almost of one Trade, the Commodity peculiar to those places is
made better and cheaper than elsewhere. Moreover, when all sorts of
Manufactures are made in one place, there every Ship that goes forth, can
suddenly have its Loading of so many several Particulars and Species, as the
Port whereunto she is bound can take off. Again, when the several Manufactures
are made in one place, and Shipped off in another, the Carriage, Postage, and
Travelling-charges will Inhance the Price of such Manufacture, and lessen the
Gain upon Foraign Commerce. And lastly, when the Imported Goods are spent in
the Port it self, where they are Landed, the Carriage of the same into other
places, will create no surcharge upon such Commodity; all which particulars
tends to the greater Gain by Foraign Commerce.

7. As for Arts of Delight and Ornament,

They are best promoted by the greatest Number of Emulators. And it is more
likely that one Ingenious Curious Man may rather be found out amongst 4
Millions than 400 Persons. But as for Husbandry, viz. Tillage and Pasturage, I
see no Reason, but the second state (when each Family is charged with the
Culture of about 24 Acres) will best promote the same.

8. As for lessening the Fatigue of Carriage and Traveling,

The things speaks it self, for if all the Men of Business, and all Artisans do
Live within five Miles of each other; And if those who Live without the great
City, do spend only such Commodities as grow where they Live, when the charge
of Carriage and Traveling could be little.

9. As to the preventing of Beggars and Thieves,

I do not find how the differences of the said two states should make much
difference in this particular; for Impotents (which are but one in about 600)
ought to be maintained by the rest. 2. Those who are unable to Work, through
the evil Education of their Parents, ought (for ought I know) to be maintained
by their nearest Kindred, as a just Punishment upon them. 3. And those who
cannot find Work (though able and willing to perform it) by reason of the
unequal application of Hands to Lands, ought to be provided for by the
Magistrate and Landlord till that can be done; for there needs be no Beggars
in Countries, where there are many Acres of unimproved improvable Land to every
Head, as there are in England. As for Thieves, they are for the most part
begotten from the same Cause; For it is against Nature, that any Man should
venture his Life, Limb, or Liberty, for a wretched Livelihood, whereas moderate
Labor will produce a better. But of this see Sir Thomas Moor, in the first
part of his Vtopia.

10. As to the Propagation and Improvement of Useful Learning,

The same may be said concerning it as was abovesaid concerning Manufactures,
and the Arts of Delight and Ornaments; for in the great vast City, there can be
no so odd a Conceit or Design, whereunto some Assistance may not be found,
which in the thin, scattered way of Habitation may not be.

11. As for the Increase of People by Generation,

I see no great difference from either of the two states, for the same may be
hindered or promoted in either, from the same Causes.

12. As to the Plague,

It is to be remembered, that one time with another, a Plague happens in
London once in 20 Years, or thereabouts; for in the last hundred Years, between
the Years 1582 and 1682, there have been five great Plagues, viz. Anno 1592,
1603, 1625, 1636, and 1665. And it is also to be remembered, that the Plagues of
London do commonly kill one fifth part of the Inhabitants. Now, if the whole
People of England do double but in 360 Years, then the Annual Increase of the
same is but 20000, and in 20 Years 400000. But if in the City of London there
should be two Millions of People, (as there will be about 60 Years hence) then
the Plague (killing one fifth of them, namely, 400000, once in 20 Years) will
destroy as many in one Year, as the whole Nation can re-furnish in 20: And
consequently the People of the Nation shall never Increase. But if the People
of London shall be above 4 Millions (as in the first of our two Extravagant
Suppositions is premised) then the People of the whole Nation shall lessen
above 20000 per Annum. So as if People be worth 70 l. per Head (as has
elsewhere been shown) then the said greatness of the City will be a damage to
it self and the whole Nation of 14 hundred Thousand pounds per Annum, and so
prorata, for a greater or lesser Number; wherefore to determine, which of the
two states is best, (that is to say, toward which of the said two states
Authority should bend the present state) a just Balance ought to be made
between the disadvantages from the Plague, with the Advantages accruing from
the other Particulars abovementioned; unto which Balance a more exact Account
of the People, and a better Rule for the Measure of its Growth is Necessary,
than what we have here given, or are yet able to lay down.

Postscript.
IT was not very pertinent to a Discourse concerning the Growth of the City of
London, to thrust in Considerations of the Time when the whole World will be
fully Peopled; and how to justify the Scriptures concerning the Number of
People mentioned in them; and concerning the Number of the Quick and the Dead,
that may Rise at the last Day, etc. Nevertheless, since some Friends liking the
said Digressions and Impertinencies (perhaps as sauce to a dry Discourse) have
desired that the same might be explained and made out. I therefore say as
follows.

1. If the Number of Acres in the Habitable part of the Earth, be under 50.
Thousand Millions; if Twenty Thousand Millions of People, are more than the
said Number of Acres will feed; (few or no Countries being so fully Peopled;)
and for that in six doublings (which will be in 2000 Years) the present 320
Millions will exceed the said 20 Thousand Millions.

2. That the Number of all those who have dyed since the Flood, is the sum of
all the Products made by Multiplying the Number of the doubling Periods
mentioned in the first Column of the last Table, by the Number of People
respectively affixed to them, in the third Column of the same Table; the said
sum being Divided by 40 (one dying out of 40 per Annum, out of the whole Mass
of Mankind) which Quotient is 12570 Millions; Whereunto may be added, for those
that dyed before the Flood, enough to make the last mentioned Number 20
Thousand Millions, as the full Number of all that dyed, from the beginning of
the World, to the Year 1682; unto which, if 320 Millions, the Number of those
who are now alive, be added, the Total of the Quick and the Dead, will amount
but unto one fifth part of the Graves, which the surface of Ireland will
afford, without ever putting two Bodies into any one Grave; for there be in
Ireland 28 Thousand square English Miles, each whereof will afford about 4
Millions of Graves, and consequently above 114 Thousand Millions of Graves,
viz. about 5 times the Number of the Quick and the Dead, which should arise at
the last Day, in case the same had been in the Year 1682.

3. Now, if there may be place for five times as many Graves in Ireland, as are
sufficient for all that ever dyed; And if the Earth of one Grave weigh five
times as much as the Body Interred therein, then a Turf, less than a Foot
thick, pared off from a fifth part of the surface of Ireland, will be
equivalent in bulk and weight to all the Bodies that ever were Buried; And may
serve as well for that purpose, as the two Mountains aforementioned in the
body of this Discourse. From all which it is plain, how madly they were
mistaken, who did so petulantly vilisie what the Holy Scriptures have delivered.

FINIS.
Observations upon the Dublin Bills of Mortality, M.DC.LXXXI. And the state of
that City. By the Observator in the London Bills of Mortality. In Octavo.


