THE GAIN OF Godliness.

BEING A Consideration of 1 Timothy 4. 8.

By Charles Phelpes.

Can a Man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable unto
himself? Job 22. 2. Riches profit not in the day of Wrath: But Righteousness
delivers from Death, Prove. 11. 4. Godliness with Contentment is great Gain, 1 Timothy 6. 6. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the three Crowns and Bible at
the lower end of Cheap Side, 1682.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
IT is a general and necessary enquiry of the Sons of Men, which is mentioned
by the Psalmist, to wit, There be many that say, Who will show us that which is
good? That which is truly profitable for us? Psalm. 4. 6. We All need to be
shown, what is for Benefit, and to be Directed thereunto; for though Empty Man
would be Wise, yet Man is Born like a wild Asses Colt; to wit, most void of
Understanding, Job 11. 12. with Psalm. 32. 9. Every Man is brutish by his
Knowledge, Jer. 10. 14. And this does Evidently appear by their undertakings
and pursuits, whatever their words and expressions are: For generally they are
seeking after the World, as their chiefest good: And their Wisdom, which is
Earthly, directs them so to do. It commends unto them, and Glorifies before
them, the Riches, Honors, and Pleasures of this vain and transitory Life, as
the most profitable, and valuable Things which can be pursued, or procured by
them; and therefore excites, and provokes them to Labor only, or chiefly, for
this Meat which perishes, for these Objects which endure not unto everlasting
Life; For the things which are seen, are Temporal, 2 Cor. 4. 18. Hence the Wise
Man gives this Caution and Dehortation to the Sons of Men, Labor not to be
Rich; cease from thine own Wisdom. Will thou cause thine Eyes to flee upon
that which is not? For Riches certainly make themselves Wings, they flee like
an Eagle toward Heaven, Prove. 23. 4, 5. And indeed, if we could have never so
sure, and certain an Enjoyment of them, while we are here continued in this
World; which yet we cannot promise to our selves, or assure our selves of; yet
without all peradventure, when we leave this World, we must leave all the
things of it behind us: For we brought nothing into this world; And it is
certain we can carry nothing out, 1 Timothy 6. 7. Be not thou fraid when one is
made Rich, when the Glory of his House is increased: For when he Dies, he
shall carry nothing away, his Glory shall not descend after him, Psalm. 49. 16,
17, 20. And Alas! What is our Life? Is it not even a Vapor that appears for
a little time, and then vanishes away? Within a few Years or Days, we shall
go the way, whence we shall not return, Job 16. 22. Yea, though we should Live
a Thousand Years, twice told, and yet have not seen, or sought after that which
is truly, eminently, and eternally Good: What will All then avail us, when we
go to the Place appointed for all Living? Will he esteem thy Riches? No, not
Gold, nor all the Forces of strength, Job 36. 8, 9. What is the hope of the
Hypocrite, though he has gained, when God takes away his Soul? Will God hear
his cry, when trouble comes upon him? Job 27. 8, 9. What is a Man Advantaged,
says our Lord and Savior, if he gain the whole world, and lose himself, or be
cast away? Luke 9. 24, 25. The World then, and the things thereof are not
Profitable for all things: They are not the good we should mainly enquire
after, or exercise our selves to the Attainment of: For they are not of the
Father, 1 John 2. 15, 17. Yea indeed, the inordinate Love of the World, is
Enmity with God; and hinders from serving and pleasing Him; For no Man can
serve two Masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else
he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon,
says our Lord Jesus, Jam. 4. 4. with Mat. 6. 24.

But now the only wise God, and our Savior; and therefore also the only good
and gracious God, does give a satisfactory Answer to that Enquiry of the Many,
or Multitude beforementioned, in Psalm. 4. 6. As the Prophet signifies,
saying, He has showed thee, O Man, what is good; (what is truly well-pleasing
unto him, and everlastingly profitable, and beneficial for thy self) and what
does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy; and
to humble thy self in walking with thy God? And so to believe in him: For,
Without Faith it is impossible to walk with, and please him, Mica. 6. 8. with
Heb. 11. 5, 6. and Genesis 5. 22, 24. This is that which God does Require of us,
for our Good and Benefit. Compare Mica. 6. 8. with Deuteronomy. 10. 12, 13. And
suitably thereto, the Apostle Paul, as directed by the Spirit of Truth, speaks
in the Words, which are the Subject of the ensuing Discourse, saying, Godliness
is profitable unto all things, etc. And could Men but be persuaded, and
prevailed withal, to Believe this with all their Souls; How would it
Metamorphose, and Transform their Hearts and Lives, and make them Christ's
Disciples; not in Name and Profession only, but in Truth and Reality! But Alas!
How many Unbelieving Believers are there in the outward Court of the Church;
and therefore, how many Unchrist-like Christians? (Jer. 9. 25, 26.) How many
are there that stand up at, and profess to Assent, and Consent to the Belief,
concerning whom it may be said, They are Children, in whom is no Faith; as
Deuteronomy. 32. 20. How many call themselves The only true Sons of the Church, while
they Actually, and openly appear to be The Children of this World, or Members
of a Worldly Sanctuary! And such manner of persons may be forward to suspect,
That they design their prejudice, who endeavor to Moderate their Affections
unto, and pursuits after these low things; and to excite, and quicken them to
exercise themselves unto true Piety and Purity. And St. Paul saw it needful to
Assure the Believing Corinthians, That he intended no hurt to them, when he
Exhorted them to have their Conversation without Carefulness, and Covetousness:
But that he endeavored their certain, and stable Interest and Advantage: For
when he had been saying, Brethren, the time is short; It remains, that --
they that Weep (for any worldly Loss, or Deprivation) be as though they Wept
not; and they that Rejoice (for any present Gain or Increase) as though they
Rejoiced not; and they that Buy, as though they Possessed not: And they that
use this world, as not abusing it; for the Fashion of this world passes away.
But I would have you without Carefulness, etc. He then presently after, thus
Writes unto them: And this I speak (not for your Disadvantage, or Detriment,
but) for your own profit; not that I may cast a Snare upon you, but for that
which is Comely: And that you may attend upon the Lord without distraction.
Signifying, That the waiting, and attending upon him; and so living Piously,
and Honestly in this World, will be more profitable for us, than waiting upon,
and endeavoring to please the World, as our Lord and Master will be, 1 Cor. 7.
29, 32, 35. O then! Taste, and see that the Lord is good: Blessed is the Man
that trusts in him, Psalm. 34. 8, 10. And as it is very useful, and needful
for all Persons seriously to consider, that Piety is the most profitable thing
they can practice, and exercise themselves unto: So particularly, and
especially let Young Persons observe, That the Apostle excites Timothy in his
Youth, or younger Years, to the pursuit and practice of Godliness, as may be
seen in 1 Timothy 4. 7, 8, 12. That they also may embrace, and obey that Counsel
given to Timothy; and given unto him, That he might, in observing it; set a
good Example before others. And St. Paul charges Titus to Exhort young men to
be Sober-minded; to wit, not to let out their Hearts too much unto, or
immorderately set their Affections upon those things which are perishing, and
momentany. Intimating, That there is a too great proness in them thereto, Tit.
2. 6, 7. But it is good for such, who are entering into the World, as some
speak, to mind, That Pure Religion, is their greatest, and surest Interest; and
most profitable for them, both for this present State, and for that which is to
come, Psalm. 34. 11, 15. When Solomon, while he was young and tender, had this
Liberty given unto him by the Lord, to wit, Ask what I shall give thee: He then
begged for Wisdom and Understanding; (which is the Principal thing, Prove. 4.
6, 7.) and his Choice and Speech did so please the Lord, that he had asked an
Understanding Heart; That he fulfilled the Request of his Lips, and Gave him an
understanding Heart; so that there was none like him before him, neither after
him should any arise like unto him. And not only so, but he also gave him other
things, which are higher desirable, and valuable with young Persons. As he
says, I have also given thee that which thou have not asked, both Riches and
Honor, etc. And if thou will walk in my Ways, -- then I will lengthen thy
Days, 2 King. 3. 5, 14. Lo here young persons! You have an eminent Instance set
before you, to assure you, that it is your highest Interest to get Wisdom,
which is the most excellent thing: For in so doing, all other good and needful
things shall be added to you. But you may say, Though we should exercise our
selves to true Wisdom and Piety; and first seek after that: Yet we cannot
assure our selves, That He will supply us with all needful things, from God's
so dealing with Solomon. To this I Answer, That Solomon himself, as it were
Relating unto God's gracious Dealing with him, does assure us, That in our
exercising our selves to sincere Piety, we shall also receive therewith, the
three valuable Things promised unto him, by way of overplus, so far as they
are Profitable for us: when he says, By humility, and the fear of the Lord,
are Riches, and Honor, and Life, Prove. 22. 4. Luke 12. 29, 31, 32. Now
therefore, says Wisdom, hearken unto me, O ye Children: For Blessed are they
that keep my Ways, both now, and to all Eternity. Hear Instruction, and be
Wise, and refuse it not, Prove. 8. 32, 33, 35. with ver. 17, 18, 21. I shall
hold thee no longer here, but refer thee to what follows: And Praying God to
Pardon what is Amiss; and to bless and succeed what is his, I desire to Approve
my self

March 4th. 1632. A Well-Willer of thine, and of all Men's, Charles Phelpes.

THE Gian of Godliness.
1 Timothy 4. 8. But Godliness is profitable unto all things, having Promise of
the life that now is, and of that which is to come.
THese words are propounded by the Apostle Paul as a forcible motive, to move
and engage Timothy, to observe and obey that Exhortation and Counsel, which he
had given him in the foregoing verse, namely, Exercise thy self unto
Godliness, ver. 7. and to enforce that Exhortation, He here sets before him
this very Powerful and Efficacious encouragement, For Godliness is profitable
unto all things, etc. And though that Exhortation, or Command in ver. 7. was
directly and particularly given by the Apostle to Timothy, his own Son in the
Faith; yet it was so given unto him, and was so to be observed by him, as that
he might be a Pattern, in the observance thereof, to the Believers generally:
For so much is signified in what he presently subjoyns, to wit, in ver. 12.
where he thus says, Let no man despise thy youth; But be thou an example of
the Believers in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Faith, in Spirit, in
Purity. And so it plainly appears, that the Counsel and Exhortation given unto
Timothy in ver. 7. was given to him; that he might in the observance of, and
obedience to it, be an Example to the Believers; And that all of us might, in
Imitation of him, and other Godly and Holy ones, heartily apply our selves unto
true and unfeigned Piety and Religion, which is profitable and advantageous to
all, that sincerely exercise themselves thereto.

Now in the words themselves, which we have Propounded to Consider, and
Discourse of, we have, as is before observed, a Powerful Motive and Enforcement
to persuade us, and prevail with us, to Exercise our selves unto Godliness: And
this weighty motive is,

1. Propounded to us more Generally, and Indistinctly: namely, Godliness is
profitable unto, Or for, All things.

2. This motive is more Particularly and Distinctly, expressed and laid down,
and the Truth of the former part evidenced, in the following words: that is to
say, Having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. In
both which it does very manifestly appear, and is fully evidenced, that
Godliness is profitable unto all things, both here and hereafter, now, in this
present, short, and frail state; and in that future and endless state, we must
all of us hereafter enter upon.

1. I say, we have a Powerful and Cogent Motive, to enforce that Counsel and
Exhortation in ver. 7. more Generally and Indistinctly laid down and propounded
to us, to wit, Godliness is profitable unto, or for, all things. Now in
speaking hereto, let us enquire into, and Consider:

1. The subject matter here treated of, and commended to us; and that is,
Godliness. 2. That which is affirmed of it, by way of Commendation, and for our
encouragement to exercise our selves thereto; and that is, It is profitable
unto all things.
1. The Subject Matter, here treated of, and highly commended to us; and that
is Godliness. But what is this Godliness, which is so much commended, and so
greatly and eternally profitable?

Now to that Enquiry I shall give answer,

1. Negatively. 2. Affirmatively.
1. We shall speak unto the forementioned Enquiry Negatively; or show what is
not meant or intended by Godliness, which is so much here commended, and so
greatly prositable: and so we may say,

1. Worldly Gain, or secular advantage is not Godliness, nor Godliness it.
There were some evil persons, and Teachers also, it may seem, in the Apostles
time, that did so suppose: and so out of a worldly design, did make a
profession of the Faith of our Lord Jesus, and of the Christian Religion: of
them St. Paul speaks in this Epistle to Timothy, saying unto him of some men,
that they were destitute of the Truth, Supposing that gain is Godliness: from
such withdraw thy self, 1 Timothy 6. 5. their Appearing Piety, and profession of
Godliness, was a cloak of Covetousness; and an Engine which they made use of,
to Advance themselves in the World: and when their Prosession of the Christian
Religion would not conduce, or contribute to their worldly design, they would
then take their leaves of that, and embrace another, which they imagined would.
And thus, it may justly be feared, it is with too too many in our days and
times in which we live: that is the best Religion with them, the pure
Apostolic worship, which tends to Secure them from the Cross of Christ, and
Afflictions of the Gospel; and which in all likelihood conduces to their
secular Advantage, and Grandeur in the world. They are too much like the
Pharisees in our Saviors time, who were so zealous for the Traditions of the
Elders; and so superstitious in observing their groundless and unnecessary
Ceremonies, and superfluous impositions: and under all this, their hearts went
after, and they hotly pursued their covetousness, Matt. 15. 1, 9. and chapter 23.
And they derided the Wisdom of God, when they heard this Doctrine from him, to
wit, No servant can serve two Masters; for either he will hate the one, and
love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other: ye
cannot serve God and mammon, Luke 16. 13, 14, 15. Thus also some of the Jews,
when they saw the mighty and stupendous works of our Lord Jesus; and rightly
concluded from thence, that he that effected such wonderful works, could, if he
pleased, deliver them from their enemies, how Numerous or Potent soever they
were: and that he could make them the Head of the Nations round about them, and
exalt them to Glory and Riches in this world: and upon this account, they would
have come, and taken him by force, to make him their King. And when our Lord
would by no means comply with them, but departed from them: when the People
therefore saw that Jesus was not there, They took shipping and came to
Capernaum, seeking for Jesus. How great pains did this People take to find
Christ, and what zeal did they express in following him! and yet their zeal was
as faulty as servent; for they still pursued a worldly design, under all this
appearing love to him, and zeal in seeking him: as our Savior also signifies
in the Reproof, and Counsel which he gives unto them; unto whom he says,
verily, verily, I say unto you, ye seek me, not because ye saw the miracles;
(in which his Power and Pity was expressed and evidenced toward the Children
of men;) But because ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled. Labor not for
the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures unto everlasting
life, which the son of man will give unto you etc. Lo here we may see it
exemplified in these Jews, That some suppose gain to be Godliness: Their aim
and design was worldly and ambitious, while they appear to have a servent
affection to Christ, and an earnest desire to follow him: Christ was but the
way, whereby they hoped to arrive at the end of their pursuit, to wit, worldly
Victory, Tranquillity, Grandeur, and Domination, John 6. 14, 15, 24, 26, 27. And
how many are there that under pretense of Religion pursue Mammon! so did they
which caused Divisions and Offenses contrary to the doctrine of Christ: of whom
the Apostle says, They that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus, but their own
Belly: and by good words; and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple,
Romans 16. 17, 18. Such also were they, concerning whom the Apostle thus writes
to the Philippians, saying; For many walk of whom I have told you often, and
now tell you even weeping; that they are the enemies of the Cross of Christ;
whose end is destruction, whose God is their Belly, whose glory is in their
shame, who mind earthly things; (to wit, only, or mainly) Phil. 3. 18, 19. But
however too too many do falsely and mistakingly suppose; yet Godliness is no
worldly design, or Artifice.

2. Nor is Godliness, the Bodily exercise here mentioned by the Apostle; But it
is opposed thereto in this verse, where he says, Bodily exercise profitteth
little: but Godliness is profitable unto all things, etc. But before we speak
further hereto, it may not be amiss, but useful for us to consider, that by
[Bodily exercise] here, the Apostle does not mean or intend, a diligent service
of God's providence in any lawful and honest Calling, Trade, or Employment;
nor does the Apostle any where speak meanly, or undervaluingly, concerning
diligence in and about the Affairs of this life But this is that which is many
times commanded, and commended to us in the holy Scriptures. When Adam was in
the state of Innocence, God put him into the Garden of Eden to dress it, and to
keep it, Genesis 2. 15. And if God thought it useful for the First man, to have
some Employment then; much rather is it both useful and needful for us now,
when we have all sinned, and are come short of(...)glory of God; And so by
means of Idleness, many times persons fall into temptation, and their spiritual
Enemies prevail against them, and lead them captive at their pleasure, Ezekiel.
16. 49. The Apostle, speaking of young Widows, says, They learn to be idle,
wandering from house to house; and not only Idle, but Tatlers also, and
Busy-bodies, speaking things which they ought not: And so give occasion to the
Adversary to speak reproachfully: And they themselves, or some of them turned
after Satan. Idleness is their first evil there mentioned, and a fruitful one
also in them; and they proceeded from evil to evil; when they did not Bear
Children, etc. They brought forth the Bratts of sin and satan, 1 Timothy 5. 13,
15. And the same Apostle gives this command to the Believers, to withdraw
themselves from every Brother that walks disorderly, and not after the
Tradition, and Example of himself, and of his fellow Laborers. For says he,
even when we were with you, this we commanded you; that if any would not work,
neither should he eat; for we hear that there are some which walk disorderly
among you, working not at all, but are Busy-bodies; Now them that are such we
command, and Exhort by our Lord Jesus, that with quietness they work, and eat
their own Bread. But ye, Brethren, be not weary of well doing: [Namely, of
working with your hands the thing that is good, that ye may have to give to him
that needs, Ephesians. 4. 28. Tit. 3. 8, 14.] And if any man obey not our word, by
this Epistle, note that man, [with a Brand of insamy] and have no company with
him, that he may be ashamed, etc. 2 These. 3. 6, 14, 15. And in his first
Epistle to the same Believers, he gives this command; That ye study to be
quiet, and to do your own Business, and to work with your own hands, (As we
commanded you:) that ye may walk honestly toward them that are without; and
that ye may have lack of nothing, 1 These. 4. 11, 12. with chap. 2. 9, 10. And
he thus writes unto Titus, a Minister of Christ: This is a faithful saying; and
these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed
in God, might be careful to maintain good works, (lawful Employments,) these
things are good and profitable unto men. -- And let Ours also learn to maintain
good works (or profess honest trades) for necessary uses, (namely, to supply
their own wants, and provide for themselves those things, which are needful
for the Body, to wit, Meat, Drink, Raiment, etc. And also, that they may (if
they can) Administer to the necessities of others:) That they be not
unfruitful, Tit. 3. 8, 14. By all which it evidently appears, that men's
diligent following their lawful calling, and Employments, to the end they may
provide for themselves, and be useful and charitable unto others, is not the
Bodily Exercise here spoken of, and opposed to Godliness; but such diligence in
business, is called well-doing, and good-works, etc. And is that which we ought
to exercise our selves unto. And it is well worthy our observation, That when
Paul says: ye remember Brethren, our Labor and Travel; for Laboring night
and day, because we would not be chargeable unto any of you, we preached unto
you the Gospel of God. He then immediately adds; Ye are witnesses, and God
also, how Holily, and Justly, etc. we behaved our selves among you that
believe: signifying, that their Diligence in their worldly vocation, was not
opposite unto, but well consistent with, if not included in, their holy and
pious Behavior amongst the believers, 1 These. 2. 9, 10. And it seems our Lord
Jesus, the Holy one of God, did, before he entered into his Prophetic Office,
exercise himself in the Trade of a Carpenter: hence some Jews say concerning
him, Is not this the Carpenter? Mark 6. 3. And it is very probable, that our
Lord was brought up in the same trade, with his supposed Father. To which I
shall here add no more.

But the Bodily exercise which the Apostle speaks of, and which he speaks so
undervaluingly of, in the place we are discoursing from, and which he does
oppose to Godliness; does mean, abstinence from things Lawful, upon the command
of some Teachers; or when they forbid us the use or enjoyment of Lawful things,
upon a Religious account. And that this is here meant by Bodily Exercise,
appears in the foregoing verses of this Chapter; for there the Apostle says;
Now the spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some will depart
from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils: --
forbidding to marry; and commanding to abstain from meats, which God has
Created to be received with thanksgiving, of them who believe and know the
Truth. For every Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be
received with thanksgiving. For it is Sanctified by the word of God, and
prayer. If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things, thou shall be
a good Minister of Jesus Christ, etc. -- But refuse profane and Old Wives
Fables; And exercise thy self unto godliness; for bodily Exercise (about these
Old Wives Fables) profits little: (or, is worth nothing; as a like Phrase is
used by the Wiseman when he says, the heart of the wicked is little worth; to
wit, it is good for nothing, Prove. 10. 20.) But godliness is profitable unto
all things, etc. And so we may say, godliness is not a strict and Conscientious
Observance of, or Abstinence from, indifferent and lawful things, at the
command of superstitious Teachers and guides: or as the Apostle elsewhere
speaks, the Kingdom of God (or the Christian Religion) is not meat and drink;
but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. For he that in these
things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of men. Let us
therefore follow after the things which make for Peace, etc. Romans 14. 17, 18,
19. To the same purpose also, Saint Paul writes to the believing Colossians,
saying; wherefore if ye be dead with Christ, from the rudiments of the world,
why, as though living in the world, are ye Subject to Ordinances? [Touch not,
taste not, handle not, which are all to perish with the using:] after the
commandments and ordinances of men; which things have indeed a show of Wisdom
in Will Worship, and Humility, etc. They have a show of Piety and Religion, and
nothing of the power thereof in Truth and reality. And of such as have their
Life in observing, or Abstaining from, such Indifferent things, it may be said,
They have a form of godliness, but deny the Power thereof, Col. 2. 20, 21, 23.
with. 2 Timothy 3. 1, 5. Conscientious Observance of, or Abstinence from, these
Lawful and Indifferent things, is not the godliness which is here commended to
us, and represented to be so advantageous and gainful: For in Christ Jesus,
neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a new
Creature, Gal. 6. 15, 16. 1 Cor. 7. 19. The great stress of the Pharisees
Religion, consisted in unnecessary, or lighter matters: they made broad their
Phylacteries, and enlarged the borders of their garments. They were very
zealous in observing, and appearing for, the Traditions of the Elders. They
paid Tithe of Mint, and Annise, and Cummin: But in the mean time, they omitted
the weightier matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith: and while they
strained at gntas, they swallowed Camels. But the heart of these men, was far
removed from inward and sincere Piety and Purity; For though they outwardly
apepared righteous unto men, yet within they were full of Hypocrisy and
Iniquity. And against them our Lord denounced many heavy and severe woes, Mat.
15. 1, 9, 20. and chap. 23. 4, 5, 23, 28. And so it is too too much in our
Times, with very many professed Christians of the reformed Religion, some are
so very hot and earnest for the Traditions and Impositions of the Elders, that
they almost, or altogether, Equalize them unto, if not prefer them before, the
Commandments of the Lord. And some others are so very Superstitiously zealous
against them, that they therein make little or nothing of disobedience to Civil
Magistrates, or Ecclesiastical Rulers and Governors; and think their
Injunction makes Lawful things unlawful. But herein, both these sorts do not
follow, or exercise themselves unto Godliness; nor walk in the spirit, and
steps of the Apostles of our Lord Jesus. And particularly, they walk not in the
steps of the Apostle Paul; for none was more zealous then he, in appearing for,
and Asserting the weighty matters of the Law of Faith, in which the Kingdom
consists. Hence he says concerning these things, do I now persuade men, or
God? or do I seek to please men? for if I yet pleased men I should not be the
servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 6, 10. With respect to these momentous things, he
would not give place by Subjection in the least, no, not for an hour, that the
Truth of the Gospel might continue with the believers, Gal. 2. 4, 5. But now,
as with respect unto indifferent matters, none was more indifferent and
flexible than he. Hence he thus Expresses himself; Though I be free from all
men, yet have I made my self servant unto all, that I might gain the more. And
unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; To them that are
under the Law, as under the Law, that I might gain them that are under the Law.
To them that are without Law, as without Law, (being not without Law to God,
but under the Law to Christ,) that I might gain them that are without Law. To
the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made all things to
all men, that I might by all means save some. And this I do for the Gospel's
sake, etc. 1 Cor. 9. 19, 20, 23. And it is observable, that the Apostle did not
Act Extraordinarily, in his Indifferency about these indifferent and lighter
matters; but to set others, even us all, an example to follow him. Hence, when
he again speaks of these Lower and Lawful things, he says: Give none offense,
neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God: even as I
please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of
many, that they may be saved. And then Immediately he Subjoynes to the former
words this Exhortation; Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ
Jesus, 1 Cor. 10. 32, 33. and chap. 11. 1.

O Let us not then mistake this Bodily exercise for Godliness, or think that
True Piety consists in an observance of, or Abstinence from, these Light and
Indifferent things; for neither the one, nor the other, simply considered, will
avail us any thing: (though still it is good and well-pleasing to God, to
submit our selves to them that have the rule over us, in Lawful things; and to
Follow Peace, so far as is consistent with Holiness and Charity, Heb. 13. 17.
and Chap. 12. 14. Romans 14.) we may say of these Indifferent things, as the
Apostle does of meats; But meat Commends us not to God; for neither if we
eat, are we the better; neither if we eat not, are we the worse. But take we
heed, lest by any means this liberty of ours, become a stumbling block to them
that are weak. 1 Cor. 8. 8, 9. Godliness is generally profitable; but these
Indifferencies, simply considered, profit little, or nothing. O then, consider
and receive that Counsel given to the believing Hebrews; to wit, be not carried
about with diverse and strange Doctrines; for it is a good thing, that the heart
be established with Grace, not with Meats, which have not profited them that
have been Occupied therein, Heb. 13. 7, 9. But no more to that particular.

3. Nor is the Godliness here mentioned and Commended, the worship of God
only, in a strict and restrained sense; or that Religious service which does
directly and immediately appertain unto the only living and true God, only.
Indeed, sometimes the word Godliness is to be taken in that narrow and limited
sense, when it is spoken of distinctly: As when it is distinguished from
Honesty: as it is by the Apostle where he says, That we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all Godliness, and Honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 2.. And elsewhere it
is distinguished from other divine graces and virtues: so this Apostle thus
Exhorts Timothy, follow after Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love, Patience,
Meekness, 1 Timothy 6. II. And so he does distinguish Godly, from Righteously, and
Soberly, Tit. 2. 11. 12. And to the same purpose the Apostle Peter mentions
Godliness, by way of distinction from other fruits of the spirit; where he thus
Exhorts the believers, saying: Add to your faith, virtue; and to virtue,
knowledge; and to knowledge, Temperance; and to Temperance Patience; and to
Patience, Godliness; and to Godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly
kindness, Charity; 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. As Godliness is not either, or both. of
the forementioned particulars, to wit, secular advantage, or bodily exercise,
at all: so neither is it only the Divine Worship of God, which immediately and
only relates unto him, in a narrow and district sense and consideration.

2. But Affirmatively we may say, Godliness in this place, being mentioned
alone, is to be taken in a very large, and Extensive sense: even as Faith,
which though sometimes it be distinguished from other fruits of the spirit, and
so is to be taken more narrowly, 1 Cor. 13. 2, 13. Gal. 5. 22, 23. Yet
elsewhere it is to be understood more Comprehensively, Joh. 3. 15, 16. And
Chap. 6. 29. Act. 16. 31. And the same we might Apply to Holiness,
Righteousness, Love, Repentance, etc. So I say here, we are to understand by
Godliness, the whole Duty of man; toward God, toward his neighbor, and toward
himself, as, Tit. 2. 11, 12. Thus when the Psalmist says, know that the Lord
has set apart him that is Godly for himself, Psalm. 4. 4. He means by the Godly
man there, not strictly such an one as worships the true God; but the person
that does Universally, and sincerely keep Gods Commandments. And thus the Godly
are opposed to the unrighteous, by Saint Peter, when the unrighteous mean such
persons as sin, not against God directly or only, but against themselves also,
and their neighbors, or brethren; as is evidently signified in his words, to
wit; The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of Temptation, and to
reserve the unjust to the day of Judgment to be punished. But chiefly them that
walk after the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness, and despise government:
presumptuous are they, self-willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of
dignities, 2 Pet. 2. 8. 10. And thus also, the whole Conversation that becomes
the Gospel of Christ is called, a living Godly in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3. 12.
And that kindness, which ought to be showed to Relations, or to Parents, is
called Godliness, by Saint Paul, where he says; Let them learn to show Piety
at home, and to requite their Parents; for that is good and acceptable before
God, 1 Timothy 5. 4. And kindness and Courtesy toward brethren, is to this purpose
expressed also by Saint John, as it is read in our Translation, where it is said,
whom if thou bring forward on their journey after a godly sort, thou shall do
welt, 3. Joh. 5. 6. And so, on the other hand, they are called ungodly persons,
who turn the grace of our God into Lasciviousness, in a general consideration,
Jud. 4. 2 Pet. 2. 5, 6. And very frequently in the book of the Psalms, where
in the Translation after the Hebrew we read, wicked; the Septuagint read
ungodly; and so does our Vulgar Translation: as we by observation may see. And
thus as I have said, Godliness is to be accepted in this place, in such an
Extensive and Comprehensive consideration. And so taking it, and looking upon
it, we may say,

1. That by Godliness here we are to understand, the Christian Faith, or the
Articles thereof, which are to be believed by us; and the unfeigned belief
thereof; which this Apostle calls, the mystery of godliness, when he says;
without Controversy, or Confessedly, great is the Mystery of Godliness, God was
manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, Preached unto
the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into Glory, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
And of which Truth, or mystery, the Church of the living God is the ground and
Pillar, v. 15. And so this mystery of Godliness contains in it, the
incarnation, abasement, sufferings, death, Resurrection, Ascension, and
Exaltation of the Son of God, and all the Truths of the Gospel, which are
therein Preached to us, to the end they may be unfeignedly and heartily
embraced, and entertained by us; and which mystery is called the Gospel. Thus
when the Apostle says to the Corinthians, I declare unto you the Gospel, which
I Preached unto you, which also ye have received, etc He then more Particularly
acquaints them with, and re-minds them of, the Gospel, which he had formerly
Proclaimed unto them, saying; For I delivered unto you first of all, that which
I also received; how that Christ died for our sins, according to the
Scriptures; and that he was buried; and that he rose again the third day,
according to the Scriptures: and that he was seen of Cephas, then of the
Twelve, etc. 1 Cor. 15. 1, 4, 8. And so this Doctrine of Godliness is called,
The word of Faith, which the Apostles have Preached and delivered, Romans 10. 8.
10, 15, 17. And the Faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27. And the Faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ, of Glory, Jam. 2. 1. And the Faith which was once delivered to
the Saints, Jude 3. 4. To which I shall not here particularly speak.

2. And by Godliness here we are also to understand, the Christian life and
practice, which is Taught us by the Gospel of Christ, as it is now Preached
unto us according to the Revelation of the Mystery. Hence the Gospel of Christ
is called, the Doctrine according to Godliness; because it does teach us to
serve God acceptably, with Reverence and Godly fear; to serve him without fear,
in holiness and Righteousness before him, all the days of our life, 1 Timothy 6.
3. Heb. 12. 28. As the Apostle Paul says, the grace of God, which brings
Salvation unto all men, has appeared: teaching us, that denying ungodliness
and worldly lusts, we should live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this
present world, (in this posture) looking for the blessed hope, etc. Tit. 2. 11,
12, 13. And the same Apostle declaring to the believing Ephesians the sad
miscarriage of the Gentiles, that knew not God; And how they walked in the
vanity of their minds; he then says unto them: But ye have not so learned
Christ: if so be that ye have heard him, and been taught by him as the truth is
in Jesus: that ye put off, concerning the former conversation, the old man,
which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts. And be renewed in the spirit
of your mind. And that ye put on the New-Man, which after God is Created in
Righteousness and Holiness of Truth. To give us to understand, that the word of
the Truth of the Gospel of Christ does Teach us, to be pure in heart, and Pious
in all manner of Demeanor and conversation; for which cause also it is called,
the Truth which is after Godliness, Ephesians. 4. 20, 24. With Tit.

1. 1. It gives unto us more perfect, Easy, and excellent commands and rules,
then the Law does; however as to the clearness of them. It sets before us more
excellent and forcible Motives and Arguments, on the right hand, and on the
left; to Enforce our Duty. It propounds to us the most excellent example of
Jesus the Son of God; That we might follow his steps, and walk as he has
walked. And also with it, are afforded more abundant and powerful assistances,
of the grace and spirit of God, to work in us both to will, and to do of good
pleasure: That we might do all things without Murmuring, and disputings; that
so we might be blameless and harmless. And therefore, as our blessed Savior
says, except your Righteousness shall exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, (which were the most strait sect of the Jews Religion, Act. 26.
5.) Ye shall in no Case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5. 19, 20, 47,
48. To whom much is given, of them much will be required, Luke 12. 47, 48. And
we therefore, being preferred above the Jews, ought to exceed them in all
Godliness and Goodness, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 12, 13, 18. What manner of persons ought
we to be in all holy conversation and Godliness! Be we then diligent that we
may be found of him in Peace, without Spot and Blameless, 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10, 12.
2 Pet. 3. 12. 14. And so in a few words, the Godliness here commended to us
does contain in it, an hearty, unfeigned, and operative belief of the Gospel;
and a life and Practice suitable thereunto, to wit, in sincere Holiness,
Righteousness, and Sobriety, Romans 6. 17, 18, 21. And thus, according to my
weakness, I have briefly shown what is here meant by Godliness.

2. Consider we in the next place, what is here Affirmed of Godliness, by way
of its Commendation; And for our encouragement to exercise our selves thereto:
And that is, It is profitable for, or unto, allthings. It is that which is of
greatest and most general advantage to them that exercise themselves heartily
unto it.

But, before we speak any further thereto, we may observe; that the Apostle
here, does not declare unto us, the whole excellency of the Christian Faith and
Life; or give unto us a Complete Commendation of it; for it is pleasant, sweet,
and grateful also; it is as delightful as Gainful; as pleasurable as
profitable; as it is said of Wisdom, to wit, of Sincere Piety, her ways are
ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace, Prove. 3. 13, 17. Great peace
have they that Love thy Law: And nothing shall offend them, Psalm. 119. 165.
Believing in Christ (with Faith unfeigned) they rejoice with joy unspeakable,
and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1, 6, 8. And such as uprightly exercise themselves to
the Faith, and fear of the Lord, may say with the Apostle, our rejoicing, our
glorying, is this, the Testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity, and
godly sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had
our Conversation in the World, etc. 2 Cor. 1. 12. And this is that Efficacious
Motive and Argument, which our Lord Jesus sets before us, to persuade and
prevail with us, to take his yoke upon us, and seriously undertake his service;
namely, says he, my yoke is easy, sweet, gracious; and my burden is light,
Mat. 11. 29, 30.

As also, the applying our hearts and lives to the power of Godliness, is the
most advancing, noble, and honorable exercise we can engage our selves in: To
you that believe, he is an honor, 1 Pet. 2, 6, 7. And when the Wiseman
Commends Wisdom, and Exhorts and excites us to the diligent pursuit of it,
saying, Wisdom is the principal thing, get Wisdom, and with all thy gettings
get understanding: he then propounds this motive and inforcement, exalt her,
and she shall promote thee; she shall bring thee to honor, when thou do
embrace her. She shall give to thine head an Ornament of Grace, a Crown of
glory shall she deliver to thee. Hear, O my Son, and receive my sayings, etc.
Prove. 4. 7, 8, 10. The reward of humility, and of the fear of the Lord, is
honor; even that also which is excellent and durable, Prove. 22. 4. 1 Samuel 2.
30. And if the desire of honor and glory, have any Influence upon us, let us
exercise our selves unto that Religion which is pure, and undefiled before God
and the Father. We may Lawfully, and Laudably, be Ambitious of that Honor,
which is united with, and Entaild upon, divine virtue and goodness: and in
following after godliness, we shall thereby attain unto true and abiding
honor. For God will give glory, Honor, and Peace, unto every man that works
good, Romans 2. 7, 10. Isa. 43. 4. 2 Cor. 5. 9. Romans 2. 28, 29.

But though Godliness be, as we have briefly showed, both Pleasurable, and
Honorable; yet in this place the Apostle asserts, the general Profitableness
of it, to induce us to the hearty exercise of it. And gain and advantage is
that which is Generally desirable, and greatly Valuable; and which excites and
encourages men, to take much pains, to run many hazards, to endure much
hardship, and encounter with many difficulties and dangers. What makes so many
persons take such long and tedious Journeys, and Voyages; ride through thick
and thin; expose themselves to the cold, and other inconveniences, but the hope
and expectation of Profit? In all labor there is profit, eyed, designed, and
pursued, Prove. 14. 23. And if men rise up early, and sit down late, and eat the
bread of carefulness, for secular gain and advantage; much rather should we so
mind, the great and excellent gain of true Piety, as to Apply our selves
thereto, with all our might and main; and endure any hardships in that
application, that we may be made partakers thereof; as the Apostle and his
Fellow Laborers did; as he signifies to us, in the next verse but one to this,
we are discoursing of, saying; Therefore (because Godliness is so generally and
greatly gainful) we both labor, and suffer reproach, 1 Timothy 4. 8, 10. And in
our working, and continued abounding in the work of the Lord, our labor shall
not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58. But to this I shall enlarge no
further at present; because there will be apt occasion, to speak more
particularly hereto, in the following part of the words; in which the Apostle
does more distinctly evidence the Truth, of what he more indistinctly
propounds, in the former part, saying, having promise of the life that now is,
and of that which is to come.

But now from this Motive, as thus generally propounded, to move and provoke us
to exercise our selves to true Piety; we may infer several things, which may be
useful for us: As,

1. Seeing this is propounded by the Apostle, to persuade us to follow
Godliness, That it is Profitable unto all things; then we may from hence learn,
that it is no mercenary or base thing; but what is well pleasing unto God; That
we should so mind and consider the gain and Profit of Godliness, that we may
exercise our selves to the Mystery and Practice of it. Indeed, when we follow
Religion, for the advantage, promotion and Grandeur of this World, only, or
Principally; then we may truly be said to be mercenary, and shall no longer
appear to be Religious, then as that may conduce unto our secular interest, and
Ambitious designs, as before we have said, and as the devil falsely and
maliciously suggested concerning Job, Chap. 1. 9, 11. But we may so consider
the Real and Eternal gain of true Piety, as to quicken, Excite, and perpetuate
our endeavors and Pursuit after pure Reliligion, and yet not at all be
mercenary, in an unworthy sense, or Reprovable consideration. And, that we may
Lawfully and allowably, have an eye and respect, to the advantage and gain of
true Piety, to engage us to exercise our selves, to the serious and constant
Practice of it does appear.

1. Because God's people, when they have neglected their Duty, have been justly
reproved for not believing, that Religion, was their greatest and truest
Interest; or for not pursuing advantageous things: Elihu somewhat severely
reproves Job, saying, Think thou this to be right? -- For thou have said,
what advantage will it be unto thee, and what profit shall I have, if I be
cleansed from my sin? whereas, as he afterward adds, Though we give nothing to
God if we be righteous; yet our Righteousness will profit the Son of man, Job.
36. 2, 3, 7, 8. And the Lord himself does fault and reprove the Priest's, and
Pastors, because they walked after things that did not profit them. And he thus
expostulates with his people: Has a Nation changed their Gods, which yet are
no God's? But my people have changed their glory, (their God,) for that which
does not profit? Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid,
etc. Jer. 2. 8, 11, 12, 13.

2. That to excite us to pursue undefiled Religion, we may have an eye at its
reward, is further evident, and evidenced; in that God, in his promises, does
set the gain of it before us, to make us truly Pious: and if this be to be
mercenary, to have a respect to the recompense of the reward, God makes men so,
by his assurances and encouragements. Thus he says unto Abram, the Father of
the saithful: fear not, -- I am thine exceeding great reward, Genesis 15. 1. My
Son, says the holy Spirit, Be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long:
for surely there is a reward, and thine expectation shall not be cut off. Hear
thou, my Son, and be wise; and guide thine heart in the way, Prove. 23. 17. 18.
Touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you, and I will be a Father
unto you, and ye shall be my sons, and daughters, says the Lord Almighty.
Having therefore these promises, Dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from
all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God,
2 Cor. 6. 14, 18. with chap. 7. 1. Rev. 22. 12, 14.

3. The truth of the former does further appear, and is manifested herein; in
that the most eminently holy ones, who surely were not mercenary, did undertake
and pursue their pious work, with a respect unto the gracious reward of it; as
to mention in a very few particulars. It is said of Moses, that eminent servant
of the Lord, that by faith when he was come to years, he refused to be called
the son of Pharaoh's daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the
People of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Esteeming the
reproach of Christ, greater riches then the treasures in Egypt. But what made
him thus comparatively despise, and set light by the excellencies of this
world, the Honor, Pleasures, and Treasures thereof; and undergo the
difficulties and grievous things thereof? The Apostle does presently acquaint
us with the true reason thereof, saying, For he had respect unto the recompense
of the reward, which reward was not the Land of Canaan; for he never entered
thereinto: But (principally however) that Inheritance incorruptible, and
undefiled, and which fades not away, Heb. 11. 24, 26. The Apostle Paul also
was very eminent and exemplary for Holiness, and diligence in the work of the
Lord; and did outrun his Brethren therein; and yet, that which made him so
fervent in spirit, serving the Lord; was the Prize which was set before him:
now, says he, They do it to obtain a corruptible Crown, but we, (Run the
spiritual Race to obtain) an incorruptible. I therefore so run, not as
uncertainly: -- I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection; least that
by any means, when I have preached to others, I my self should be a Castaway;
Namely, lest he should lose, or fall short of the reward of the Incorruptible
Crown, 1 Cor. 9, 18, 25, 27. And again he says; Brethren, I count not my self
to have apprehended; but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are
behind, and reaching forth to those things which are before; I press toward the
Mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. And this his
exercise was so laudable, and imitable, that he exhorts the believers presently
after, to follow his example herein, saying unto them; Brethren, be followers
together of me, and mark them which walk so, as ye have us for an ensample,
Phil, 3. 13, 14, 17.

Yea, a greater than he, and one that was above All, to wit, our Lord Jesus,
the Captain of our Salvation, comforted and encouraged himself, in the
consideration of the recompense he should receive; and therefore Patiently and
Perseveringly endured Temptation, and continued in well-doing,; and surely, He
was not Mercenary; or if He was, we may well be so also. The Prophet speaking
in his Person, says, I have labored in vain, and spent my strength for
naught, and in vain; yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work, or
reward, with my God. -- I shall be glorious in the eyes of the Lord; and my God
shall be my strength, Isa. 49. 4, 5. And the Apostle thus Exhorts, and
speaks unto the believers, saying, looking unto Jesus, the Author and
Finisher of the Faith, who far the joy set before him endured the Cross,
despising the shame, etc. Heb. 12. 1, 2, 3. Joh. 17. 4, 5.

4. That we may Lawfully have respect unto the gain of godliness, in exercising
our selves unto the sincere practice thereof, may further appear, by those
Metaphorical or borrowed expressions, made use of in the Holy Scriptures; in
which our Practice of Piety is described, and declared to us. So it is many
times called Labor, and work, to wit, that of a servant: now, does not the
recompense he shall receive encourage a servant to labor? and may not he
Lawfully expect it, and long for it? Mat. 20. 1. 14. And, to them who by
patient continuance in well doing seek for Glory, and Honor, and immortality,
he will render eternal life, Romans 2. 7. 1 Cor. 15. 58. Rev. 14. 13. Sometimes
it is called running, as in a race: and who so runs, but in hope to receive the
Prize? and the Apostle thus Counsels, or Commands, the believers, so run, that
ye may obtain, 1 Cor. 9. 24. Sometimes it is called and compared to Plowing,
Sowing, etc. And who will employ themselves therein, but in hope and
expectation of an Harvest? as the Apostle says, that he that ploweth should
plow in Hope; and he that Thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his Hope, 1
Cor. 9. 10. Jam. 5. 7. And, whatsoever a man sows, that also shall be reap.
-- He that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting,
Gal. 6. 7. 8. And they that sow to themselves in righteousness, may Lawfully
expect to reap in mercy, Hos. 10. 12. Sometimes it is compared to a Warfare;
and who goes a warfare at any time at his own charges? 1 Cor. 9. 7. And a
Crown is proposed to the seven Churches in Asia, to Animate them, that they may
overcome; and it is assured to every one that does overcome, Rev. 2. and chap.
3. And the Apostle thus Exhorts* Timothy; fight the good fight of Faith, lay
hold on Eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6. 12. 14.

5. They that say, a man may not from the expectation of a reward exercise
himself to righteousness, and all goodness, or if he does, he is mercenary
therein; do make void Faith, in some acts of it, and Hope wholly; for Hope is a
well-grounded desire and expectation, of some absent, or future good: Hope that
is seen is not hope, for what a man sees, why does he yet hope for? Romans 8.
23, 25. And Hope is very efficacious and operative, to engage us to perform our
duty; Lord, says the Psalmist, I have hoped for thy Salvation, and done thy
commandments, Psalm. 119. 166. Every man that has this hope in Christ, [that
when he shall appear, he shall be like him] purifieth himself even as he is
pure; 1. Joh. 3. 2, 3. This is also an Anchor of the soul, to preserve it from
shipwreck, in the midst of the proud waves, billows, and storms of the Sea of
this troublesome and Tempestuous world, Heb. 6. 18, 19. And Faith is the ground
of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen: For if men do not believe
that there is a reward for the righteous; and that God is faithful to give it
to them, and bestow it upon them, in due season; why then should they hope, or
expect any? Romans 5. 1, 2. and chapter 15. 13.

6. Yea, that we not only may but ought to mind the recompense of the reward,
that we may sincerely and steadfastly exercise our selves unto what is good, and
well-pleasing unto God; does plainly appear from what the Apostle speaks to the
believing Hebrews, saying; but without faith it is impossible to please God:
for he that comes to God must believe that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 5. 6. As also the Truth hereof does further
appear, in those Commands which the Apostles have given by the Lord Jesus, to
the believers: As, so run, that ye may abtain, 1 Cor. 9. 24. Let us not be
weary in well doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not. As we
have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, etc. Gal. 6. 9. 10.
And when the Apostle had been saying, as before we took notice, I press toward
the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus; He then
immediately adds thereto, let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus
minded, etc. To wit, as he himself was, Phil. 3. 14. 15. 1 Timothy 6. 12.

7. And lastly, as to this; a reward is particularly propounded to us, and
needful to be respected, and expected by us, to make us willing to perform
those Tasks of Christ, which appear to be very difficult, chargeable, and
unpleasant to us: as to say, that we may patiently and cheerfully take up the
Cross of Christ, and endure affliciton as good Soldiers of his, for the Word,
and way of truth; it is doubtless very requisite and needful to have such
respect unto the Crown of Glory, as that none of the things we suffer may move
us: and therefore that is proposed to us, to strengthen us to suffer adversity
and persecution. Blessed are ye, says our Savior, when men shall hate you;
and when they shall separate you from their company; and shall reproach you;
and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake; rejoice ye in that
day, and leap for Joy; for behold. (mind and consider this seriously and
attentively, your reward is great in heaven, Luke 6. 22, 23 Mat. 5. 10, 12. For
which things sake we faint not, says the Apostle: -- for our light affliction,
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory: while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen: -- for the things which are not seen are eternal, 2
Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18. and chap. 5. 1. 9. And the Apostle Peter thus admonishes
and encourages the believers, to partake of the afflictions of the Gospel;
think it not strange concerning the fiery Trial, as if some strange thing
happened unto you; but rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's
Sufferings; that when his glory shall be revealed ye also may be glad with
exceeding joy, 1 Pet. 4. 12, 13. It is a faithful saying; for if we be dead
with him, we shall also live with him. If we suffer, we shall also reign with
him. -- Of these things put them (namely, the believers, in Remembrance:
intimating; that the believing remembrance hereof is very proper, and
profitable for them, to strengthen them to all patience and long-suffering with
joyfulness, in all their Tribulations, 2 Timothy 2. 11, 14. 2 Cor. 1. 7.

Again, that we may cheerfully and liberally, according to our several
abilities, give to the poor; and exercise our selves in works of mercy and
charity, in administering to the necessities of such, as are needy and indigent;
it is needful and requisite for us to consider the reward set before us to
excite us thereto; otherwise we shall be back-ward to undertake, or continue
in, this good work. And therefore oftentimes, the future advantage of this
pious work is proposed, that we might be forward thereto. Thus our Lord says
to the young man whom he loved; if thou will be perfect, go and sell that thou
have, and give to the poor; and thou shall have treasure in heaven, Mat. 19.
21. And to the same purpose our Savior speaks unto his Disciples also, saying;
sell that ye have, and give Alms, provide your selves bags which wax not old,
a Treasure in the heavens that fails not, where no Thief approaches, nor
Moth corrupts, Luke 12. 33, 34. And to the end the Apostle Paul might provoke
the Corinthians to a liberal distribution toward their poor and necessitous
brethren, he thus writes unto them, he that sows sparingly, shall reap
sparingly: and he that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully, 2 Cor. 9. 6,
9. with, Psalm. 1 12. 9. Eccles. 12. 1. And he thus Commands Timothy, charge
them that are rich in this world, -- that they do good; that they be rich in
good works; ready to distribute; willing to communicate: (and that they might
so be he signifies, that this would turn to their own future account and
advantage, in the day of Christ, saying;) laying up in Store for themselves, a
good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal
life, 1 Timothy 6. 17, 19. Once more; to the end we may really love our enemies,
and such as hate and persecute us; and may do good to them, and be Cordially
kind to them, according to their needs, and our Capacity; it is very behoveful
and requisite for us to mind, and have respect unto the encouragement of a
future reward, assured to them that exercise themselves in that work of
Perfection. To this purpose, when our Lord gives this command to his disciples,
namely, I say unto you which hear, love your enemies; do good to them which
hate you, bless them that curse you; and pray for them that despightfully use
you, and Persecute you: he afterward in the same discourse assures them, that
their observing and obeying this command, would be for their own profit and
advantage; for he thus says, Love ye your enemies; and do good, and lend;
hoping for nothing again; and your reward shall be great: (he not only
propounds and promises to them a reward, but also a great one; that they might
perform this difficult and excellent duty; and then presently after adds:) Be
ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful, Luke 6. 27, 28, 35, 36.
Mat. 5. 44, 47, 48. It may be said of this duty of heartily loving our Enemies,
as sometimes some said in another Case, this is an hard saying, who can hear
it? but that we may hear and obey it, our bountiful Lord does hire us to the
performance thereof, and so makes it easy. Wherefore, as the wise man says, if
thine Enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat: and if he be thirsty, give him
Water to drink; for thou shall heap coals of fire on his head: and the Lord
shall reward thee, Prove. 25. 22, 23.

And thus we have largely showed, that it is no mercenary, or reprovable thing,
to exercise our selves to godliness, out of a respect to, and hope of a reward
of grace upon our so doing: but that which is Lawful, Laudable, yea and in some
sense and Cases requisite and needful so to do: and I shall add no more to
this first use; but shall now proceed on unto a second; namely.

2. Seeing God has made that which is our Duty, to be our great, and only real
Interest: seeing he has made Godliness our true and most excellent Gain and
Advantage; we may infer and learn from hence, that it is his good Will and
gracious Mind in Christ concerning us, that we should all of us seriously and
in good earnest, exercise our selves unto true Piety; That we should not only,
or chiefly have a form of Godliness upon us; but that we should entertain and
obey the Power thereof: and be all of us in sincerity, Godly Persons; Therefore
has he entailed all profitable Prosperity on Godliness; that we might never
think of enjoying the former, without our embracing the latter. No good thing
will He withold from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84. 11. Hence he thus
expresses himself, and evidenceth it to be his Cordial desire, that we should
apply our selves to the hearty Obedience of him; O that there were such an
heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments always,
that it might be well with them, and with their Children for ever. Deuteronomy. 5. 28,
29. And now Israel, says Moses, what does the Lord thy God require of thee,
but to fear the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and with all thy soul: to
keep the Commandments of the Lord, and his Statutes, which I command thee this
day, for thy good? chap. 10. 12, 13. It adds nothing really unto him, if we be
holy and good; nor does it take any thing from him, if we be ungodly and
profane. If thou sinnest, what do thou against him? or if thy transgressions
be multiplied, what do thou unto him? If thou be Righteous, what give thou
him? or what receives he of thine hand? Job 36. 6. 8. No, but he hires us to
the Embracement and Practice of sincere Piety and Purity, with the undoubted
Advantage of it to our selves. And therefore we may rationally and certainly
conclude, that God our Savior will have all men to be saved, and to come unto
the knowledge of the Truth, as, 1 Timothy 2. 4. That he is not willing that any man
should perish, while it is called to day, but that all should come to
Repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9. Therefore he sets before us Life and Good, and Death
and Evil, Blessing and Cursing: not as if he was indifferent which of them we
choose: but he does Council us, and Cordially desire, we should choose Life; and
to that end, that we love the Lord our God, and obey his voice, and cleave unto
him; for He is our Life, and the length of our days, Deuteronomy. 30. 10, 15, 19, 20.
And doubtless, seeing it is his hearty will, we should seriously exercise our
selves unto the obedience of Faith, he will not be wanting to enable us
thereto, by the asistance of his grace; if we be not wanting to our selves: for
he gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, Jam. 1. 5. It is God that
works in you, says the Apostle, both to will, and to do, of his good
Pleasure, Phil 2. 12, 15. If therefore we continue disobedient and ungodly, and
so perish in conclusion; we shall have no just cause, to blame the God o^ all
Grace, who has done so great things for us, and set so great encouragments
before us, to move and engage us to serve him acceptably; But our Destruction
will appear to be wholly of our selves; and that we our selves have, by
observing lying vanities, forsaken our own mercies; and have been too too like
profane Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his Birthright, Heb. 12. 14, 17.

3. Seeing Godliness is profitable unto all things; and that our exercising our
selves thereto, is our most certain, excellent, and eternal advantage; This
then discovers and evidences unto us, the great and pernicious mistake and
folly of them, that think and speak otherwise; and so exercise not themselves
thereto; but walk in Ungodly, Unrighteous, and Intemperate ways and practices;
as if Impiety were the only, and mainly gainful thing, they could exercise
themselves unto. To this purpose Job speaks of some wicked ones, who did
greatly Flourish in this world, in their unrighteous courses; and who thought,
that because they did so, therefore it would be a vain and unprofitable thing,
to serve and fear the Lord. They spend their days, says he, in Wealth, or
Mirth; and in a moment go down to the grave. Therefore they say unto God,
depart from us: for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. What is the
Almighty, that we should serve him? And what profit should we have if we pray
unto him? Job 21. 14. 15. And to the same purpose Eliphaz speaks of them:
namely, They say unto God, depart from us; And what can the Almighty do for
them? (see how brutish they are in their thoughts, or expressions of God; while
they give him the Title of the Almighty, they yet say, What can he do for them?
whereas they might rather, and most truly say, What cannot the Almighty do for
them? most strange! That he should be Almighty, and yet should have no Hands,
no power to provide for his servants! Thus some wicked ones did Reason with
such contradictious Talk: But though they doubted of, or denied, his
Providence and Bounty, they did partake thereof, while they spoke so
Atheistically; for it presently follows;) yet he filled their houses with good
things, Job 22, 15. -- 17. 18. Yea such foolish and brutish ones there were,
not only amongst them that were without the Church, but of them also that were
of the Church; and of the most Reformed part thereof, of Judah God's pleasant
Plant. Hence it is said concerning some therein; your words have been stout
against me, says the Lord: Yet ye say, what have we spoken against thee? ye
have said, it is vain to serve God; And what profit is it that we have kept his
ordinance? And that we have walked Mournfully before the Lord of hosts? But
whence proceeded this unreasonable and absurd talk of theirs? Surely from hence;
Because wicked ones did grow Great, and were Fat and Flourishing; therefore
they thought, that their Impiety was their great Interest and Advantage: for so
much is signified in the following words of these simple and unwise Persons; to
wit, And now we call the Proud happy; yea they that work wickedness are set up;
yea they that tempt God are even delivered, Mal. 3. 13, 14, 15. Nay, that Good
Man was envious at the foolish, when he saw the prosperity of the wicked. That
there were no Bands in their death, but their strength was firm. That they were
not in trouble as other men, neither were they plagued like other men. -- That
their eyes stand out with fatness; and they have more than heart could wish.
Behold, says he, these are the ungodly, they prosper in the World, they
increase in Riches: And while he looked upon their security, and prosperity,
according to outward appearance, he was to ready and forward to say, verily, I
have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence. For all the
day long have I been plagued, and chastened every Morning. But thus this
Holy-man spoke in a Temptation; And presently after, greatly blames himself for
his weakness and foolishness, saying; Thus mine heart was grieved; and I was
pricked in my reins; So foolish was I, and ignorant, I was as a Beast before
thee, Psalm. 73. 3, 7, 12, 14, 22. But wicked Persons are usually so foolish and
without understanding; And because God, out of his general Bounty and Goodness,
provides for, and prospers them, therefore perverting what is right, they
conclude, that ungodliness is most profitable for them. O, say some, if we had
not been good fellows; if we had not kept company with vain persons; and eaten
and drunken, yea and been drunken with the drunken; we should never have had
their custom, nor such good trading as we have: or if we had not lied,
defrauded, and overreacht others; we should not have kept our Shops open to
this day: or if we had not oppressed, or outwitted others, we had been as poor
as the poorest: whereas now, we have plentiful Estates, and a full Table. Like
them in former times, who said, I will go after my Lovers, that gave me my
Bread, and my Water, my Wool, and my Flax, mine Oil, and my Drink, Hos. 2. 5.
Or like them of whom it is said? They take up all of them with the Angle: they
catch them in their Net, and gather them in their drag: therefore they rejoice,
and are glad. Therefore they sacrifice unto their Net, and burn incense unto
their Drag, because by them their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous,
Hab. 1. 15, 17. Zech. 11. 5. Deuteronomy. 8. 17, 18. Jer. 5. 26, 27, 28. But alas!
This their way is their folly; and so it appears to be many times in this day;
for how often is the candle (the shining prosperity) of the wicked put out? And
how often comes their destruction upon them? God distributeth sorrows in his
anger, Job. 21. 5, 17. I have seen, says the Psalmist, the wicked in great
Power, and spreading himself like a greenbay-tree; yet he passed away, and Lo,
he was not: yea I sought him, but he could not be found, Psalm. 37. 35, 36.
Prove. 1. 10, 11, 13, -- 19. and chap. 23. 20, 21. Thus when some of the Church
of God said unto the Prophet, We will certainly do, whatsoever thing goes
forth out of our own mouth, to burn incense unto the Queen of Heaven, -- As we
have done: -- For then had we plenty of victuals, and saw no want. Then the
Prophet answered them, saying, The Incense that ye burn in the Cities of Judah,
and in the streets of Jerusalem, ye, and your Fathers; -- did not the Lord
remember them, and came it not into his mind? So that the Lord could no longer
bear, because of the Evil of your doings, and because of the abominations,
which ye have committed: therefore is your Land a Desolation, and an
Astonishment, and a Curse, as at this day; because ye burned Incense; and
because ye sinned against the Lord, and have not obeyed the voice of the Lord,
nor walked in his Law: -- Therefore this evil is happened unto you, as at this
day. In which words, we may plainly perceive the folly and evident mistake of
those wicked Persons, in that what they thought was the cause of their fullness,
and prosperity, was indeed the true Reason and procurement of their want, and
of their miserable Ruin and dismal adversity, Jer. 44. 16, 17, 19, 24. Hos. 2.
5, 6, 8, 10. Psalm. 52. 3, 7. and 56. 7.

Or if such ungodly ones, should spend all the days of their vain Life, in
wealth and prosperity, and have here no considerable changes; yet hereafter, in
the world to come, their folly will be made manifest unto all men; and will
then sadly be bewailed, and acknowledged by themselves. What will it then
profit a man, to have gained the whole World, and lose his own soul? or what
shall a man give in exchange for his soul? for the Son of man will come in the
glory of his Father, with his Angels; and then he will reward every man
according to his works, Matt. 16. 26, 27. Eccles. 12. 13, 14. Then shall the
ungodly change their minds, and sigh for grief of spirit, and say within
themselves; This is he (the Pious man) whom we sometimes had in derision, and
in a parable of reproach. We fools thought his life Madness, and his end
without Honor. -- We have wearied our selves in the the way of wickedness and
destruction; and we have gone through dangerous ways: But we have not known
the way of the Lord. What has Pride profited us? -- For the hope of the
ungodly is like the dust that is blown away with the wind; and like a thin
foam, that is scattered abroad with the storm; and as the smoke that is
dispersed with the wind; and as the Remembrance of him passes, that tarrieth
but for a day, Wisdom 5. Then will all unrighteous persons bemoan themselves,
and bewail their former folly and madness, in embracing as most pleasant, and
profitable, that which will then by woeful experience, appear to them to be most
bitter, loathsome, and eternally pernicious, and dismally destructive to them.
What is the hope of the Hypocrite, though he has gained, when God takes away
his soul? Will God hear his cry, when trouble comes upon him? no, no, it will
then be too late. Then they shall call upon me, says the Lord, but I will not
answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me: Because they
hated Knowledge: and would not choose the fear of the Lord, Job. 27. 8, 9. with
Prove. 1. 24, 32. O now consider this, ye that forget God, least he tear you in
pieces, and there be no deliverer! Though a sinner do evil an hundred times,
and his days be prolonged: yet surely it shall not be weil with the wicked:
neither shall he prolong his days, which are as a shadow, because he fears
not before God, Eccles. 8. 12. 13.

4. In that true Piety and Goodness is profitable unto all things, we may then
well infer from hence; that the sincerely Pious and honest person, is the truly
Wise man, and does most really, and only Consult his sure and most excellent
Advantage; and pursue that which does indeed, and to all eternity, tend to his
best Happiness and Interest. He that is wise is profitable unto himself, Job.
22. 2. Unto man God says, Behold (mark and consider this well,) the fear of
the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding. That is to
say, Sincere Piety is true wisdom, Job. 28. 28. And they that do exercise
themselves thereto (however they are reputed amongst sinners) are indeed Wise
men, in the account of him that Judges righteously; and whose judgment shall
stand: yea and they will appear so to be, in the eyes of all men, and Angels,
in due season; for in being thus wise, they shall be wise for themselves; and
shall lay up for themselves in store, a good foundation against the time to
come, that they may lay hold on eternal life, Prove. 9. 10, 12, 1 Timothy 6. 6, 19.
Dan. 12. 2, 3. Others may appear, to have more speculative and notionall
knowledge and wisdom, but these are the only persons that are really and
practically wise; and wiser than all other men, in that they pursue Godliness;
and thereby obtain and make sure, the favor of him that loves Piety and
righteousness. Happy is the man that finds wisdom, and the man that gets
understanding; for the Merchandise of it, is better than the Merchandise of
Silver; and the gain thereof than fine Gold: she is more precious than Rubies;
and all the things thou can desire are not to be compared unto her: Length of
days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and honor -- She is a
tree of life to all that lay hold on her; and happy is every one that retains
her, Prove. 3. 13, 18. I love them, says the Wisdom of God, that love me; and
they that seek me early shall find me. But what shall they be the better for
finding her? what advantage will that be of unto them? much every way: for
says she in the next words, Riches and Honor are with me, yea durable Riches
and Righteousness (and these two always go together, namely, durable Riches and
Righteousness:) I walk, and lead in the way of Righteousness: in the midst of
the paths of Judgment; that I may cause them that love me to inherit substance,
and I will fill their Treasure, Prove. 8. 17. 18, 21. If therefore we would
behave our selves wisely; and hopefully, and succesfully pursue, that which
will be really, and in truth, profitable and advantageous to us; Let us follow
after righteousness and Godliness; for this is our wisdom and our
understanding, as, Deuteronomy. 4. 5, 6. The ungodly Person is the greatest fool; and
so he is frequently called by the Wisdom of God, in the Book of the Proverbs:
And he does appear so to be by his despising the fear of the Lord; in doing
which he wrongs his own soul, and loves death, Prove. 1. 7. and chap. 8. 36. But
the sincerely pious Person is, and is usually called, the Wise man; because he
fears before God: and the reward of Humility, and of the Fear of the Lord, is
Riches and life, Prove. 22. 4. When our savior commends unto his disciples, in
his parable, the unjust Steward; not for his unrighteousness, but because he
had done Wisely; he then gives this instruction unto them; and I say unto you,
make to your selves friends of the Mamon of unrighteousness: (that is, be rich
and abundant in good and pious works;) That when ye fail, (as fail from hence
we must all,) They may receive you into everlasting Habitations, or
Tabernacles: and in so doing, we shall deal wisely and prudently for our own
souls, Luke 16. 8, 9. And this leads us to the last use, namely.

5. Seeing Piety is profitable unto all things; Be we all exhorted persuaded,
and prevailed withal, seriously and constantly to exercise our selves thereto,
if we would indeed aim at, and pursue that which is gainful and beneficial to
us. Now in this day, in exercising our selves thereto, God will supply all our
wants; and give unto us those things, that are useful and needful for us. O
taste and see that the Lord is gracious: Blessed is the man that trusts in
him. O fear the Lord, ye his Saints; for there is no want to them that fear
him, Psalm. 34. 8, 9, In thus doing, God will be our exceeding great reward,
Genesis 15. 1. God is not unrighteous says the Apostle, to forget your work, and
labor of l^ve, Heb 6. 9. Who is there even among you, that would shut the
doors for naught? neither do ye kindle fire on mine altar for naught, Mal. 1.
10. Whosoever shall give to drink, unto one of these little ones, a cup of cold
water only, in the name of a Disciple, says our Lord Jesus, verily, I say
unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward, Mat. 10. 42. O let us then
intend his service, and cast all our cares and concerns upon him; for he
cares for us; let all our Wants lie upon him, whose is the earth, and the
fullness thereof; the Cattle upon a thousand hills: and who has given this
command and encouragement to us, to wit, trust in the Lord, and do good, and
thou shall dwell in the land; and verily thou shall be fed, Psalm. 37. 3, 6.

And then hereafter, they that now live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall have the
Fullness, and Harvest of all spiritual blessings: O how great is thy goodness
which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, which thou have wrought for
them that trust in thee before the Sons of men! Psalm. 31. 19. For since the
beginning of the world men have not heard, nor perceived by the Ear, neither
has the Eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he has prepared for him, that
waits for thee, Isa. 64. 4. He that sat upon the Throne said, behold, I make
all things new: and he said unto me, write, for these words are true and
faithful: -- he that overcomes (to wit, his spiritual enemies) shall inherit
all things; and I will be his God, and he shall be my Son, Rev. 21. 5, 7. O
then! Let us abstain from, and flee all Ungodliness, and worldly lusts; and
follow after Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness. Let us
fight the good fight of Faith, and so lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 11,
12. And this leads us unto the following part of the words: namely.

2. We have the Motive to excite and provoke us, to exercise our selves to
Piety and Righteousness, propounded to us more particularly and distinctly; and
therein the Truth, of the foregoing part of the words, opened and evidenced:
namely, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come;
of this present momentany state we are now in, and of that eternal one we shall
enter upon, and have an everlasting enjoyment of, when we are removed hence,
and shall be here no more.

But now, before we come to speak unto the Motive and enforcement, as it is
here more particularly and distinctly expressed, and evidenced to us in the
latter part of the Text; we may a little, usefully fore-consider these
following things: to wit.

1. What it is, that has the promise and promises absolutely Annex't unto it,
and entailed upon it, and that is godliness; as that signifies the whole duty
of man; as we have before noted and shown: and so the promises, are first of
all made, unto our Lord Jesus Christ, who is Emphatically, and most Eminently
called, God's holy one, or godly one, Psalm. 16. 10. Who loved righteousness,
and hated iniquity: therefore God, even his God, has anointed him with the oil
of gladness above his fellows; because he was more Godly and holy then his
Fellows, Heb. 1. 8, 9. He was one that knew no sin, that did no sin, neither
was guile found in his mouth; but he always did those things that pleased his
father. And when the due season was come, he humbled himself, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross; as he received commandment
from his father. And because, in obedience to his father, he laid down his
life, and has taken it up again; therefore the father loves him; and so
loves him, that he has given all things into his hands, Joh. 10. 17, 18.
with, chap. 3. 35. And unto him the promises were made Originally, and most
fully: now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made: he says not, unto
seeds, as of many, but as of one, and to thy seed, which is Christ, Gal. 3. 16.
And he is become the root and foundation of godliness for us, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
Without whose Abasement, Death, Resurrection, and Exaltation, there had been no
forgiveness of sins for us; nor could we have been made partakers of the favor
of God; nor would Repentance and Faith have availed us any thing, Heb. 9. 22. 1
Cor. 15. 12, 17, 20 Nor could we have come unto God, so as to have received
mercy and salvation from him, Joh. 14. 6. Act 4. 11, 12. But now in Him, who by
the grace of God, tasted death for every man, and rose again; all the promises
of God are yea, and in him Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. And if we be Christ's (to wit,
in a special consideration,) then are we Abraham's seed, and Hears according to
promise, Gal. 3. 16, 26, 29. And Heirs of the promises, in being united by
Faith unto him, who is the Heir of all things, Heb. 1. 2. 1 Cor. 3. 21, 23. 1 John 5. 11, 12. The promises are not made with, or absolutely assured unto, any
person in a personal Consideration; but to such manner of persons, as do
exercise themselves unto Godliness and Righteousness. Thus the everlasting
Covenant, which did contain exceeding great and precious promises, was not made
with Abraham, as a man known by that name simply; but it was made with him as
he was a Truly Pious and upright man. Thus it is said, the Lord appeared unto
Abraham, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou
perfect, or sincere: and I will make my Covenant between me, and thee, etc.
Genesis 17. 1, 2, 7, 8. And to the same purpose it is elsewhere said, thou
foundest his heart faithful before thee, and made a Covenant with him, Neh.
9. 7, 8. And this Covenant was thus made with him, not for himself only, but
for his spiritual Seed also; and so it was made with him as a father of many
Nations, Genesis 17. 4, 5, 8. Romans 4. 16, 17. And so those that are sincere, like
unto him, are Heirs of the same Covenant, as to the choice things therein
contained and assured, Romans 4. 16, 17, 24. As the Apostle says, know ye
therefore that they which are of Faith, the same are the Children of Abraham.
-- So then they which be of Faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham, Gal. 3.
7, 9. with Romans 4. 11, 13, 16.

It is out of God's love to righteousness, that God does delight in, and is
well-pleased with, them that heartily follow it, and walk in it: the righteous
Lord loves righteousness: [and therefore] his countenance does behold the
upright, Psalm. 11. 7. To him that sows righteousness shall be a sure reward.
Righteousness tends to life, Prove. 11. 17, 18. In the way of righteousness is
life; and in the path way thereof, there is no death, chapter 12. 26, 28.
Righteousness keeps him, that is upright in the way, chap. 13. 6. and chap.
8. 20. 21. And this is the general and constant Current of the holy Scriptures,
both of the Prophets and Apostles; that not such persons merely, but such
manner of persons, graciously qualified persons, are the Heirs of the promises
of life and salvation, and shall, so abiding, in due season, inherit the
blessings therein propounded, and thereby assured. Who shall Ascend into the
hill of the Lord? and who shall stand in his holy place? he that has clean
hands, and a pure heart, who has not lift up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn
deceitfully. He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness
from the God of his salvation. This is the generation of them that seek him,
that seek thy face, O God of Jacob. Selah. Psalm. 15. and 24. 3. 6. When the
Evangelical Prophet largely treats of the Everlasting Covenant, and of the
blessings thereof, in Isa. 54. He then, in the close of that Chapter, gives us
to understand, who are the Heirs of it; and shall inherit the Blessings and
Benefits of it, saying; This is the Heritage of the servants of the Lord; and
their righteousness is of me, says the Lord. And then by his servant the
Prophet, he makes this Proclamation, and Invitation; Ho, every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money; (no worth, no
worthiness:) -- Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good; and
let your soul delight it self in fatness. Incline your ear, and come unto me;
hear, and your soul shall live: and I will make an everlasting Covenant with
you, even the sure mercies of David. As if he should say; if ye will indeed
learn the way of my people, (as Jer 12. 16.) and sincerely become my servants
also; then, upon these terms, you shall be heirs with them of the same
Covenant, and inherit the same blessing with them, Isay. 54. 17. and chap. 55.
1, 2, 3. Psalm. 84. 11, 12. and 125.

And to the same purpose our Lord and Savior, and his Holy Apostles have
spoken to us in the Word of the Lord: My Sheep, says our Lord Jesus, hear my
voice, and I know them, and they follow me. And I give unto them eternal life;
and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of mine hand,
John. 10. 27, 30. and chap. 14. 21, 23. Matthew. 7. 24, 27. Col. 1. 22, 23. 2
Pet. 1. 3, 4, 8, 10, 11. 1 John 2. 24, 28. Rev. 22. 12, 14. The way of the
Lord, even sincere Holiness and Righteousness, is strength to the upright,
Prove. 10. 29. And he that keeps his way, preserves his soul, Prove. 16. 17.
But as for them that turn aside to their crooked paths, the Lord will lead them
forth with the workers of iniquity; but peace shall be upon Israel, even upon
the Israel of God, Psalm. 125. 5. with Gal. 6. 15. 16.

For Persons therefore to rely on, and bolster up themselves with, the
Promises, while they walk ungodlily, and their way is perverse before the Lord;
this is to turn the grace of our God into Lasciviousness, and Wantonness, as
Jude 4. And this is that which is highly provoking unto the Holy Lord God.
Hence Moses gives this caution to the People of Israel, (when they entered into
a Covenant with the Lord their God, and into an Oath which the Lord made with
them;) saying unto them; Lest there should be among you man or woman, Family or
Tribe, whose heart turns away this day from the Lord our God, to go and serve
the Gods of these Nations: lest there should be among you, a root that bears
Gall and wormwood: and it come to pass when he hears the words of this Oath,
or Curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace,
though I walk in the imagination, or stubbornness of mine heart, to add
drunkeness to Thirst; the Lord will not spare him, but then the Anger of the
Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that man; and all the curses
written in this book shall lie upon him; and the Lord shall blot out his name
from under Heaven, etc. By all which, and much more that follows in the place
referred to, it evidently appears, that it is a fearful thing, wonderfully
provoking unto God, and Fatally pernicious to our own souls, to presume that we
shall have the benefits of the promises, though we exercise not our selves unto
Godliness, unto which the promises are intaild: or to conclude, that though
there be a failure, a wilful failure, found with us in performing the
conditions of the Covenant; yet God is bound on his part, in point of fidelity,
not to deprive us, but to make us partakers, of the blessings thereof, Deuteronomy.
29. 10, 11, 13, 18. 20, 28. with Heb. 12. 14, 15 17. whereas the promises are
only made unto Godliness absolutely; and to us respectively and conditionally,
to wit, upon our good behavior, in living Righteously and Godly in Christ
Jesus. And otherwise, if we believe not, he is faithful, and cannot deny
himself, but must therefore deny us, if we deny him. Of these things, says St.
Paul. to Timothy, put them in remembrance, etc. 2. Tim. 2. 13, 14. When I shall
say to the righteous, says the Lord, that he shall surely live: if he trust to
his own righteousness, and commit iniquity, all his righteousness shall not be
remembered: but for his iniquity that he has committed, he shall dye for it;
whatever God formerly said to him, when he was a righteous Person, Ezekiel. 33.
12, 13, 18. Now the just shall live by faith, says the Lord: but if he draw
back; my soul shall have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10. 38. O let this be
seriously minded, and duly considered by us all; that we deceive not our selves
to our endless destruction. But I shall here enlarge no further to it.

2. Again, Let us also mind and consider, how Godliness, or our Exercise of
Godliness, is profitable unto all things; and that is, having the promise; and
therein a sure and full reward proposed and ascertained to us; not of Debt, but
of Grace. Godliness is our Duty; and therefore we can merit nothing, by our
exercising our selves thereto: as our blessed Savior signifies, when he thus
says unto his Disciples; When ye shall have done all these things which are
commanded you, say we are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was
our duty to do, Luke 17. 7, 10. But God, who is rich in mercy, has of his free
grace, made many great and precious promises to our duty; and to us upon our
sincere performance thereof; and so has made it our highest, and in truth our
only real interest and advantage, to exercise our selves to unfeigned Piety
and Holiness. There is nothing in our Godliness, that can deserve the pardon of
our sins, or the special Favor of God, Matthew. 18. 25. Luk 7. 42. Nay indeed,
in our Best and most Religious, and Pious exercises and Performances, there is
so much Pollution, and Imperfection sound, that our holy Things, our spiritual
Sacrifices, could not come with acceptance upon God's Altar, if our
High Priest, did not continually take away the iniquities cleaving to them, and
persume them with the Odours, of the Incense of his most Powerful and
well-pleasing Intercession, Exodus 28. 38. with 1 Pet. 2. 5. Rev. 5. 8. But the
God of all grace, has frankly and freely entailed the promises, on sincere
Godliness and Honesty. And therefore the promise is oftentimes opposed to the
Law, as that did call for and command an unsinning Obedience; and so made the
reward to be of debt to every such Performer of it. To him that works,
(namely, that continues in all things written in the Book of the Law to do
them,) is the reward not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt, Romans 4. 4. The
Righteousness which is of the Law says, The man that does those things
(sinlesly and constantly,) Shall live in them, Romans 10. 5. Gal. 3. 12. But, I
say, the Promise by Faith of Jesus Christ, is opposed to the Law in this sense.
To this purpose are these sayings of the Apostle: For the Promise that Abraham
should be the Heir of the World, was not to him, or to his seed through the
Law: -- For if they that be of the Law are Heirs Faith is made void, and the
promise made of none effect, Romans 4. 13, 14, 16. For if the Inheritance be of
the Law, it is no more of promise: but God gave it to Abraham by promise. -- If
there had been a law given, which could have given life, verily righteousness
should have been by the law. But the Scripture has concluded all under sin,
that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that Believe,
Gal. 3. 17, 18, 21, 22. Luke 1. 72, 73. And therefore, seeing Godliness is
profitable unto all things, by having the promise entailed on it; it plainly
and evidently appears, that it becomes profitable unto us by the grace of God,
and worthiness of the mediation of Christ; and not from any merit of our
exercising our selves thereto, Romans 3. 22, 24. where is boasting then? It is
excluded: by what Law? of Works, nay but by the Law of Faith, Romans 3. 27. By
Grace ye are saved, through Faith, and that not of your selves; it is the gift
of God, not of works, lest any man should boast, Ephesians. 2. 5, 9. with Gal. 3. 22.
and Romans 4. 16.

3. Consider we also, how far Godliness has the promise; and that is, so far,
and so far only, as it is truly and really Profitable, and for our advantage,
in the judgment and account of him who has ensured it to Godliness: as it is
here expressed, to wit, Godliness is profitable, -- having promise of the life
that now is, and of that which is to come. It has not the promise of what our
unrenewed, craving, and lustful spirits might judge desirable and valuable; but
of what God knows to be really advantageous for us, both as to this present
life, and that which is to come. Now in and for this life, we may possibly
desire that which would prove a snare to us, if we had it: or we may ask amiss,
to consume upon our lusts, Jam. 4. 2, 3. But now, Godliness has not the
promise of that, because it is not profitable for us. And as with respect to
the life to come, some may conceive they shall then marry, and have their fills
of Love and Carnal delights and pleasures, as, Mat. 22. 28, 30. But now,
Godliness has not the promise of these sensual and contemptible Enjoyments;
but of that which is infinitely better; of all spiritual and heavenly delights
and satisfactions, Psalm. 36. 7, 9. Romans 8. 23. And so it has the promise of
all that which is, and only of that which is, profitable for us, in our present
and future state. Like unto what the Scripture elsewhere speaks, saying: the
young Lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but they that seek the Lord shall not
want any good thing, Psalm. 34. 9, 10. The Lord God is a Sun and Shield, he will
give grace and glory: no good thing (here during the kingdom of his grace, or
hereafter, in the kingdom of his glory) will he withhold from them that walk
uprightly. O Lord of hosts, Blessed (is, and for ever shall be) the man that
trusts in thee, Psalm. 84. 10, 12. And thus also our Savior, when he excites
and encourages his disciples, to exercise themselves to pious devotion in
addressing themselves unto God, saying, Ask and ye shall receive; seek, and ye
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: He presently after
signifies to them, what they shall receive and find; (and so intimately directs
them what to ask, and seek for;) to wit, that which is really good for them:
saying unto them, if ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your
children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things
to them that ask him? Mat. 7. 7, 9, 11. Deuteronomy. 28. 1, 12. To which I shall
enlarge no further in this place.

Now then, having premised and noted these three things, which deserve our most
serious consideration: we come to consider, and speak unto the Motive and
enforcement, as it is here more particularly and distinctly expressed and
evidenced to us by the Apostle: and so Godliness is profitable:

1. Having promise of the life that now is; of this present frail state we are
now upon, while we are in this old, passing, and corruptible world: and so it
has the promise of the good things directly appertaining to this passing,
short, and transitory life.

2. And it has the promise of a first fruits of the life of God; or of a new
and spiritual life; which will be complete and consummate hereafter, in our
abiding in the says of our Lord Jesus.

1. I say, Godliness has the promise of the life that now is; even of the good
things more directly appertaining, to the continuance and comfort of this
short, transitory, and uncertain life; as may appear to us in the following
particulars.

1. Godliness has the promise of this life it self, and of the continuance of
it, while it may be for the glory of God; and so, while it may be truly
profitable for them, that unfeignedly apply themselves unto the power of
Godliness. Their times of health, and life, are in the hands of God; as David
says of his; and it is not in the power of Satan, or of any of their enemies,
to put an end to their lives, when they please, Psalm. 31. 13, 15. Indeed, in
his hand is the soul of every living thing, and the breath of all mankind, Job
12. 10. Mat. 10. 29, 31. But he is especially the Savior of them that believe,
1 Timothy 4. 8, 9, 10. Job 1. 9, 10, and chap. 2. 6. And while the continuance of
this life is profitable for them, it shall be granted unto them. Hence it is
observable, that when the Psalmist had been saying, as we before noted, that
they that seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing: He then immediately
adds; come, ye children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the
Lord; what man is he that desires life, and loves days, that he may see good?
and then he directs them to apply themselves to Piety, and the fear of the
Lord, that they may enjoy life, as long as it is good for them; saying; keep
thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile. Depart from evil, and
do good; seek peace, and pursue it; For the eyes of the Lord are upon the
righteous, etc. Psalm. 34. 10, 12, 15. And this assurance and encouragement, to
follow virtue and goodness did not only respect them, that lived before our
Lord took upon him our nature: (in which times they had, as to the outside of
them however, more, and more frequently, temporal blessings set before them,
and assured to them:) but the same Motive is made use of by the Apostle Peter
since, to move and prevail with us, to abhor that which is evil, and cleave
unto and pursue that which is good before God, 1 Pet. 3. 10, 11, 12. Thus also
when the Psalmist pronounces them blessed, that exercise love and mercy
toward such as are indigent and necessitous, saying, blessed is he that
considers the poor, the weak, or sick: he then declares this as one
partiticular, in which a merciful person shall be blessed, namely, the Lord
will preserve him, and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon the earth,
Psalm. 41. 1, 2. All things are theirs, who are Christ's; and so particularly
life, even this present life, is theirs also, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 23. Hence we have
such sayings as these, in the book of the Proverbs: The labor of the righteous
tends to life, Prove. 10. 16. Righteousness tends to life, chap. 11. 19. The
fear of the Lord tends to life, and he that has it shall abide satisfied,
chap. 19. 23. He that follows after righteousness and mercy finds life,
chap. 21. 21. The reward of humility and the fear of the Lord is life, chap.
22. 4. All which Proverbs, though they may have a principal respect unto, a
more excellent life than is here enjoyable; yet they have also respect unto our
enjoyment of this present life, while the continuance of it is a mercy to us,
if we be, and abide in the true fear of the Lord. God is the God of the
righteous, in a peculiar consideration, and the God of their lives; therefore
they need not fear, with any fear that has torment in it, (1 John 4. 18.) What
their enemies can do unto them, Psalm. 118, 6, 9. Heb. 13. 5, 6. To this purpose
the Psalmist speaks, saying, the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall
I be afraid? Psalm. 27. 1. And when he was in great afflictions, and had many
enemies that conspired and endeavored to destroy him, he encouraged himself
herein, that God was the God of his life. Hence when he says, Deep calls
unto deep at the noise of thy water-spouts; all thy waves and thy billows are
gone over me: He does then thus comfort himself; yet the Lord will command his
loving kindness in the daytime; and in the night his Song shall be with me,
and my prayer unto the God of my life, Psalm. 42. 7, 8, 9, 11.

Object. But against what has been last said, some may Object and say: But are
not godly persons oftentimes short-lived in this world? are not their days as
few in number as other men's are, and sometimes fewer? are they not untimely
removed out of this world, as well as those that live ungodly?

Answ. To this objection I shall desire to return some answer in these
following particulars. Namely,

1. Sometimes such as are godly in the main, may be guilty of some great and
provoking miscarriages, and thereby procure to themselves an untimely cutting
off: and so they may say of themselves as good King Hezekiah did of himself;
namely, our age is departed, and is removed from us as a shepherds Tent: we
have cut off like a Weaver our lives, Isa. 38. 11, 12. Thus it was with Moses
and Aaron, those two eminently holy ones; because they believed not God, to
sanctify him in the eyes of the Children of Israel; therefore said the Lord to
them, ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which I have given
them, Numb. 20. 11, 24. Though he forgave their iniquities, yet he took
vengeance of their inventions, as, Psalm. 99. And doubtless many of them whose
Carcases fell in the wilderness, and who were cut off before their time, were
good men in the main; and yet were cut off for their unbelief, Numb. 14. Whence
the Apostle admonishes the believers, to be warned by their harms and
miscarriages, Heb. 3. and chap. 4. 1, 11. And when David, out of a prudential
consideration, was dumb with silence, and held his peace, even from good; then
God threatened to cut him off by his afflicting hand; which made him cry out
unto God for mercy, saying, remove thy stroke away from me, I am consumed by
the blow of thine hand: -- O spare me a little, that I may recover strength;
before I go hence, and be no more, Psalm. 39. Job 36. 17, 21. But now, this
nothing opposes what we have been speaking of; for these, and such like plous
persons, were not so punished, or untimely removed, because they exercised
themselves to godliness; but because at some times they did not exercise
themselves thereto, but did partake with others in their sins, and so did
partake with them in their judgments here, that they might not be condemned
with the world hereafter, as Rev. 18. 4. 1 Cor. 11. 30, 31, 32. And thus it
has fared, and may do so again, with many such as were good persons in the
main.

2. Sometimes God in mercy removes good persons, before he pours out some heavy
Judgments on the Nation, or place in which they lived: so the Lord says
concerning Abijah, the Son of Jeroboam King of Israel; concerning whom the
Prophet in the name of the Lord says, all Israel shall mourn for him: -- for
he only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave; because in him there is found some
good thing toward the Lord God of Israel, 1 King. 14. 1, 13. And the same may
be said in part, concerning that very excellent and good Prince, King Josiah;
concerning whom the Lord says: Behold, I will gather thee to thy fathers, and
thou shall be gathered to thy grave in peace; neither shall thine eyes see all
the evil, that I will bring upon this place, and upon the Inhabitants of the
same, 2 Chronicles. 34. 26, 27, 28. And to this purpose some understand those words
of the Lord, spoken by the Prophet Isaiah, namely; Come, my people, enter thou
into thy Chambers, and shut thy doors about thee, hide thy self as it were for
a little moment, until the indignation be over-past. For behold, the Lord
comes out of his place, to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their
iniquity, etc. Isa. 26. 20, 21. with Job 14. 13. Or God may in much mercy
remove some Timorous, and feeble-minded upright-hearted ones, before a day of
Fiery Trial come, which might be too hot, and too heavy for them, lest they
should put forth their hand to iniquity, to save themselves, and secure
themselves from such sufferings, Psalm. 125. 3. So our Lord Jesus, speaking to
the Angel of the Church in Philadelphia, which had but a little strength,
says; Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee
from the hour of Temptation, which shall come upon all the world, etc. Rev. 3.
8, 9, 10. Now in such Cases, or in others of a like nature, it would not be
good for them which are so removed, to have their lives longer continued to
them; but it is profitable for them to be taken away, Isa. 57. 1, 2.

3. Sometimes pious men are taken out of this world, as a gracious reward of
their more Eminent piety, and abundant goodness that is found with them, above
what is found with others. As by reason of the great and more heinous
wickedness, committed by some evil men, their iniquity is more speedily full;
and they are in judgment untimely cut off, even before they have lived out half
their days, Psalm. 55. 21. Eccl. 7. 17. So also on the other hand, some pious
persons may in much mercy to themselves be removed, and taken out of this world
into a better, before old age and decrepid years come upon them. Thus Enoch was
the shortest liver by far of all, mentioned in Genesis 5. But the very reason of
his being so early removed from hence was, his signal and more abundant piety
and goodness: Enoch walked with God, and he was not: for God took him, Genesis 5.
22, 24. with Heb. 11. 5, 6. To which things I shall not, though I might,
further enlarge.

But to conclude this particular, as I have said, so again I say, godliness
has the promise of this life, of the life it self; namely, of the continuance
thereof; while the only wise God judges it good and profitable for them.

2. And in order to the preservation and continuance of this natural life,
while it may be useful and good for them, godliness has the promise of needful
provision, for them that sincerely exercise themselves thereunto; and are
diligent in their lawful vocation, Trade, or way of Employment. Indeed, God out
of his general mercy and bounty does provide for all mankind, during the day
of his grace and patience: the Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are
over all his works, for the good of mankind, Psalm. 145. 8, 9, 17. He gives
food to all flesh, for his mercy endures for ever, Psalm. 136. 25. He makes
his Sun to Rise upon the evil, as well as upon the good: and he is kind to the
unthankful, and to the evil, Mat. 5. 44, 45, 48. Luke 6. 35, 36. He left not
himself without witness toward the Heathen, but did them good, and gave them
rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with food and
gladness, Act. 14. 16, 17. and chap. 17. 24, 28. But now, as with respect to
them that serve him acceptably, with reverence and Godly fear, he provides for
them, as for his children, in an especial consideration; and as Heirs of his
Covenant and promises. The Lord is gracious, and full of compassion. He has
given meat to them that fear him, he will ever be mindful of his Covenant,
Psalm. 111. 4, 5. And it was David's observation, when he was grown into years,
that God did always provide, what was good for the righteous: I have been
young, says he, and now am old, yet have I never seen the righteous forsaken,
nor his seed begging bread. He is ever merciful, and lends, and his seed is
in the blessing, Psalm. 37. 25, 26, 27. And when the same holy Prophet,
pronounces the blessedness of the truly Godly person, saying; blessed is the
man that fears the Lord, that delights greatly in his Commandments: he
then gives us to understand, that this is a part of his blessedness, namely,
wealth and riches shall be in his house, etc. Psalm. 112. 1, 3. Prove. 22. 4.

It must be acknowledged, that God has not promised to them that walk
uprightly before him, an abundance of outward and worldly good things; or such
a fullness as some others enjoy, out of his general goodness and kindness, who
have their portion in this life; and whose bellies God fills with his hid
treasure, as Psalm. 17. 14. But that Competency which he gives them, with his
blessing, is better then the whole world without it. (And indeed, as our
blessed Savior faith, a man's life consists not in the abundance of the
things which he possesses, Luke 12. 15.) A little that a righteous man has,
is better then the riches of any wicked, Psalm. 37. 16. Better is a little with
the fear of the Lord, then great treasure, and trouble therewith. Better is a
dinner of herbs where love is, (however, where men are in the well pleased love
and favor of God;) then a stalled Ox, and hatred therewith. Better is a
little with righteousness, then great revenues without right, Prove. 15. 16, 17.
and chap. 16. 8. And he has assured them, that they that seek and serve him,
shall not want any thing that is really good and profitable for them, Psalm. 34.
8, 9, 10. and 84. 10, 11, 12.

And such Promises are not only propounded and ascertained to the Fearers of
the Lord, before the coming of the Son of God into the world; but since that
time also Our Savior does not only direct his disciples, thus to pray to their
Father which is in heaven, to wit, Give us this day our daily bread, Mat. 6.
11. But also in the same chapter, gives them this assurance and encouragement;
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness: and all these things
shall be added to you: to wit, what ye shall eat, and what ye shall drink, and
wherewith ye shall be clothed. And so, whatsoever your heavenly Father knows
ye have need of, shall be given to you. And this is propounded to them, that
they might have their conversation without covetousness and carefulness, Mat.
6. 31, 32, 33. Luke 12. 29, 31, 32. So the Apostle says, having food and
raiment, let us therewith be content. (This we shall have, in leading our lives
in Godliness and honesty.) But they that will be rich fall into temptation, and
a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in
destruction and perdition. For the love of money is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. And again he says to the believing Hebrews: let your
conversation be without Covetousness, and be content with such things as ye
have: for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee: so that we
may boldly say, the Lord is mine helper, and I will not fear what man shall do
unto me, Heb. 13. 5, 6. with Deuteronomy. 31. 1, 6.

Yea, and there are Promises and assurances given to them, that he will take
care of, and provide for, his faithful servants, in a time of scarcity and
want; when he orders cleaness of Teeth in those quarters, or Nations, in which
God has bounded their Habitations, Job 5. 20, 22. Behold, (says the Psalmist,
attend to, and mind this diligently) the eye of Jehovah is upon them that fear
him, upon them that hope in his mercy: -- To keep them alive in famine, Psalm.
33. 18, 19. They shall not be ashamed in the evil time; and in the days of
famine they shall be satisfied; they shall have enough to hold their souls in
life withal, Psalm. 37. 19, 25. The Lord will not suffer the soul of the
righteous (to wit, them, or their persons) to famish: but he casts away the
substance of the wicked, Prove. 10. 3. And in such times, in times of death and
famine, he has wonderfully and Marvellously taken care of, and kept alive,
such as waited upon him, and walked before him, in former days: and with him is
no variableness, nor shadow of turning, Genesis 12. 10. and chap. 26. 1. and chap.
42. 5. But no more to that particular.

3. Godliness is profitable, having also the promise of the life that now is,
as to God's special and gracious protection and salvation, from all such
dangers and troubles, as might be indeed evil and hurtful to them: he is
especially the Savior of them, that trust in him hefore the Sons of men, and
whose hearts are perfect toward him: hence the Psalmist thus pours out his
heart before the Lord, saying, show thy mavelous loving kindness, O thou that
savest by thy right hand, them which put their trust in thee, from those that
rise up against them, Psalm. 17. 7, 8, 9. and 31. 19, 20. His eyes run to and
fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong on the behalf of them
whose heart is perfect toward him, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. Psalm. 9. 9. 10. They that
dwell in the secret of the most High, shall lodge under the shadow of the
Almighty. -- He will cover them with his feathers, and under his wings they
shall trust: his Truth shall be their shield and buckler, Psalm. 91. 1, 3, 4. So
he is said to be a buckler to them that walk uprightly, Prove. 2. 7. And a
Shield to them that put their trust in him, chap. 30. 5. The name of the Lord
is a strong Tower; the righteous runs into it, and is safe. Prove. 18. 10. As
with respect to them that are wicked, and stubbornly sin against God, Salvation
is far from them, Psalm. 119. 155. Isa. 59. 11, 12. But, surely his Salvation is
nigh them that fear him, Psalm. 15. 9. Be their enemies then never so numerous,
have they never so much power in their hands, or on their side: (as Eccles. 4.
1.) Be they never so full of Enmity and Malice, toward such as are upright;
and never so full of subtilty and cunning Craftiness, to accomplish their evil
and mischievous designs against them, who, out of the fear of God, dare not
have fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness: yet they need not be
afraid of them, with any fear of amazement: the Lord of Hosts is for them, the
God of Jacob is their refuge, Psalm. 46. And till he gives their enemies
permission, they cannot Touch an Hair of their heads. And of this the
grand-Enemy and adversary of the upright-hearted is aware: hence he says to
the Lord concerning Job; have thou not made an hedge about him, and about his
house, and about all that he has on every side? Job 1. 9, 11. And our Lord
Jesus thus speaks for the encouragement of his sincere disciples: Are not two
sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall on the ground
without your Father. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered: (So that
not one of them shall be plucked off, until he give that liberty to their
enemies. And not one of them shall be plucked off, but he will miss it.) Fear
ye not therefore, ye are of more value then many sparrows, Mat. 10. 29, 31.
Luke 12. 6, 7. with chap. 21. 17, 18. And Rulers, who are Gods Ministers, are
not a Terror to good works, but to evil, Romans 13. 3, 4. And their hearts are
in the hands of the Lord, and he will order and overruled them, for the good
and protection of those, that are upright in their heart and way, while it may
be for their profit. By me, says Wisdom, Kings reign, and Princes decree
Justice. By me Princes Rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth. I
Love them that love me: and therefore he will order them, whom he sets over
them in this world, as may be for his glory, and for their good and benefit,
Prove. 8. 15, 16, 17. And in former times, he suffered no man to do them harm,
but rebuked Kings for the sakes of his dearly beloved people; when they were
few in number, yea very few, and strangers in the land: saying, touch not mine
anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, 1 Chronicles. 16. 19, 22. Psalm. 105. 11, 12,
15. Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with his benefits, even the God
of our salvation. He that is our God is the God of salvation, and unto God the
Lord belong the Issues from death, Psalm. 68. 18, 19, 20. O let us trust in him
at all times, and pour out our hearts before him: for he is a refuge for us: --
Power does belong unto him, and also with him is mercy, Psalm. 59. 16, 17. and
62. 8, 10, 12.

4. Godliness has the promise of the life that now is, even of all that is
profitable in this world: and therefore when it is useful and needful for them,
that exercise themselves thereto, that they should meet with troubles and
Trials here, he will order them unto them: these may be profitable for them;
and their Heavenly Father, when he chastens them, does not do so, for his own
pleasure, but for their profit; (not that they might be rich and great here,
but) that they might be partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12. 10, 12. Afflictions
are for the Health of the Soul: and Physic, when it is given by this able,
faithful, and skilful Physician, is as wholesome as, yea, may be more wholesome
than Food. It is good for me, says David, that I have been afflicted: that is,
he does hereby acknowledge, that it was useful and profitable for him. And
again he says; I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that thou in
faithfulness have afflicted me, Psalm. 119. 71, 75. Behold, happy is the man
whom God corrects: therefore despise not thou the Chastening of the Almighty,
Job 5. 17. Blessed is the man whom thou Chastenest, O Lord, and teach him
out of thy Law, Psalm. 94. 11, 12, 13. And the Apostle, as guided by the
infallible spirit of God, gives us this assurance, to wit, All that will live
Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 11, 12. And that the
afflictions which he is ordering to them, especially such as they endure for
his names sakes, even for the word, and way of truth, may be useful and
profitable for, and unto their Souls: Therefore,

1. He does promise and assure us, upon his faithful word, that he will order
afflictions and troubles in measure; both as to the weight, and as to the
continuance of them: the remainder of man's wrath, that would not tend to his
praise, in the profit of his people, he will restrain, Psalm. 76. 10. The Rod of
the wicked shall not Rest upon the Lot of the Righteous, lest the Righteous put
forth their hands to Iniquity, Psalm. 125. 3. In measure, when it shoots
forth, thou will debate with it: he stays his rough-wind, in the day of the
Eastwind. By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, etc. To wit,
it shall therefore be purged, because God does in measure debate; otherwise it
would consume, not profitably purge: even as a Physician will do more hurt then
good, if his Physic be over strong; and may then purge away the life, instead
of purging away the Noxious Humors, in order to cure and health, Isa. 27. 8,
9. So the Lord promises, saying, I will not contend for ever, neither will I
be always wroth: for the spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I
have made, etc. Isa. 57. 16, 19. And to the same purpose the Apostle speaks
saying, There has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man, (such
as is moderate) and God is faithful (for the future) who will not suffer you to
be Tempted, above that ye are able: but will with the temptation also make a
way to escape, (or, give an Issue) that ye may be able to bear it. Wherefore,
my dearly beloved, flee from Idolatry. Walk not in any crooked path, use no
indirect, or unwarrantable method to save your selves, or to prevent, or
extricate your selves from troubles and afflictions; but commit your souls unto
God in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator. 1 Cor. 10. 13, 14. with 1 Pet.
4. 19.

2. When he orders Trials and Sufferings unto those that exercise themselves
unto true Piety, he will keep them from evil; from that which would really be
evil to them; from the evil design of Satan and his instruments; namely, from
sin, and from everlasting destruction. Evil shall slay the wicked, and they
that hate the righteous shall be guilty, or desolate: But, the Lord redeemeth
the soul of his servants, and none of them that trust in him shall be guilty,
or desolate, Psalm. 34. 19, 22. and 91. 9, 10. He will not suffer thy foot to be
moved: The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil: he shall preserve thy soul,
Psalm. 121. There shall no evil happen to the just, Prove. 12. 21. And our Lord
Jesus, when he addresseth himself to his Father, in his last solemn Prayer
before his passion; though he prays not, that God would keep his real
disciples from persecution, but supposes they should meet with hatred and
trouble from the world: yet he thus expresses himself, I pray not that thou
should take them out of the world, but that thou should keep them from
the evil, Joh. 17. 14, 15. And his Father always hears him, and grants unto
him all his desires, Joh. 11. 41, 42. And the Apostle gives this assurance unto
the believers, God is faithful, who will establish you, and keep you from evil,
2 These. 3. 3. Yea, not only so, but (as we have said) he will do them good by
all their Afflictions and Tribulations: and this the Apostle confidently
assures the believers of, saying, We know that all things work together for
good to them that love God, to them who are the Called according to purpose. --
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress,
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? -- Nay, in all
these things we are more then Conquerours, through him that loved us, Romans 8.
28, 35, 37, 38, 39. In the most severe providence he orders unto them, he
does design, and is effecting and promoting their benefit and advantage: as he
sent the upright in the Church of Judah, out of their own Land, into the land
of the Caldeans, for their good, Jer. 24. 5, 6, 7.

3. He has promised, that he will vouchsafe unto them his gracious presence in
all the troubles, afflictions, and hardships, which they endure for his Name
and Gospel's sake; to keep them from evil, and from the fear of evil; and to
comfort and cheer their hearts: The Lord is my Shepherd, says the Psalmist, I
shall not want -- Yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death,
I will fear none evil: for thou art with me, thy rod, and thy staff they
comfort me, Psalm. 23. 1, 4. When Jacob was taking his journey, with his family
into Egypt, (in which land God had foretold Abraham, that his seed should be
in great affliction for a long time, Genesis 15. 12, 13.) then God spoke unto
Israel in the visions of the night, and said, -- I am God, the God of thy
father, fear not to go down into Egypt: -- I will go down with thee into Egypt,
etc. And doubtless, this was a great Encouragement unto him, and did animate
him against all discouragements, and occasions of sainting: and this was
remembered by him, and propounded by him also to his Son Joseph, Genesis 46, 1, 4.
with chap. 48. 21. Exodus 33. 14, 15. And God was as good as his promise; for
when the children of Israel were in very great affliction, and met with a Fiery
Trial, his gracious presence was with them therein. And so much is signified in
that vision showed unto Moses, in mount Horeb: where, the Angel of the Lord
appeared to him in a flame of fire, out of the midst of a bush, and he looked,
and behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush (signifying the Church of
Israel in great Tribulation) was not consumed. But how came this to pass?
whence was it, that the bush, which of it self is combustible, was not burnt up
and consumed? Surely it proceeded from hence, that God was in the bush: it
proceeded from the good will of him that dwelt in the bush. For when Moses
said, I will now turn aside, and see this great (and mavelous) sight, why the
bush is not burnt. Then the Lord called unto him out of the midst of the Bush,
(where he was, and dwelt) and said, -- I am the God of thy father, etc. Exodus
3. 1, 2, 4, 6. with Deuteronomy. 33. 16. Dan. 3. 25. Thus says the Lord that created
thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel: fear not, for I have redeemed
thee: -- when thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through
the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through the fire,
thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. For I am the
Lord thy God, etc. Fear not, for I am with thee, Isa. 43. 1, 2, 3, 5. and chap.
41. 10, 14. But what does all this concern us, may some say? God did promise
his Gracious Presence indeed with his Ancient people in their afflictions; but
may we suck comfort and encouragement from the Breasts of their consolation? Yes
doubtless we may, if we be Israelites indeed, in whom is no guile. The
believers are instructed to behold Israel after the flesh, 1 Cor. 10. 18. And
the Apostle acquaints us, that this is a considerable part of the mystery,
which was in former times hid from ages and generations, but is now revealed
and made manifest; namely, That the Gentiles should be fellowheirs, (to wit,
with the Jews, of the promises which were made unto them;) and of the same
body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the Gospel, Ephesians. 3. 3, 6, 8.
Being built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, They are no
longer strangers and foreigners, but fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of
the household of God, Ephesians. 2. 13, 19, 20. with Romans 11. 17. And more
particularly, as to the business we are discoursing of; that promise and
assurance, which the Lord by Moses gives (not to Joshua first of all, nor
directly, as some learned men by mistake affirm; but) unto all Israel; namely,
that he would not fail them, nor forsake them, in their difficulties and
troubles, if they were obedient to him: the very same encouragement, the
Apostle does propound unto the sincere Christians; to wit, for he has said, I
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee: whence the Apostle thus infers; so
that we may blodly say, the Lord is mine helper; and, I will not fear what man
can do unto me, Heb. 13. 5, 6. with Deuteronomy. 31. 1, 6. Yea,

4. If they that sincerely exercise themselves to true Piety and holiness, be
brought before Rulers and Governors for his names sake, he will then stand by
them, and guide and direct them by his blessed Spirit, what to speak, and how
to answer their greatest and wisest Adversaries, Job 36. 7. So our Lord says
unto his disciples: When says he, they deliver you up, take no thought how, or
what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that hour what ye shall
speak: for it is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your Father which
speaks in you, Mat. 10. 18, 20 And again, and at another time, he speaks to
the same purpose to them, saying; They shall persecute you, delivering you up
to the Synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before Kings and Rulers for
my names sake. -- Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before
what ye shall answer. For I will give you a mouth, and wisdom, which all your
adversaries shall not be able to gainsay, nor resist, Luke 21. 12, 14, 15. And
Saint Stephen found Christ as good as his word, when he encountered with, and
was stiffly opposed by several Jews: for it is said, They were not able to
resist the wisdom, and the spirit by which he spoke, Act. 6. 9, 10. So when
Saint Paul was brought before Nero, or some in Power and Authority under him,
and was deserted and forsaken by his friends in this eminent time of danger; he
had then the gracious presence and assistance of him that is faithful, of him
that is true, with him. At my first answer, says he, no man stood with me, but
all men forsook me: I pray God that it may not be laid to their charge;
notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me: -- And the Lord
shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly
kingdom, etc. 2 Timothy 4. 16, 17, 18.

5. And when those that live in Godliness, and Honesty, are in Tribulation, he
will make them instrumental for his praise; and cause them to glorify him in
the fires, as, Isa. 24. 12, 14. Behold, says the Lord to his afflicted people,
I have refined thee, but not with silver; I have chosen thee in the furnace of
affliction. For mine own sake, even for mine own sake will I do it: for how
should my name be polluted? Thereby giving us to understand, that he therefore
cast them into the fire, and furnace; and thereby refined and purified them,
that they might be vessels for the finer; that they might be to him, for a
people, and for a Name, and for a praise, and for a glory: that they might call
on his name, and (then he promises) I will hear them: I will say, it is my
people; and they shall say, Jehovah is my God, Isa. 48. 10, 11. with. Zech. 13.
9. And when he sent the upright ones into that severe, and long continued
Affliction, and Captivity, in the land of the Caldeans, he says concerning
them, I have sent them out of this place, into the land of the Caldeans* for
good. It was indeed for their own good; as we have before noted. But it was not
only so, but also for the good of them unto whom they were sent, that they
might show forth God's praise among them, as Isa. 43. 21. And therefore we may
take notice that the word [their] is not in the Hebrew Text, nor in the
Septuagint, in Jer. 24. 5. But is put in by the Translators. And indeed, the
upright ones, in that grievous and severe Captivity, were eminent instruments
for the glory of God, and for the good of all, that were under the Government
and Empire of that great King of Babylon, (which was so large and extensive,
that all Nations did serve the King thereof, Jer. 27. 5, 6, 8.) As we may
observe in one or two instances. After the three Worthies had refused to
worship the golden Image, which Nebuchadnezzar the King had set up; and were
for such refusal, by his command, cast into the burning fiery furnace, and by
God's Miraculous and wonderful Power preserved in, and delivered out of the
fiery furnace, without any hurt or harm: the King, by occasion thereof, does
himself bless the only living and true God: and not only so, but thus he
says, therefore I make a decree, That every People, Nation and Language, which
shall speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego,
shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a dunghill; because
there is no other God that can deliver after this sort, Dan. 3. 22, 30. See
also chapter 41, 23. Another instance of the truth hereof was, when that vast
Empire was Translated to the Medes, and Persians; the Nobles and Rulers under
King Darius procured a decree and interdict, to be made and sealed, that
whosoever should ask a petition of any God, or man, for thirty days, save of
the King, should be cast into the Den of Lions. Daniel, the man greatly beloved
of God, was presently found and declared a Transgressour of, and by this Law.
The unwary King, though greatly unwilling, is forced as it were to consent,
that Daniel should suffer the penalty for the Transgression of that interdict:
he is cast into the Den of Lions: but God sent his Angel, and shut the Lions
Mouths, that they hurt him not: and he was taken out of the Den safe and
sound. Then King Darius wrote unto all People, Nations, and Languages, that
dwell in all the earth, Peace be multiplied unto you. I make a decree, that in
every aominion of my Kingdom, men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel;
for he is the living God, and steadfast for ever, and his Kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed, and his dominion shall be even unto the end, etc. Jer.
24. 5. with Dan. 6. 7, 10, 26, 27. By all which it plainly appears, what
Eminent instruments of God's praise the sincerely pious ones have been; and of
great Good unto others, when they have been under great persecution; and so
Afflictions and Trials were profitable unto themselves in conclusion. And the
Apostle, writing to the believing Philippians, says; I would ye should
understand, brethren, that the things which happened unto me, have fallen out
rather unto the furtherance of the Gospel; so that my bonds for Christ are
manifest in all the Palace, and in all other places. And many of the brethren
in the Lord, waxing confident by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the word
without fear, Phil. 1. 12, 13, 14.

6. And lastly, as to this matter; God has promised, that he will, in due
season, deliver them out of their Tribulations and afflictions. And he will
faithfully perform, what he has so promised. The righteous cry, and the Lord
hears, and delivers them out of all their troubles, -- many are the
afflictions of the righteous; but the Lord delivers him out of them all,
Psalm. 34. 17, 19. The Salvation of the righteous, is of the Lord; he is their
strength in the time of trouble. And the Lord will help them, and deliver them;
he will deliver them from the wicked, and save them, because they trust in him,
Psalm. 37. 39, 40. and 91. 14, 15. 2 Timothy 4. 18. By all which it does evidently
appear, that God will make profitable unto them, and cause all the afflictions
which he orders, to work together for the good of them, who are undefiled in
the way, and walk in the Law of the Lord.

Thus we have spoken somewhat unto the promise of this life, which Godliness
has; as to the things more directly appertaining to the good and benefit
thereof: and shall now proceed on to what follows; to wit,

2. Godliness has also the promise of the life that now is; namely, that in
exercising our selves thereto, he will, while we are in this world, bless us
with spiritual blessings; with those blessings which more directly conduce to
the life, prosperity, and advantage of the inner-man, the most Noble and
excellent part of man. And indeed, what we have been speaking of afflictions,
and of the profit and advantage of them, is to be understood, as with respect
to the soul and inner-man especially: but having spoken so largely of them
before, I shall add no more thereto. But we may say, he will now justify them
freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, Romans 3.
22, 25. And he will pour out his spirit unto the truly pious persons; and
thereby make their souls like a watered garden, and like a spring of water,
whose waters fail not; which will spring up unto everlasting life, Isa, 58. 6,
11. How much more, says our Savior, shall your heavenly father give the holy
spirit to them that ask him? Luke 11. 13. But this is to be understood of the
first fruits thereof; the Harvest thereof is still to be waited for: as the
Apostle says; we our selves also, which have the first fruits of the spirit,
even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption, etc. Romans
8. 23, 25. Even as before the children of Israel came into the Land of Canaan,
they had a first fruits, as it were, of that excellent land, which was the
glory of all lands, brought unto them in the wilderness, for their
encouragement to hold on their way; and that from thence they might conceive
and conclude, that the land of Canaan was a most excellent country, Numb. 13.
23, 24, 26, 27. So now, while they are in the wilderness of this world, God
does in some beginnings, and in a small measure, give unto them that live godly
in Christ Jesus, a Taste of what they shall hereafter completely and fully
enjoy; that they might Hunger and Thirst after righteousness; and press toward
the mark, for the prize which is set before them. He is now merciful to their
unrighteousness, Heb. 8. 12. And does remember them with his special favor,
Psalm. 106. 4. Prove. 8. 17. And gives them grace for seasonable help, Psalm. 84.
11. Heb. 4. 16. And is filling them with the fruits of righteousness, which are
by Jesus Christ to the praise and glory of God, Isa. 61. 3. Joh. 15. 1, 8. In
taking Christ's yoke upon them, and learning of him, they shall find rest to
their souls; while they meet with various afflictions, and occasions of
sadness, as with respect to the outward man: their soul shall dwell at case,
and lodge in Goodness, Mat. 11. 28, 30 Psalm. 25. 11, 14. God is now filling
them with joy and peace in believing, in the midst of all the troubles and
exercises, wherewith they are exercised: and is also effecting in them, and
quickening them unto a lively Hope, and well-grounded Expectation, which makes
not ashamed, of the Harvest and future inheritance: and this Hope they have as
an Anchor of the Soul, both sure; (that which will not break; how highly soever
the waves lift up their voice; or how fiercely soever the winds bluster and
blow, yet this Hope will hold firm:) and it is steadfast; (it will not slip, for
it is centred in Christ, that Rock of Ages, against which the gates of hell
shall not prevail; nor against those that firmly abide in him.) Yea this Hope,
which is the Anchor of the Soul, enters into that within the veil; whither the
forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an High Priest for ever, after
the order of Melchisedech, Heb. 6. 18, 20. 1 John 3. 1, 2, 3. But we shall here
add no more as to this first particular; in which the Apostle does evince and
evidence to us, the great advantageousness and profitableness of true piety,
holiness, and righteousness; to the end we may seriously and steadfastly
exercise our selves, to the unfeigned belief of the mystery of it; and also to
the sincere practice of it; in saying unto us, having promise of the life that
now is. And now, God willing, we shall proceed on unto the second, contained in
the last clause: namely,

2. Godliness is profitable, having promise also of the life that is to come:
to wit, after this uncertain and frail life shall have an end. In which is
intimated to us, that though men lead never such pious and good lives; though
they walk never so holily, justly, and unblamably, in having their conversation
as becomes and adornes the Gospel of Christ Jesus: yet they shall not live here
always; but they must depart this life as well as other men. It is appointed to
men generally once to dye, to dye the first death, Heb. 9. 27. What man is he
that lives, and shall not see death? and shall he deliver his soul from the
hand of the grave? Psalm. 89. 48. Nor indeed would it be good for them, to live
here always in this polluted, evil, troublesome, and dangerous world: for while
they are at home in the body, they are absent from the Lord: but when this life
is at end, they shall then be with Christ, and shall enter into the joy of
their Lord. And therefore, as the present life is theirs, while it is continued
to them; so death is theirs also; to them to dye is gain: the day of death is
better to them, than the day of their birth, Eccl. 7. 1. To which I shall at
this time enlarge no further.

But though they also must needs dye, and depart out of this world, yet in
unfeignedly exercising themselves to Godliness, they have the promise of the
life that is to come. As things present are theirs, so also are things to come.
All things are theirs, and they are Christ's, and Christ is God's, 1 Cor. 3.
21, 22, 23. If in (or for) this life only, they have hope in Christ, they are
of all men most miserable, as, 1 Cor. 15. 19. But they have the promise and
assurance of a suture and better life; and are begotten again to the lively
hope of it.

But now, in speaking unto this last clause, I shall desire so to do in this
following order. That is to say:

1. Evidence; and show, that there is a future life, a life to come, when this
present, short, and frail life is ended. 2. What is meant by, and contained in
the life to come. 3. That Godliness has the promise thereof.
1. I Say, we shall give some evidences; and show, that there is a future state
to be entered upon; another life besides this present, a life to come, when this
frail, vain, and Transitory life is ended and expired: and this may appear, and
be evidenced, in these following evidences: namely,

1. From plain intimations, and expressions, which are contained in the
Scriptures of Truth. This was more darkly signified and made known in the holy
Scriptures, written before the coming of our Lord Jesus in the Flesh. Thus
those words spoken unto Moses by God in the bush, to wit, I am the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, Exodus 3. 6. are made use
of by our blessed Savior, to prove a future state after this life: For, says
he, God is not the God of the dead, but of the living: for all live unto him.
These Patriarchs, though they are dead unto us, yet they live unto him: and
shall be raised again in due season, Mat. 22. 31, 32. Mark. 12. 26, 27. Luke
20. 37, 38 Thus also, whereas the Prophet says, he will swallow up death in
victory: and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces, etc. The
Apostle Paul proving the Resurrection of the dead; and particularly saying,
this corruptible must put on incorruption; and this mortal must put on
immortality, etc. He then adds the former part of that Prophecy before cited;
to wit, Then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is
swallowed up in victory. And the latter clause of the Prophet's forementioned,
is cited by the Apostle John, when he speaks of the future state of such, as
were truly Godly persons, Isa. 25. 8. with 1 Cor. 15. 53. 54. and Rev. 7. 14,
17. and chap. 21. 4. That Prophecy also of the prophet Hosea's, to wit. O
death, I will be thy plagues; O Grave, I will be thy destruction: The Apostle
does cite, when he treats of, and proves the resurrection, Hos. 13. 14. with 1
Cor. 15. 55. Thus also when the Prophet Isaiah is speaking of the removal of
the righteous out of this world by death, saying, The righteous perishes, --
And merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken
from that which is evil: he then immediately signifies, that there is not then
an utter end of them; or that for ever they cease to be: but he very plainly
gives us to understand, that they enter upon a better state, when they are
hence departed: for he immediately subjoynes to the former; He shall enter into
peace, they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness; or
before him, Isa. 57. 1, 2. And the Prophet Daniel does very plainly and
perspicuously speak of a future state, to be entered upon by both good and bad,
when they by death are passed out of this world: for he thus prophetically
speaks, saying, Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake;
some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. And by
the word [many] there, we may well understand [all] or the multitude: for it
does so signify in other places of Scripture, Dan. 12. 2. with Romans 5. 15, 19.
with verse. 18. Psalm. 32. 10. etc.

And though the life to come, or future state, was more darkly discovered, or
less clearly revealed, then it is since Christ came a light into the world; yet
it was then so plainly made known, that the holy ones in the Church of Israel
did firmly believe, and confidently expect a better life, when they should
depart out of this: and the faith and hope thereof, made them willing to forgo
the desirable things of this present life and world; and to undergo
afflictions, persecutions, and torments, yea and death it self, for the name of
God, Heb. 11. 13, 16, 24, 26. And so it is said, Others were tortured, not
accepting deliverance (to wit, upon their enemies Terms) That they might
obtain a better Resurrection. And others had trial of cruel Mockings, and
Scourgings; yea more-over, of Bonds and Imprisonments, etc. Heb. 11. 35, 36,
40. Yea it appears, that not only the truly pious ones in that Church did thus
believe and confess; But it was the general belief of all among the Jews, (the
Sect of the Sadduces excepted) Mark. 12. 18, 27, 37. Matthew. 22. 23, 33. And
particularly of the Pharisees it is said, They confess a Resurrection, and
Angels, and Spirits, Act. 23. 6, 8, 9. See also, John 11. 24. Act. 24. 14, 15,
16. and chap. 26. 6, 7, 8.

But that there is a Future State to be entered upon by All, when this
Transitory and Momentany State shall be ended and determined; is much more
clearly revealed and evidently discovered to us, in the Holy Scriptures,
written since the coming and appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
abolished death, and brought Life and Immortality to Light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. with Mat. 22. 24, 30. How plainly was this declared by our Lord
Jesus himself, while he was upon the Earth? When, says he, the Son of Man
shall come in his Glory, and all the Holy Angels with him; Then shall he sit
upon the Throne of his Glory; and before him shall be gathered all Nations: And
he shall separate them one from another, as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from
the Goats, Matthew. 25. 30, 32, 41, 46. And again our Lord says unto the Jews:
Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming, in which all that are in their
Graves, shall hear the voice of the Son of Man, and shall come forth; they that
have done good, unto the Resurrection of Life; and they that have done evil,
unto the Resurrection of Damnation, John 5. 27, 29. Once more he says, I came
down from Heaven, not to do mine Own Will, but the Will of him that sent me.
And this is the Will of him that sent me, That of all which he has given me I
should lose nothing, but should raise it up at the last day. And this is the
Will of him that sent me, That every one that sees the Son, and believes on
him, may have everlasting Life: And I will raise him up at the last day, John
6. 38, 39, 40. and Chap. 11. 25. And the holy Apostles, after the Holy Spirit
was received by them in that most plentiful effusion of it, mentioned in Act.
2. did very frequently, and most clearly, Preach through Jesus, the Resurection
from the dead, Act. 4. 2. and chap. 10. 42, 43. And particularly, the Apostle
Paul speaks thus of his Faith and Hope; After the way which they call Heresy,
so worship I the God of my Fathers; Believing all things which are written in
the Law, and the Prophets. And have hope toward God, which they themselves also
allow; That there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the Just, and of
the Unjust, Act. 24. 14, 15, 16. And indeed, to this end Christ both Died, and
Rose, and Revived, that he might be Lord both of the Dead and living. -- For it
is written, As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every
tongue shall confess to God. So then every one of us shall give an Account of
himself to God, Romans 14. 9, 11, 12. with Phil. 2. 9, 11. And in 1 Cor. 15. the
same Apostle does very largely assert and evidence, by manifold Arguments, that
all shall be raised again in due season: And particularly in ver. 21, 22. he
says; For since by man came Death, by man came also the Resurrection of the
Dead. For as in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive. But every
man in his own order. See also, Rev. 20. To this I might further have enlarged;
but what has been written does sufficiently evince, that the Scriptures, do
very fully and plainly assure us, that there is a Life to come; a future State
to be entered upon by all, when this short and frail state is ended. And I shall
here only add, that this is a very considerable, momentous, and weighty
Evidence of the Truth hereof; For the Scriptures cannot be broken. And it is
easier for Heaven and Earth to pass, than one tittle of the Law to fail, Luke
16. 17. And when the Rich man in the Parable said unto Abraham, I pray thee
therefore Father, that thou would send Lazarus to my Fathers House; for I
have five Brethren, that he may testify unto them, lest they also come unto
this place of Torment. Abraham then says unto him, They have Moses, and the
Prophets, let them hear them. (Intimating plainly, that they gave sufficient
notice of a future State; that those that heard them might avoid that dismal
place of Torment, Psalm. 9. 17. and 49. 14, 15.) And he said, nay Father
Abraham; But if one went unto them from the dead, they will Repent. And be said
unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded though one rose from the dead. (And the same may be more fully
affirmed concerning them, that will not believe our Lord Jesus, and his holy
Apostles) Luke 16. 27, 29, 31. with Heb. 2. 1, 3. and chap. 10. 28, 29, 31. and
chap. 12. 18, 25, 29. And so much for that first and most material evidence.

2. That there is a Life to come, a future State to be entered upon, when this
present Frail one is ended, is evidenced also by some Instances of the Truth
hereof, which are mentioned in the Holy Scriptures: Thus it is said of Enoch,
That He walked with God, and he was not: For God took him. Or as the Apostle
says, By Faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death; and was not
found, because God translated him, (to wit, from Earth to Heaven:) for before
his Translation he had this Testimony, that he pleased God. But without Faith
it is impossible to please him. Now if there be not a future State to be entered
upon, when this present one is ended; and a better Life to be enjoyed, by such
as please God, when they depart out of this, then Enoch had fared the worse for
his very signal and eminent Holiness: For he was the shortest liver in this
World by far, of any of them mentioned in Genesis 5. And doubless, God removed him
to a far better place and state, to give assurance to others, that He is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him. And this Instance of a future
Blessed State was the more considerable, before the Scriptures were written,
that the World might know that it is no vain thing to serve and please the
Lord, Genesis 5. 22, 24. with Heb. 11. 5, 6. And as the Son of Sirach says, Enoch
pleased the Lord God, therefore was he translated for an ensample of Repentance
to the Generations, Ecclus 44. 16. And again, Upon the Earth was no man created
like Enoch: for he was taken up from the Earth, chap. 49. 14. Thus it is also
said of Elijah, There appeared a Chariot of fire, and Horses of fire, and
parted Elisha and him asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into Heaven,
and Elisha saw it, and he cried, My Father, my Father, etc. 2 King. 2. 9, 11,
12. And many hundred of years after this, even when our Lord Jesus was upon the
Earth, Moses and Elias were with him, when he was transfigured: As it is said,
Behold, there talked with Christ, two men, which were Moses and Elias; who
appeared in Glory, and spoke of his decease which he should accomplish at
Jerusalem. And Peter, James and John, a competent number of credible Witnesses,
Saw the two men that stood with our Lord. And Peter said unto Jesus, Master, it
is good for us to be here, (or as some, that we Remain here) And let us make
three Tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias, etc.
Luke 9. 30, 31, 32, 33. Our Lord also, who was not in Appearance only, but
really dead, John 19. 33, 34. And who continued until the third day in the
Grave, was then Raised again from the Dead, in that very individual Body in
which he was Crucified, Dead and Buried, Luke 24. 38, 40. John 20. And unto his
holy Apostles, He showed himself alive after his passion, by many infallible
proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining
to the Kingdom of God, Act. 1. 3. Yea, he was not only seen of his Apostles,
but also of above five hundred Brethren at once, 1 Cor. 15. 6. And after his
Resurrection, and after his Remaining forty days upon the Earth, While his
Apostles beheld, he was taken up, to wit, into Heaven. And unto his Disciples
two Angels said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? This
same Jesus, which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like
manner, as ye have seen him go into Heaven, Act. 1. 9, 10, 11. And some
considerable time after this, the Holy Man, and Martyr, Stephen saw him in
Heaven: For it is said, He being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly
into Heaven, and saw the Glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of
God; and said, Behold, I see the Heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing on
the right hand of God. And this good confession he witnessed before those, Who
gnashed on him with their Teeth; and presently after stoned him, Act. 7. 54,
55, 56, 59. And after this again, the Lord Jesus Appeared unto Saul in the way,
Act. 9. 15. and was seen by him: Hence he says; Am I not an Apostle? -- Have I
not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? 1 Cor. 9. 1. And says he, Last of all he was
seen of me also, as of one born out of due time, 1 Cor. 15. 8. Act. 22. 8, 14,
15. and chap. 26. 11, 16. And himself, by his Angel, thus speaks unto St.
John, saying, I am he that lives, and was dead; and behold I am alive for
evermore, Amen. This is a true and Faithful saying, And therefore worthy of all
acceptance, Rev. 1. 18. and chap. 2. 8. So that we have full assurance, and
infallible proof given us, of the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ; and of
his enjoyment of an everlasting and endless Life in the nature of man, Heb. 7.
16, 17.

And this Instance is the most Considerable of all; because he died and rose as
a Public Man, as the last Adam. He by the grace of God tasted death for every
man: And rose again for their justification: and is become the Resurrection and
the Life, John 11. 25. He is a quickening Spirit; In and by whom All shall be
made Alive, after they are dead, 1 Cor. 15. 45. with ver. 21, 22. And the very
end of his dying and rising, and reviving, was, that he might Lord it over
quick and dead; and be Judge of all, Romans 14. 9, 12. And says the Apostle
Paul, God now commands all men, every where, to Repent: Because he has
appointed a day, in which he will Judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man
whom he has ordained; whereof he has given assurance unto all men in that he
has raised him from the dead, Act. 17. 30, 31. 1 Cor. 15. 20, 22. and chap. 6.
14. 1 These. 4. 13, 18.

And presently after the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus from the dead, many
other Holy Ones were raised: As it is said, And the Graves were opened, and
many Bodies of Saints, which slept, arose, and came out of the Graves, after
his Resurrection; and went into the Holy City, and appeared unto many, Mat. 27.
52, 53. which might be some first fruits of fulfilling of that Prophecy of
Esaias, where he says, Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead Body
shall they arise, etc. Isa. 26. 19.

And Lastly, our Savior in the Parable, or Story, of the Rich Man, and of
Lazarus, does plainly give us to understand; that when they departed out of
this Life and World, they then entered upon another State; the one of Joy and
Comfort, and the other of Misery and Torment: for it is said, The beggar died,
and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's Bosom. The Rich Man also died,
and was Buried. And in Hell he lift up his eyes, being in Torments, and sees
Abraham afarr of, and Lazarus in his Bosom. -- -- And said, Father Abraham
have mercy upon me; and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in
water, and cool my tongue, for I am Tormented in this Flame. But Abraham said,
Son, Remember that thou, in thy lifetime, received'st thy good things, and
likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is (...) Comforted, and thou art
Tormented. In which also is plainly signified to us, that Abraham, the Father
of the Faithful, was then alive in his Spirit; and did live unto God; as our
Savior also elsewhere affirms, Luke 16. 19, 22, 24, 25. and chap. 20. 38.
And the Apostle John says, I saw under the Altar, the Souls of them that were
slain for the Word of God, and for the Testimony which they held. And they
cried with a loud voice, saying, How long O Lord, Holy and True, do thou not
Judge and Avenge our Blood on them that dwell on the earth, etc. Rev. 6. 9, 10,
11. and chap. 7. 14, 15, 17. But I shall enlarge no farther unto that Second
Evidence of a Future State, and Life to come; but proceed unto the Third, to
wit:

3. The Truth of the former is further Evidenced, by the Desire and Vote of
Pious and Serious Persons to be removed out of this World. I do not mean, or
speak concerning the Desire or Prayers of some good men in a Passion, or
Distemper: such an one it may seem, Elijah was in, when Jezebel vowed to take
away his Life: for then he requested for himself that he might Dye, and said;
It is enough O Lord, take away my Life: for I am not better than my Fathers, 1
King 19. 1, 4. with Jam. 5. 17. So also when Jonah saw that God spared Nineveh,
upon their serious Repentance; It displeased him exceedingly, and he was very
angry: -- And said, Take, I beseech thee, my life from me; For it is better for
me to dye, than to live. And again, when his Gourd withered; -- And the Sun
beat upon the head of Jonah, that he fainted; He wished in himself to dye, and
said, It is better for me to dye, than to live. And God said unto Jonah, do
thou well to be angry for the Gourd? and he said, I do well to be angry, even
unto Death, Jonah 4. 1, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9. Job 6. 8, 9, 10. and 14. 13. with chap.
36. 20, 21.

But I speak concerning the Vote and Desire of Good men, when they were in a
good calm, composed frame and temper of Spirit. So that Good and Holy man
Simeon, when he had seen our Lord Jesus, and taken him into his Arms; He then
blessed God, and said: Lord, Now let thou thy servant depart in Peace,
according to thy word, etc. Luke 2. 26, 28, 29, 30. And Paul says of himself,
and of other unfeigned Believers: Our selves which have the first fruits of the
spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the the
Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of the Body, Romans 8. 23. And again he says,
For we know, that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we
have a Building of God, an house not made with hands Eternal in the Heavens:
for in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon, with our house
which is from Heaven. -- For we that are in this Tabernacle do groan, being
burdened, not for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that Mortallity
might be swallowed up of Life. -- We are confident, and willing, rather to be
absent from the Body, and to be present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 18. and
chap. 5. 1, 2, 4. 8. And the same Holy Apostle, as with Respect to himself,
says, I am in a straight betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be
with Christ, which is far better, Phil. 1. 20, 23. And of the Patriarchs and
Holy Ones, in former times, it is said, If they had been mindful of that
Country from whence they came out, they might have had opportunity to have
returned: But now they desire a better Country, that is, an Heavenly:
wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God: for he has prepared for
them a City, Heb. 11. 9, 10, 13, 16. Genesis 49. 18.

And these Holy Ones who thus Desired, were not Novices in the Faith, but
Eminent ones therein: they were Pillars in the Church, as it were; or however,
some of them were so; Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles; and so, such as were
guided by the Holy and Eternal Spirit of God, which searches all things, yea
the deep things of God. And by which Blessed and infallible Spirit they were
assured, that there was a future state, to be entered upon, when they are
departed out of this Evil and passing world, and so Fail from among the
Children of men; or otherwise, it was not at all desirable to go out of this
Life and World: For not to be, is next unto, and little better than, to be
miserable, as our Savior seems to signify to us in Matthew. 26. 24. Mark 14.
21. And also by this good and most Understanding Spirit, they were persuaded to
Believe, that the future State that good men shall enter upon, when they are
departed out of this World, is far better, and much rather to be chosen, then
that they were then upon, while they were in this Frail, Mortal, and
Corruptible Body: as the Apostle Paul says, To me to live is Christ, and to
dye is Gain, Phil. 1. 20, 21. And so particularly it is said of that Pious man
Simeon, forenamed, who desired to depart out of, and leave this World and
Life, when he had seen God's Salvation, which he had prepared before the face
of all People; that the holy Ghost was upon him, and it was revealed to him by
the Holy Ghost, that he should not see Death, before he had seen the Lord's
Christ. And he came by the Spirit into the Temple, etc. Luke 2. 25, 26, 29. And
when the Apostle Paul expresses the hearty desire of himself, and of other
believers, (which we have given some account of, and mentioned before;) not
that they might be unclothed, but clothed upon, that Mortallity might be
swallowed up of life. He then immediately subjoyns thereto; now he that has
wrought us for this self-same thing, is God, who also has given unto us the
earnest of the Spirit. Therefore we are always confident, knowing that whilst
we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord. -- We are confident, I
say, and willing rather to be absent from the booy, and to be present with the
Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 4, 6, 8. But what we have been discoursing of, may suffice as
to that third Evidence: And now proceed we unto a fourth: namely,

4. That there will be a future state to be entered upon, when this present
short state is expired appears to be most Reasonable; and enlightened Reason it
self may convince us of the Truth and certainty thereof: for when, or how
otherwise can there be a clear and full Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of
God; who has very clearly and plentifully assured us, in his word of Truth,
That he will render unto every man according to his deeds, Romans 2. 5, 6. That
he will bring every work into Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be
good, or whether it be Evil, Eccles. 12. 13, 14. Shall be not render to every
man according to his works? Prove. 24. 12. Psalm. 62. 12. Now if there were not a
Life to come, after this present momentany one is ended; when shall many wicked
Persons receive the due and deserved reward of their ungodly and unrighteous
Deeds? And when shall the truly Pious and Righteous ones, be made partakers of
the gracious recompense of their reward? If there be not a future state to be
entered upon, and an account hereafter to be given unto God, many wicked persons
would appear to be in the best and most desirable condition, and so abide
without any remarkable change or alteration, all the days of this vain short
life: and many of the best and most Godly persons, would appear to be in the
worst condition, because they meet with so much Reproach; Adversity and
Affliction in this world: as our Savior has foretold, saying, In the World
ye shall have tribulation, Joh. 16. 33. Concerning the Prosperity and
Flourishing estate, of Evil and Ungodly Persons, Job speaks very fully, unto
his mistaken friends, saying, Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea are
mighty in Power? their seed is established in their sight with them, and their
offspring before their eyes. Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the
Rod of God upon them. Their Bull gendreth, and fails not; their Cow Calveth,
and casts not her Calf. They send forth their little ones like a flock, and
their Children dance. They take the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoice at the sound
of the Organ: they spend their days in Wealth, (or in Mirth;) and in a moment
go down into the grave. This was the observation of that perfect and upright
man Job, concerning the un-interrupted prosperity and fullness of some wicked
Persons in his time; and yet he had not the Advantage of the Holy Scriptures as
we have. But notwithstanding all this; though they did so prosper and rejoice
in this world; yet nevertheless, He looked upon them to be really in a very bad
and sad condition; because he believed, that there would be a future Judgment,
and then they would be rewarded according to their deeds and demerits: for in
the following part of the Chapter before-referred to, he says; Have ye not
asked them that go by the way? And do ye not know their tokens? That the
wicked (notwithstanding all his present fullness and admirable prosperiry in
this world) is reserved unto the day of destruction? they shall be brought
forth (out of their graves) to the day of wrath, Job 21. 5, 6, 13, 29, 30.
Psalm. 73. 3, 11, 12, 17, 20. O Lord how great are thy works! and thy thoughts
are very deep. A brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand this;
when the wicked spring as grass, and when all the workers of Iniquity do
flourish; it is that they shall be destroyed for ever, Psalm. 92. 5, 6, 7. and
37. 1, 2, 35, 36, 38.

And so, on the other hand, many righteous ones do now meet with many troubles
and afflictions in this world; as it is written, For thy sake we are killed all
the day long, we are counted as sheep for the slaughter, Romans 8. 36. They do
pass through much Tribulation and exercise in this present state; and many
times Drink of the Cup of sorrow and grief; but without all doubt, there will
be another and better reward for the righteous; because the righteous Lord
loves righteousness, Psalm. 11. 7. Then (to wit, hereafter) ye shall return,
and discern between the righteous, and the wicked; between him that serves
God, and him that serves him not; for behold, the day comes that shall burn
as an oven; and all the proud, yea and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble:
and the day that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of hosts; that it
shall leave them neither Root, nor Branch; but unto you that fear my name,
shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings, etc. Mal. 3.
17, 18. and chapter 4. 1, 2, 3. And if it should not thus be, how should God judge
the world in righteousness? when the wisest of mere men, to wit, Solomon,
says; And more-over, I saw under the Sun the place of judgment, that
wickedness was there; and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was there:
He then makes this rational conclusion, or deduction therefrom, to wit; I said
in mine heart, God shall judge the righteous, and the wicked: for there is a
time, there (to wit, in the world to come) for every purpose, and for every
work. And then the evil and unrighteous persons, who have judged, or acted
unjustly, against the upright and innocent, shall be called to an account, and
justly condemned for so doing; how high soever they have been in Power or
Authority here: and the righteous shall be acquitted and righted by him, who
executes judgment, for all that are opporessed, Eccles. 3. 16, 17. with Job
34. 10, 11, 12. God's righteousness is engaged, to render unto all men,
according to their works and doings; and therefore, because he does not do so
fully now in this day, and world, we may safely and certainly conclude, that he
will do so in the world to come, Romans 2. 5, 6, 7, 10, 11. Seeing that it is a
righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you:
and to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord shall be revealed from
heaven, with the Angels of his power; in flaming fire taking vengeance on them
that know not God, and obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall
be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and
from the glory of his power; when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints,
and admired in all them that believe, in that day, 2 These. 1. 5, 6, 7, 9, 10. 1
Cor. 15. 19; 32. 2 Pet. 2. 9, 10.

5. And lastly, as to this matter; another evidence to evince, that there is a
life to come; another state to be entered upon, when this is ended and expired:
as also to assure and confirm the truth of the foregoing, and last mentioned
evidence, is this; that even the Gentiles, or such as were without the pale of
the Church, and so such as had not the advantage and instruction of the holy
Scriptures, had, (that notwithstanding) some dark and obscure apprehensions and
knowledge of a future state to be entered upon, when this frail and Temporary
state was ended; even by the light of nature: or however, some of them had so;
as is clearly intimated to us, and signified in the Scriptures of truth. Thus
it plainly appears in Job, and in the sayings of some of his friends, in those
obscure times in which he lived. Oh, says Job, that my words were now written!
O that they were printed in a book! that they were graven with an Iron pen, and
land in the rock for ever! for I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he
shall stand at the latter day upon the earth; and though after my skin, worms
destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God: whom I shall see for my
self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed
within me, Job 19. 23, 24, 25, 27. And as he very fully and clearly (all things
considered) declares his says and knowledge, concerning his Redeemer, and the
blessed state he should enjoy, after his body, and skin, and reins were
destroyed, and consumed: so also elsewhere he very plainly speaks of a future,
sensible being of evil and wicked persons, after their removal out of this
world; in the words which we have mentioned before upon another account,
namely: Do ye not know their Tokens? That the wicked is reserved to the day of
destruction? they shall be brought forth to the day of wrath. Even such wicked
ones also shall be brought forth to the day of wraths; as of whom he had said,
but a little before, They spend their days in wealth, and in a moment go down
to the grave, Job 21. 29, 30. with verse. 13. And Elihu also speaks to the same
purpose, saying; Far be it from the Almighty, that he should commit iniquity;
for the work of a man shall render unto him, and cause every man to find
according to his ways. And again to the same purpose he says; For his eyes are
upon the ways of man, and he sees all his goings. There is no darkness nor
shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves, Job 34. 10,
12, 21, 23. with Romans 2. 5, 6. So Balaam, who was an Heathen, and lived in
Aram, or Syria, near the river Euphrates, Numb. 23. 7. and chap. 22. 5. he very
plainly signifies, that there shall be a future state to be entered upon, by
both good and bad: and that the condition of good men, would be excellently
desirable: and therefore he thus breaths out his vote and desire, Let me dye
the death of the righteous, and let my last end, or reward, be like his.
Plainly signifying to us thereby, that he did believe, that the end, or reward
of the righteous, would be better, and more to be desired, than that of the
wicked: and yet also, that both should dye, and after that be rewarded,
according to their several deeds, Numb. 23. 10. And it is said concerning
Felix, who was governor of a Province under the Roman Emperor, that as Paul
reasoned, in his hearing, of the Faith in Christ; and therein particularly, of
Righteousness, Temperance, and the Judgment to come; Felix trembled. In which
is plainly intimated, that he did believe, what was declared unto him by the
Apostle, concerning the future judgment, though he was an heathen; and his
guilty conscience, at the hearing thereof, put him into an uneasy trembling
condition, because that day of judgment, will be the Perdition of ungodly and
unrighteous men; and such an one it may seem he was, Act. 24. 24, 25. with Jam.
2. 19. Romans 2. 14, 15. 2 Pet. 3. 7. And so, it may seem, though the Epicurean
Philosophers, who denied all Providence, and any future state, and counted the
delights and pleasures of this life, their chiefest good; and therefore might
oppose the notion of a life and judgment to come: Though they, I say, mocked at
the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the dead; Yet others at Athens were more
serious at the hearing of it, and said; We will hear thee again of this matter;
and certain persons there clave unto the Apostle, Act. 17. 31, 34. with verse.
18. And though we might have enlarged hereto, yet what has been discoursed of,
may sufficiently evidence unto us, and assure us of this hugely weighty and
important truth, namely, That there is a life and world to come, when this
present life and world is ended and expired. And therefore I shall, at this
present however, add no more to the proof and evidence thereof.

Only, by way of Inference from what has been said on this Subject, I may
briefly say, that the serious consideration of the certainty of a future state,
is very useful, proper, and cogent, to provoke us all, so to live in this
world, as those that know, we must hereafter give an account of our selves, and
of our actions, unto God, the judge of all the earth; and then we must receive
a just recompense of reward, suitable to our former works and doings: O then!
how does it behoove and concern us all to receive, and hold fast grace, that we
may serve God acceptably, with reverence and Godly fear: For our God is a
consuming fire, Heb. 12. 28, 29. Our Lord Jesus now calls upon all, in this day
of his Grace and Patience, saying; Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends
of the earth; For I am God, a just God, and a Savior, And there is none else.
And to enforce his call and command, and engage all to answer and obey it,
therefore this is added to the former; I have sworn by my self, the word is
gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, that unto me every
Knee shall bow, every Tongue shall swear; surely shall one say; in the Lord is
righteousness and strength. Even unto him shall men come, and all that are
incensed against him shall be ashamed. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel
be justified, and shall glory. Let us then give diligence, while the day of
grace is lengthned out, and continued to us, that we so receive the grace of
God to purpose, as to fear him, and keep his commandments; for this is the
whole of man; his whole duty, excellency, and interest, that it may be well
with us in the life to come. And it is worthy our serious consideration, and
observation, that when the Apostle Paul, referrs to that forementioned prophecy
of Isaiah, in which he fore-declares and prophesies of the future judgment, in
which every knee shall bow to our Lord Jesus, and every Tongue shall confess
him Lord, to the glory of God the Father: He then gives such like exhortation,
as is beforementioned, to the believers, saying; Wherefore, my beloved; --
work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling: for it is God that works
in you both to will, and to do, of good pleasure. Do all things without
murmuring, and disputings: that ye may be blameless and harmless: -- That I may
rejoice in the day of Christ, that I have not run in vain, neither labored in
vain, Isa. 45. 22, 23. 24, 25. with Phil. 2. 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 16.

And as this Holy Apostle, gives such like counsel to the Believers, unto whom
he writes; so he also set before them an Imitable example, by his own practice,
that they might be followers of him: I have hope toward God, says he, that
there shall be a Resurrection of the dead, both of the just, and of the unjust.
And herein do I exercise my self, to have always a conscience void of offense
toward God, and toward Men, Act. 24. 14, 16. And again he says of himself, and
of other hearty Believers; We labor, that whether present, or absent; we may
be accepted of him. For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ,
that every one may Receive the things done in his own Body, according to that
he has done, whether it be good, or bad; knowing therefore the terror of the
Lord, we persuade Men, etc. 2 Cor. 5. 9, 10, 11. Eccl. 12. 13, 14. Luke 21. 34,
35, 36. But we shall enlarge no further unto this particular, but proceed on to
what remains, to wit;

2. We come in the next place to enquire and consider, what is meant by, and
contained in, The Life to come, which is mentioned in the Text; now we may
premise this, before we come to speak more distinctly hereto: That though in
the Evidences beforementioned, we have spoken of the future state indistinctly,
and in a general consideration: Yet here, in the place we are discoursing of,
and from, by the Life to come; we are to understand, that blessed and happy
Estate they shall enter into hereafter, who do now exercise themselves, to
sincere Godliness, and unfeigned Obedience. And so much is plainly intimated to
us in the words themselves, to wit, Godliness is profitable unto all things,
having promise -- of the Life that is to come. Without all peradventure, that
which is promised, and which is promised unto Godliness, and unto them that
heartily exercise themselves thereto, must needs be (as is there also said)
Profitable, and highly desirable and valuable.

As also we may premise this, that I shall not here distinctly discourse of
that Intermediate State, which the Spirits of Righteous Men made perfect are
in, between the Death and Resurrection of the Body; but of that which they
shall enter upon, and perfectly enjoy in, and after the Resurrection of their
proper Bodies.

Now having very briefly premised these two things; we may say in general, that
by the Life to come, here mentioned, we are to understand, a full and complete
deliverance from all, that is evil and afflictive; and a perfect, glorious, and
everlasting enjoyment and fruition, of all that Good and Bliss, which they
shall be made capable of. And as on the one hand, Death comprehends all that
Misery, Curse, and wosul Punishment, which is the due and deserved reward of
Men's Trangression and Disobedience.

Thus the Lord at the beginning threatened our first Parent, Adam, saying, In
the day thou eatest of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, Thou shall dye
the Death; Thou shall surely dye, Genesis 2. 17. and so the Apostle says, The
wages of Sin is Death: to wit, all Misery and Affliction, Romans 6. 23. and that
eternal and dismal Torment and Destruction, wherewith they shall be punished
and tormented, who know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord and
Savior, is called, The second Death, Rev. 2 11. and chap. 20. 6. So on the
other Hand, all that Glory and Happiness which is assured unto, and shall
hereafter be enjoyed by them that exercise themselves unto, and perservere in
well doing, is called Life, and Eternal Life; and here, The Life that is to
come. So also it is said, This is the Record, that God has given unto us
Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son. He that has the Son, has Life: --
These things have I written unto you that believe on the Name of the Son of
God, that ye may know, that ye have eternal Life, 1 John 5. 11, 12, 13. And
concerning both the punishment of sin, and the gracious Reward of Piety, the
Apostle says, The wages of Sin is Death; but the Gift of God is eternal Life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord: As in like expressions also, Moses had spoken in
former times, calling the punishment of Sin and Disobedience, Death; as that
comprehends all Cursing and Misery: and the reward of Righteousness and
Obedience, Life: As that encludes and contains, as we have said, all Blessing
and Happiness whatsoever, of which they shall be made capable, Romans 6. 23. with
Deuteronomy. 30, 15, 16, 19, 20. Ezekiel. 33. 11. And so we may say of all, who continue
to exercise themselves to true Piety.

1. That though they must needs all of them dye, as well as other men; yet they
shall in due season, be Raised again to the Resurrection of Life, John 5. 29.
Luke 14. 14. They that are Christ's, in a special consideration, shall be
quickened at his coming, John 11. 25. 1 Cor. 6. 14. and chap. 15. 23. Our Lord
Jesus is the Resurrection and the Life; and He has the Keys of the Grave, and
of Death, Rev. 1. 18. And therewith he will, in the proper season, open the
Gates of Death, and the Doors of the Grave; and will bring them forth that
sleep in him, to the complete enjoyment, of that Glory and Happiness, which he
has, by his precious Blood, obtained for them, and and Promised to them: and
will then give unto them Spiritual, Powerful, and Immortal Bodies; so as then
they Can dye no more, for they are equal unto the Angels, and are the Children
of God, being the Children of the Resurrection, Luke 20. 35, 36. For this
Corruptible, says the Apostle Paul, must put on Incorruption; and this mortal
must put on Immortality, etc. 1 Cor. 15. 53, 55, 58. Then their Body, which is
now Vile, shall be fashioned into the Likeness of the Glorious Body of Christ,
Phil. 3. 20, 21.

2. Eternal Life, by our blessed Savior, is opposed unto, and set against,
Condemnation, Joh. 5. 24. and chap. 3. 15, 16. with ver. 18. and so it does
signify, or however enclude Justification; (for these two, to wit,
Justification and Condemnation, are very usually opposed the one to the other,
Romans 5. 18. and chap. 8. 33, 34. 2 Cor. 3. 9.) And so, those that now do live
Godly and Righteously in Christ Jesus, shall, in the World to come, of which we
speak, be completely Gloriously, and eternally Justified from all their Sins
and Transgressions, Isa. 45. 23, 25. Their Sins shall be fully and
everlastingly Blotted out, when the times of Refreshing shall come from the
presence of the Lord, Act. 3. 19. Now they are instructed and directed by our
Lord Jesus, and need to pray unto their Father which is in Heaven, every day,
Forgive us our Sins and Trespasses; for they are daily offending and sinning
against God, Matthew. 6. 12. who can tell how often he offends? There is not a
Just man upon the Earth that does good, and sins not, Eccl. 7. 20. But then
they shall sin no more, but shall be justified and cleansed (as Dan. 8. 14.)
from the Inherency and In-being of Sin; and they shall also perfectly and for
ever be forgiven, and delivered from the Guilt of their former Transgressions
and Miscarriages, Isa. 45. 25. with Heb. 8. 10, 12. He commanded us, says the
Apostle Peter, to Preach unto the People, and to testify, That it is He
(Christ) who is Ordained of God the Judge of quick and dead. To him give all
the Prophets Witness, that through his Name, whosoever Believes in him, shall
receive (in the future Judgment) Remission of Sins, Act. 10. 40, 43.

3. The truly Godly and Righteous persons shall, when they are raised again out
of their Graves, be wholly, and for ever delivered from the wrath and
displeasure of the Almighty God: and so Eternal life is opposed unto the wrath
of God, by the Baptist, when he thus speaks, He that believes on the Son,
has everlasting Life; and he that obeys not the Son, shall not see life, but
the Wrath of God abides on him, John 3. 3, 6. So also the Apostle does oppose
Eternal Life, and Wrath, each to other, saying; to them who, by patient
continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, He will render eternal Life: But
unto them that obey not the Truth, he will render Indignation and Wrath, Romans
2. 7, 8. see also, Prove. 16. 14, 15. And so, they that now are Pious and Pure
in heart and way, shall then obtain and enjoy his valuable Favor, in which is
life, Psalm. 30. 5. yea his loving kindness is better than Life; than the most
excellent life we can here enjoy, Psalm. 63. 3. Then shall that promise, which
the Faithful God has promised to them, be completely and most fully performed;
to wit, For a moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather
thee. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee, for a moment: but with
everlasting kindness, will I have mercy upon thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer;
For this is as the waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn, that the waters
of Noah, shall no more go over the earth; so have I sworn, that I will not be
wrath with thee, nor rebuke thee. This is the Heritage of the servants of the
Lord, etc. Isa. 54. 7, 8, 9, 10. 17.

4. Eternal Life is opposed unto Everlasting fire, and unto everlasting
punishment, Matthew. 25. 41, 46. And so it may signify the same with Everlasting
Salvation: And our Lord Jesus, being made perfect, Became the Author of eternal
Salvation, unto all them that obey him, Heb. 5. 8, 9. Whosoever believes in
him shall not perish, but have everlasting life, John 3. 15, 16. and chap. 10.
27, 28. They that now run, with patience and perseverance, the way of God's
Commandments, shall hereafter, unto all Eternity, be delivered from the
dreadful and direful effects, of the Wrath of the Almighty God, which is to be
dreaded and deprecated by us; they shall then fully, and for ever be secured
from all Torment, Destruction, and perdition, Isa. 45. 16, 17.

Everlasting Life is also opposed unto Shame, Reproach, and Disgrace: As where
the Prophet says, Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall
awake; some to everlasting Life; and some to Shame, and everlasting Contempt,
Dan 12. 2. And so in that future state, which the Godly shall enter upon, they
shall certainly and perpetually, be delivered from all Infamy and Contempt:
though now many times they are a Reproach of men, and despised of the People;
and are a Byword amongst their Neighbors: and therefore may say as the
Psalmist does; Thou have known our Reproach and our Shame, and our Dishonor:
-- Reproach has broken our hearts, etc. Psalm. 69. 19, 20. yet hereafter,
Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation; they shall not
be Ashamed, nor Confounded, world without end, Isa. 45. 17. But they shall then
obtain, and be made partakers of everlasting Glory, and immortal Honor, unto
which they are now called by the Gospel. When Christ, who is our Life, shall
appear, then shall ye also appear with him in Glory, Col. 3. 1, 4. Then, says
our Lord Jesus, shall the Righteous shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of
their Father; who has ears to hear, let him hear, Matthew. 13. 44. 2 Timothy 2. 10.
For their former Shame, they shall then have double Glory, Isa. 61. 7.

And again; Eternal life is sometimes opposed unto the Place of Torment, into
which the unrighteous and unholy shall go; and in which will be Weeping, and
Wailing, and Gnashing of teeth, Mark. 9. 43, 46. And so also it is opposed unto
Anguish, and dismal Grief, which is the effect of the Wrath and Indignation of
the most Righteous Judge; Romans 2. 7. with ver 8. 9. And they that now lead
their lives in sincere Piety, and Honesty, shall hereafter be delivered from
all occasions of weeping, and wailing; and shall be made partakers of
everlasting Joy, Gladness, and Consolation: as the Lord, by the Prophet, gives
us to understand, saying; The Redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come with
singing unto Zion, and everlasting joy shall be upon their Heads: they shall
obtain Gladness and Joy, and Sorrow and Mourning shall flee away, Isa 35. 10.
and chap. 51. 11. Light is now sown for the Righteous, and Gladness for the
upright in heart, Psalm. 97. 11, 12. And even now, while as their need requires,
they are in heaviness, through manifold Temptations; yet believing in Christ
Jesus, whom now they see not, they rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of
Glory: they greatly rejoice in that Salvation, ready to be revealed in the last
times, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 6, 8, 9. But their present joy is not without mixture of
sorrow; They now rejoice with trembling, Heb. 3. 16, 18. And their joy is not
complete, because it is in unseen things: but hereafter, God will wipe away all
tears from their eyes: and there shall be no more sorrow, nor crying: for the
former things are passed away. And he that sat upon the Throne said unto me,
faith St. John, Write, For these words are true and faithful, Rev. 21. 1, 4, 5.
And then they shall for evermore, Reap that Harvest of unmixed joy and light,
which is now sown for them: they shall enter into the joy of their Lord: when
they are absent from the Body, they shall be present with the Lord; and shall
for ever be in his Blessed and Glorious Presence, In whose Presence is fullness
of joy, and at whose right hand are Pleasures for evermore, Matthew. 25. 21, 23.
2 Cor. 5. 6, 8. Rev. 22. 4. And if now they greatly rejoice, in hope and
expectation of the Glory of God, which now they see not, nor fully enjoy, Romans
8. 24, 25. what will their joy and rejoicing be, when they have a complete,
glorious, and never-ending enjoyment and fruition, of what they now in this
day, longingly and patiently expect and wait for?

5. Sometimes Eternal life is declared to consist in the Knowledge of God, and
of our Lord Jesus Christ: as our Lord gives us to understand, in his Address to
his Father, saying unto Him; This is life Eternal, that they know thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, John 17. 2, 3. with 1 John 5.
20, 21. Indeed, that imperfect and small knowledge of God, and Jesus Christ,
which they now have, while they are absent from the Lord, is very sweet and
delightful: My Son, says the Wiseman, eat thou honey, because it is Good, and
the honey comb which is sweet upon thy palate: so shall the knowledge of
Wisdom be unto thy soul, when thou have found it, Prove. 2. 10. and chap. 24.
13, 14. It is called, The light of the knowledge of the glory of God, 2 Cor. 4.
4, 6. And Light, and Understanding, and Excellent Wisdom, are put together, Dan
5. 11, 14. to signify, that what Light is to the outward man, knowledge and
wisdom is to the Inner, even to the soul: And truly the light is sweet: and a
pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the Sun, Eccl. 11. 7. But if that
very small, and little measure of knowledge and understanding, which the Saints
now partake of, be so grateful and pleasant; how sweet, satisfactory, and
ravishing will be the perfect and complete knowledge they shall enjoy, and be
made partakers of, in the future state they shall enter upon! We now know in
part, says the Apostle, and we Prophecy in part; But when that which is
perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. -- For now we
see through a glass darkly, but then face to face. Now I know in part, but then
shall I know, even as also I am known, 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10, 12. And through the
present perfect sight and knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, they shall also be
completely conformed to his most excellent Image and Likeness, which is now
effected in part, through the imperfect sight of him: as it is said; We all
with open face, beholding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed
into the same Image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2
Cor. 3. 12, 18. But when they shall behold him without a glass, when they shall
see him eye to eye, (as Isa. 52. 8.) they shall then be perfectly made like
unto him. To this purpose the Apostle John speaks to the believers, saying; Now
are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear (to wit, to themselves
fully) what we shall be: But we know that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him: for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3. 2, 3. Matthew. 5* 8. Isa. 33.
15, 16, 17.

6. Sometimes by the life to come, is meant, that Kingdom, or reigning state,
that is proposed to and set before us in the Gospel, to move and excite us to
exercise our selves, seriously and constantly, to Godliness and Righteousness;
and which Crown of Glory, they shall undoubtedly receive, who run the ways of
Gods commandments, with diligence and perseverance: Thus whereas in two verses
in Mark, 9. we have these expressions, used by our Lord Jesus, It is better for
thee* to enter into life: In another verse, in the same place, it is thus
expressed; It is better for thee to enter into the Kingdom of God, etc. verse.
43, 45. with verse. 47. Thus also it is said of them, which receive the
abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, that they shall reign in
life by one, Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 17. And the Future life, the life to come,
which is promised to the unfeigned believers, is called, The Crown of life; so
it is said, When he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of Life (elsewhere
called by the same Apostle, The Kingdom) which the Lord has promised unto them
that love him, Jam. 1. 12. with chap. 2. 5. And our Lord says unto the Angel
of the Church in Smyrna, Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee
a Crown of life, Rev. 2. 10. And so, this is contained in the future life,
which is promised unto Godliness, that they that now hear Christ's voice, and
follow him, shall then be exalted to inherit a Kingdom, Luke 12. 32. As the
holy ones confess, to the praise of the Lamb that was slain, saying, Thou have
made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall Reign on the earth, Rev.
5. 9, 10. Romans 2. 9, 10. And they shall Reign for ever and ever, Rev. 22. 5.

7. And lastly, sometimes life, and eternal life, are opposed to Corruption,
and Mortality: thus the Apostle says, That Mortality may be swallowed up of
life, 2 Cor. 5. 4. Gal. 6. 8. And life is joined with Immortality, 2 Timothy 1.
10. And so it signifies, an endless life; and therewith an everlasting
deliverance from all wrath, death, pain, punishment, enemies, shame, weeping
and grief, etc. And an eternal enjoyment and possession of all Glory, Honor,
Peace, Joy, and complete bliss and happiness: as we have intimated all along,
in what we have written; and as is also imported to us in the very Pharse of
everlasting, or eternal life, Heb. 7. 16. Psalm. 133. 3. and 36. 7, 9.

Thus I have given some short and very imperfect account, of what is meant by
and contained in, the life to come, of which Godliness has the promise; of
which the Apostles themselves have, not only known, but also Prophesied in
part, in those excellent things spoken and written by them: and then, how
should such a Child in understanding as I am, do otherwise then darken it, by
words without knowledge? 1 Cor. 13. 9, 12, 1 John 3. 1, 2. Isa. 64. 4. with 1
Cor. 2. 9, 10. Psalm. 31. 19. And we shall hereafter see cause, to use the words
of the Queen of Sheba, concerning this eternal life and Salvation: namely, It
was a true report that we heard of it from the holy Prophets and Apostles:
Howbeit, -- Behold, the half was not told us by them; this life and immortality
exceeds the same which we have heard of it, 1 King. 10. 6, 7, 8. But no more to
that.

3. We come in the last place to evidence and show, that Godliness has, and
those that unseignedly and preseveringly exercise themselves thereto, have the
promise also of the life to come; of this most excellent, desirable, and
eternally happy and blessed state; of which we have before given some broken,
imperfect, and brief account. To this purpose the Apostle Paul speaks, in the
presence of King Agrippa, and some other great persons, saying; And now I
stand, and am judged for the hope of the promise, made of God unto our Fathers:
(to wit, the promise of a blessed and joyful resurrection from the dead; and of
an everlastingly happy state afterward, which was made unto Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, etc. Genesis 22. 7. Exodus 3. 6. with Luke 20. 35, 36, 38. Act. 24. 14,
16. Heb. 11. 9, 10, 13, 16. Unto which promise, says he, our twelve Tribes,
instantly serving God day and night, hope to come. (Intimating, that they
rightly judged and concluded, that no persons could enjoy the complete benefit
of that promise, made unto the Fathers, but such as were sincerely pious, and
devout persons; such as walked in the steps of the Faith of our Father Abraham:
And therefore they did instantly, and constantly serve God, in holiness and
righteousness; that they might enjoy the benefits and blessings of that
promise.) Act. 26. 6, 7, 8. Psalm. 119. 166. To the same purpose also the
Apostle James, speaking concerning them that were Rich in faith, though poor in
this world, says of them, that they are Heirs of that Kingdom which God has
promised unto them that love him, Jam. 1. 12. and chapter 2. 5. And the Apostle
John, writing unto them that did believe in the name of the Son of God, in
general, says: Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from the
beginning: If that which ye have heard from the beginning, shall remain in you,
ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father. And this is the promise
that he has promised us, even eternal life, 1 John 2. 24, 25. Rev. 2. 7, 10,
11. and chap. 22. 12, 14. This promise, as we have said before, is
conditionally propounded and assured unto all, however, where the Gospel of
Christ is plainly taught and proclaimed; that upon their performing the
conditions of the New Covenant, by the help and assistance of the blessed
spirit of God, (which he will not be wanting to give them preventingly) they
might be made partakers of the blessings, therein assured and promised: For so
God loved the world, (of fallen, sinful mankind) that he gave his only
begotten Son; (namely, to be the Savior of it) That whosoever (of the world)
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3. 14, 15,
16, 17, 35, 36. and chap. 5 24, 25, 40. Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3. But they only are
the Heirs of it, (I now speak of adult ones) and shall assuredly receive and
enjoy, the choice and everlasting benefits of it, who do exercise themselves
unto true and sincere Godliness and Goodness; and continue so to do unto the
end of their lives; for they do perform the terms and conditions of that
New Covenant. To them who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory,
and Honor, and Immortality, God will render eternal life, Romans 2. 7, 10. Hence
the Apostle thus entreats, exhorts, and encourages the believing Hebrews,
saying unto them: And we desire, that every one of you do show the same
diligence, to the full assurance of hope unto the end: That ye be not slothful,
but followers of them, who through Faith and Patience inherit the promises,
Heb. 6. 11, 12. And again he faith unto the same believers, Ye have need of
patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the
promises, chap. 10. 36, 38. But having mentioned somewhat to the same purpose
before, in the foregoing part of this discourse; and thereby prevented my
self, from further enlarging thereto here; I shall add no more unto it.

Only for our further helpfulness and encouragement, we may enquire into, and
consider these two things; namely,

1. Whose is this promise that is assured unto Godliness; and consequently unto
them, that sincerely exercise themselves thereto?

2. How is this most excellent promise confirmed and established, that we may
firmly expect to receive the blessings thereof, upon our exercising our selves
to true Piety and Holiness?

1. Whose is this promise that is assured unto Godliness; and consequently unto
them, that sincerely and perseveringly exercise themselves thereto? Or who is
he that has promised eternal life to the truly Godly and Holy persons? And he
is, The living God; as he is styled in verse. 10. He that lifts up his hand unto
heaven, and says, I live for ever, Deuteronomy. 32. 40. That God who only has
immortality, 1 Timothy 6. 16. And him we may further consider:

1. As a Gracious and merciful God; one who is full of tender bowels of
compassion and affection to mankind, Tit. 3. 4. Jam. 5. 11. Especially toward
them that heartily seek, and serve him: as the Apostle also signifies, in what
he says of the living God in verse. 10. Namely, that he is the Savior of all
men, but especially of them that believe. His Charity and Mercy moved him to
promise his dear Son, from the beginning of the world, to be the Savior of the
world: and in the fullness of the time to send him, according as he had
before-promised: whom he has given For a Covenant of the people, Isa. 42. 6.
Through the tender mercies of our God, the dayspring from on high visited us:
To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, Luke 1.
70, 80. Isa. 55 3, 4. And he has by the grace of God tasted death for every
man, and is raised again from the dead; and has by his precious blood obtained
and ratified the New Testament, of exceeding great and precious promises, 2
Cor. 1. 20. And this everliving and true God, who has so greatly, and
wonderfully manifested, the sincerity of his love and kindness toward us, in
sending his well-beloved, and only begotten Son, to be the Propitation for our
sins, does still keep mercy toward the Heirs of his promise; otherwise they
could not be made partakers of the blessings and benefits of his Covenant.
Hence we have frequently such expressions as these made use of in the holy
Scriptures; to wit, The great and dreadful God, who keeps Covenant and mercy
for them that love him, and observe his Commandments, Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Neh. 1. 5.
Dan. 9. 4. All the Paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, unto such as keep his
Covenant, and his Testimomonies, Psalm. 25. 10. He retains not his Anger for
ever: because he delights in mercy. -- Thou will cast all their sins into the
depths of the Sea. Thou will perform the truth unto Jacob, and the mercy to
Abraham, Mica. 7. 18, 20. If God should be severe to Mark against the pious and
righteous persons, the manifold iniquities and miscarriages found with them,
both in their Omitting that which is good, and Committing that which is evil,
they could not stand before him, nor receive the benefits of his promises,
Psalm. 130. 4, 5. And as that perfect man Job says, how should man be just
before God? (namely, if he should enter into judgment with him: for so it
immediately follows;) If he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one of
a thousand, Job 9. 2, 3. with Psalm. 143. 2.

And therefore such as are upright in the main, need to Rejoice in, and Implore
the mercy of God daily and continually: And it is observable, that David, the
man after Gods own heart, thus expresses himself; I will sing of thy Power,
yea I will sing aloud of thy Mercy, etc. Psalm. 59. 16, 17. And again he says,
I will sing of the Mercies of the Lord for ever, Psalm. 89. 1, 4. And when he
thus speaks of himself, in his Prayer unto God, saying, I have done Judgment
and Justice; and does acknowledge himself to be The Servant of the Lord; to
wit, in an especial consideration; one that did desire to fear his name, and to
serve and please him; yet then he humbly and earnestly Implores the mercy of
God, saying, Deal with thy Servant according to thy Mercy, Psalm. 119. 121, 124,
125, and 143. 2. And Daniel, a man greatly beloved of his God, and an eminently
Holy man, does thus address himself unto God in his Prayer; We do not present
our Supplications before thee for our Righteousness, but for thy great Mercies.
O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do, Dan. 9. 7, 9, 18, 19. with
Isa. 64. 6. And when the Apostle Jude gives this counsel and exhortation unto
the Believers, who were Sanctified in God the Father, and Preserved in Christ
Jesus and Called: to wit, But ye, Beloved, Building up your selves on your most
Holy Faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God: He
then Immediately further adds thereto, Looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ unto Eternal Life. To signify to us; that the most upright and holy
Ones, do continually stand in need of the Mercy of God, and of our Lord Jesus
Christ; and without that, they could not have Eternal Life, Jude 1. 2, 20, 21.
Heb. 4. 16. Luke 17. 9, 10. The Mercy of the Lord is from Everlasting to
Everlasting upon them that fear him, Psalm. 103. 17, 18. with 52. 8. Where is
Boasting then? It is excluded. By what Law? Of Works? Nay, but by the Law of
Faith, Romans 3. 25, 26, 27.

Yet let none, from what has been said, Abuse the Mercy and Grace of God, (as
evil ones are two forward and prone to do, Romans 5. and chap. 6 1, 2.) and cry
Peace to themselves, Where there is no Peace: For though it be certainly true,
that God is a God of Mercy toward mankind, rich in Mercy, the Father and
Fountain of Mercies, 2 Cor. 1. 3. Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. yet he will not be merciful,
in an especial consideration, To any wicked trangressors, Psalm. 59. 5. He that
made them will not have mercy on them; and he that formed them will show them
no Favor: I mean, if they continue, and go on still in their Trespasses, Isa.
27. 11. Psalm. 68 18, 21. But this is a very great and considerable
encouragement to them, whose hearts are perfect with the Lord; That he who has
entailed the Promise on Godliness, is one who delights in mercy; And therefore
he will perform the Covenant to them that keep his Testimonies, and seek him
with the whole heart; though they be subject to Passions, and have many
Infirmities and Frailties found with them; in their due and diligent addressing
themselves to the Throne of Grace, that they may obtain mercy, in the
forgiveness of their Sins: These are The Vessels of special Mercy, which he
has prepared unto Glory, Romans 9. 23. with 1 Timothy 4. 10. Hence the Apostle Paul
thus votes, As many as walk according to this Rule, Peace be upon them, and
Mercy, even upon the Israel of God, Gal. 6. 14, 15, 16. Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12.

2. The God whose the Promise is that Godliness has, is also a God of Ability
and Power; one who is strong and able to perform all his Gracious Promises: And
so he is able to give unto the truly Pious Persons now, those things which he
knows to be needful for them, for this present Life and State: Whatsoever is
under the whole Heaven is his, Job 41. 11. Thine, O Lord, says David, is the
Greatness, and the Power, and the Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty: For
all that is in the Earth, is thine: Thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art
exalted as head above all. Both Riches and Honor come of thee, etc. 1 Chronicles.
29. 11, 13. Deuteronomy. 10. 14. He can open his good Treasure, and give unto us, out
of that, whatsoever is needful and useful for the Body and outward man, as,
Deuteronomy. 28. 1, 12.

And so also the Heaven, and all Heavenly things are his, in his hand, and at
his Dispose, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11. Behold the Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens, is
the Lords, Deuteronomy. 10. 14. Psalm. 115. 16. And says the Apostle Paul, Blessed be
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has Blessed us with all
Spiritual Blessings, in Heavenly things, in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1. 3. Jam. 1. 5,
17. Luke 11. 13. Thus God in former times, made known himself to Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, by the Name of God Almighty, Genesis 17. 1. Exodus 6. 3. And Abraham
glorified God, in believing him to be such an one as he made himself known by
his Word to be; namely, the Powerful, the Almighty God; and that therefore he
could give a Being to his word, and and perform the Promise, which he had made
unto him, notwithstanding all appearing difficulties, and unlikelyhoods: So
when the Lord promised him, saying, So shall thy Seed be; It is said by the
Apostle, He considered not his Body now dead, neither yet the deadness of
Sarahs Womb. He staggered not at the Promise of God through unbelief, but was
strong in Faith, giving Glory to God. And being fully persuaded, that what he
had promised, he was able also to perform, Romans 4. 18, 21. There were some
staggerings at that Promise of God, as to his Ability to perform it, in Sarah,
it may seem, for which she was somewhat reproved by the Lord, in his thus
speaking unto Abraham; Wherefore did Sarah laugh? Is any thing too hard for the
Lord? Genesis 18. 13, 14. But no such thing was charged upon her Husband. And
again when the Lord tried Abraham, commanding him to Offer up his Son, his only
Son Isaac, for a Burnt-Offering; concerning which Son, the Lord had thus
promised, In Isaac shall thy Seed be called, Romans 9. 7. yet Faithful Abraham
staggered not at the Promise of God, but did firmly believe, that he was able
to perform what he had promised; though in obedience to God, he did offer up
his Son. Hence it is said; By Faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up
Isaac: And he that had received the Promises, offered up his only begotten Son,
accounting that God was able to raise him up even from the dead: From whence
also he received him in a Figure, Heb. 11. 17, 20. And He is the same God
still, and is able to do for us exceeding abundantly, above all that we can
ask, or think, according to the Power that works in us, Ephesians. 3. 20, 21. as
St. Paul says, I know whom I have believed: and I am persuaded that he is able
to keep that which I have committed to him, against that day, 2 Timothy 1. 12.

He is not only able to give us the things which are good and needful for the
mortal Body, 2 Chronicles 25, 9. but also to raise up this body again, when it is
dead, and laid in the Grave, and turned to corruption. Why should it be thought
a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the Dead? Acts 26. 8.
Indeed, it might well be thought a thing incredible, and impossible, that any
mere Creature, should effect this great and wonderful work; But is any thing
impossible unto, or too hard for the Lord? Cannot he who at the first Created
all things of nothing, raise up this Body again when it is dissolved, and
turned to dust and rottenness, and reunite it to its proper Soul and Spirit?
yes, without all peradventure he can do it, and will do it, in due season. God
has both raised up the Lord Jesus, and will Raise up us also by his own Power,
1 Cor. 6. 14. with Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. 2 Cor. 1. 9, 10. Though Christ was
Crucified through weakness, yet he lives by the Power of God: For we also are
weak in him, But we shall live with him by the Power of God, 2 Cor. 13. 4. He
is able to change and transform these vile, dusty bodies, into excellent ones;
to make these bodies which are corruptible, weak, dishonorable, Natural
bodies; to become Spiritual, Glorious, Powerful, and Incorruptible bodies, 1
Cor. 15. 42, 44, 48, 49, 53, 54. He shall change our vile Body, says the
Apostle, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious Body, according to the
working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself, Phil. 3. 21.
And so he has power to deliver us from the In-being of sin, and from all our
spots and Faults; and will do so perfectly in the Resurrection from the dead,
Ephesians. 5. 25, 27. He is able to keep the Believers from falling, now in this day;
and hereafter, even in the resurrection of the just, To present them faultless
before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, Jude 24. 25. Yea in short,
He is able to save them to the uttermost, who do sincerely seek and serve him;
and to make them partakers gloriously of Eternal Life; as it is before spoken
to, and in some weak and imperfect measure opened and explained. And he has
given his Son, our Lord Jesus, Power to give unto them Eternal Life: he has
already given us (mankind) in his Son, Eternal Life: hence the Apostle John
says, He that believes not God, has made him a liar, because he believes
not the record that God gave of his Son. And this is the record that God has
given to us Eternal life: and this life is in his Son, 1 John 5. 10, 11. And
not only has he so done; but he has also empowered his Son to make them
partakers of this Eternal life, who hear his voice, and diligently and
constantly follow him; now in a first fruits by faith, and hereafter fully, in
the glorious enjoyment and fruition of it: As our Savior in his address to his
Father, signifies, saying; Thou have given him power over all flesh, that he
should give eternal life to as many, as thou have given him, John 17. 2. with
chap. 10. 27, 28.

Now this is a very powerful and forcible encouragement, to encourage and
strengthen us to expect the performance of the exceeding great and excellent
promises, which he has made unto Godliness; and so unto us, upon our sincerely
exercising our selves thereunto; and patiently continuing so to do; that he who
has promised, is a God of infinite and eternal power; and so able, to
accomplish whatever he has promised. If men make promises, and intend really
to perform them, yet there may be, and oftentimes is, a failure found with them
therein; because though their wills and purposes, be never so strong and firm,
yet their Hand and Power, is very short and weak: But it is not so with the
Lord our God; his Hand is not shortened at all, but Power does belong unto him,
as well as with him is Mercy. Psalm 62. 11, 12. In thine hand is there not Power
and Might, so that none is able to withstand thee? 2 Chronicles. 20. 6. He that has
made these Promises to Godliness (and unto them that sincerely exercise
themselves thereto, who walk before him, and are perfect) is, the Lord
Almighty, Genesis 17. 1, 8. 2 Cor. 6. 16, 18. with chap. 7. 1.

3. And he who has entailed the promise on Godliness, is also a God of
Righteousness and Truth, and who will therefore undoubttedly perform his good
word: he is abundant in Goodness and Truth, Exodus 34. 6. Thus when Moses says,
I will publish the Name of the Lord; he presently thus proclaims it, He is the
Rock, his work is perfect, for all his ways are Judgment: a God of truth, and
without iniquity, just and right is he, Deuteronomy 32. 3, 4. And he thus speaks unto
Israel, saying: Know therefore that the Lord thy God he is God, the faithful
God, that keeps Covenant and Mercy with them that love him, etc. Deuteronomy. 7. 9,
11. And thus, in due season, he evidenced himself to be, in accomplishing that
promise, which he made unto his ancient people, in bringing them into, and poss
ssing them of, the Typical rest, the land of Canaan: Hence it is said, The Lord
gave them rest round about, according to all that he swear unto our Fathers: --
there failed not ought of any good thing, which the Lord had spoken unto the
house of Israel; all came to pass, Josh. 21. 43, 45. and chap. 23. 14, 15. And
now he has most clearly and comfortably manifested his truth and faithfulness,
in sending his well-beloved Son into the World, that we might live through him;
and in not sparing his own Son, but delivering him up for us all; and in
lifting him up again from the gates of Death. This he promised from the
beginning of the World, long before the proper season (for the actual
accomplishment of it) came: But his promise did not fail for evermore: But when
the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made
under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, to redeem them that were
under the Law, Luke I. 69, 72. Gal. 4. 5. Hence the Apostle says, of David's
Seed has God, according to his promise, Raised unto Israel a Savior, JESUS.
And again he says, We declare unto you glad Tidings, how that the Promise,
which was made unto the Fathers, God has fulfilled the same unto us their
Children, in that he raised up Jesus again, etc. Act. 13. 23, 32, 33. And
therefore, without all doubt, he will faithfully do and perform whatsoever he
has promised. God is faithful, by whom ye were called to the Fellowship of his
Son Jesus Christ our Lord, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 8, 9. All men have not
Faith: Too too many of them do falsify their Word, and fail in Performing their
Promises and Engagements: But God is faithful, says the Apostle, who will
establish you, and keep you from evil, 1 These. 5. 23, 24. 2 These. 3. 2, 3. 1
Cor. 10. 13, 14. and from the consideration of the Fidelity of God, the Apostle
thus exhorts the believing Hebrews, saying, Let us hold fast the Profession of
our Faith without wavering: For he is faithful that Promised. And let us
consider one another, to provoke unto Love, and to good Works: not forsaking
the assembling of our selves together, etc. Heb. 10. 23, 25. Thus when the Lord
promised Abraham a Son in his old Age, by aged Sarah, who was as good as dead;
though she did somewhat doubt, through her weakness and infirmity, of God's
ability to perform this promise of his, as we noted before: yet she was verily
and firmly persuaded of his Truth and Faithfulness, as Abraham was of the
Greatness and Almightiness of his Power: and therefore it is said by the
Apostle; By faith Sarah her self received strength to conceive seed, and was
delivered of a child, when she was past the time of age; Because she judged him
faithful who had promised, Heb. 11. 11. And it is the same living, and
ever-living God, and who is steadfast for ever, (as, Dan. 6. 26.) who has
promised all useful and profitable things unto Godliness; and unto them that do
uprightly apply and exercise themselves thereto, for this present Transitory
life and state: and who has also promised an eternally, excellent, and blessed
state hereafter, unto them that Piously and Purely walk before him, and run
with patience to the end of their Christian race, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. And he is not
a man that he should lie; nor the Son of man, that he should repent: Has he
said, and shall he not do it? or has he spoken, and shall he not make it good?
Numb. 23. 19, 20. Hence the Apostle styles himself, A servant of God, and an
Apostle of Jesus Christ; -- In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie
promised, before the world began: or rather, as it is also in the Greek, before
the Secular, or Agey times, Tit. 1. 1, 2. O then! Let us so believingly and
seriously consider these three attributes of him, who lives for ever and ever,
whose promise Godliness has, both for this present life that now is, and for
that which is to come; that far more excellent and desirable one; namely, his
Mercifulness, Almightiness, and Faithfulness; that abstaining from, and denying
all ungodliness and worldly lusts, we may live soberly, righteously, and Godly,
in this present world: looking for the blessed hope, and the glorious appearing
of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; who gave himself for us, that
he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works. And so much as to that first consideration
fore-propounded.

2. Let us also carefully and diligently consider the promise it self, how it
has been ratified, established, and confirmed; and so it will evidently appear
to be a faithful saying, or word of promise, Romans 9. 9. And therefore it
deserves to be highly embraced, and heartily entertained by us all: so much the
Apostle gives us to understand in what he does immediately subjoyn hereto; to
wit, This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all Acceptance. And so he gives
the very same high Commendation of it, which he had given before of the first
branch of the mystery of Godliness: to wit, This is a faithful saying, and
worthy of all Acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners, etc. 1 Timothy 4. 8, 9. with chap. 1. 15. 2 Timothy 2. II. Tit. 3. 8. And
this promise will evidently and undoubtedly appear to be a true and faithful
saying; and therefore highly worthy to be believed, and embraced with all
cheerful and Honorable respect and acceptance, if we duly consider and weigh
the two following particulars: that is to say;

1. That this promise which Godliness has, is confirmed, and assured to us, by
the Oath of the unchangeable and faithful God; and therefore, without all
peradventure, it shall be performed unto all, that unfeignedly and constantly
exercise themselves to Piety and Holiness. Thus when the Lord declares the
Heritage of his upright and obedient servants, by his Prophet; he then says
concerning that Covenant made with them; For this is as the waters of Noah unto
me: for as I have sworn, that the waters of Noah shall no more go over the
earth; so have I sworn, that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee.
For the Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed: but my kindness
shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed,
says the Lord, that has mercy on thee, Isa. 54. 7, 9, 10, 17. And the Apostle
also, speaking of the Covenant made with Abraham, for himself, and for his
spiritual seed, even all such as are of his faith, and walk in the good steps
thereof, assures us, that it was confirmed by an Oath; that we might
confidently believe the firmness of it; and hopefully wait for, and expect the
performance of it: for says he, When God made promise to Abraham, because he
could swear by no greater, he swear by himself: saying; Surely in blessing I
will bless thee: -- for men verily swear by the greater, and an Oath of
confirmation is to them an end of all gainsaying. Wherefore, God willing more
abundantly to show unto the Heirs of Promise, the immutability of his Counsel,
interposed by an Oath, That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible
for God to lie, we might have a strong Consolation, who have fled for refuge to
lay hold on the hope set before us, Heb. 6. 12, 13, ^17, 20. with Genesis 22. 16,
18. As with respect to the New Covenant, and the promises therein contained, we
may say as the Psalmist does, The Lord has sworn that he will perform it, and
them, according to the Tenor thereof, and will not repent, Psalm. 110. 4. and
132. 11.

2. This New Covenant also, which is established upon better promises than the
first was, Heb. 8. 6. is ratified and made sure by the most precious blood of
Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot. Indeed, the first
Testament was confirmed and Dedicated with blood; For Moses took the blood of
Calves, and of Goats, with water and Hysop, and sprinkled the book, saying,
This is the blood of the Testament, which God has enjoined unto you, Exodus 24.
3, 8. with Heb. 9. 18, 20. But this better and far more excellent Covenant and
Promise, which is entailed on sincere Piety, is ratified and established by the
blood of the Son of God, who is the Mediator of it. Thus when our Lord Jesus
instituted his Supper, in the night in which he was betrayed; He took the Cup,
and gave it unto his Disciples, saying, Drink ye all of it: for this is my
Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many, for the Remission of Sins,
Matthew. 26. 27, 28. This Testament of exceeding great and precious Promises, is
confirmed by the Blood of himself, who is the Testator: For where a Testament
is, there must also of necessity be brought in the Death of the Testator. For a
Testament is of force after men are dead: otherwise it is of no strength at
all, while the Testator lives, Heb. 9. 16, 17.

Hence this Covenant is called, The New Testament in his Blood, Luke 22. 20. 1
Cor. 11. 25. And his Blood is said to be, The Blood of the New Testament, or
Covenant, Mark. 14. 24. Heb. 10. 29. and the Blood of the everlasting Covenant,
Heb. 13. 20. And our Lord Jesus, who has obtained, sealed, and ratified this
New Testament with his own Death, is raised again from the Dead, and is now
Alive, a(...)ives for evermore; and is the Mediator (...)is New Covenant, to
see to the faithful Execution and Performance of his own last Will and
Testament: As the Apostle says; And for this cause he is the Mediator of the
New Testament: That by means of Death, for the Redemption of the Transgressions
that were under the First Testament, They which are called (to wit, called
according to purpose, so as they unfeignedly obey the call) might receive the
Promise of the eternal Inheritance, Heb. 9. 14, 15. So that the Promise being
thus Confirmed, by the Oath of the ever-living, and eternally unchangeable God;
and by the Blood of the eternal and Immutable Son of God, (Heb. 13. 7, 8.)
appears, hereby to be a faithful and true saying; and therefore, as we have
said, is worthy of all hearty and honorable Acceptance and Entertainment from
us all.

To conclude all then in a few words, Let us all so carefully and seriously
mind and consider, the General Gainfulness of sincere Piety and Goodness, both
in this present State, which we are now in, and in that future and eternal
State, which we must hereafter enter upon; which is fully and abundantly
evidenced in this, that it has the Promise of the life that now is, and of
that which is to come:And that the Author and Maker of this Prom(...)s the
living God, the Incorruptible God, the most Merciful, most Powerful, and
Faithful God: And that this Promise is ascertained and confirmed by his most
solemn Oath, to show unto the Heirs of his Promise, the Immutability of his
Counsel; and that it is also Ratified and Established by the Precious Blood of
Jesus Christ, who is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 7,
8. And who ever lives to see to the performance of his Covenant and Promise,
Heb. 1. 10, 12. that we may resolvedly and constantly deny Impiety, and all
sinful and worldly lusts and affections, by the aid and assistance of the
Spirit of Grace; lest we come short of enjoying the Benefit and advantage, of
this excellent and most beneficial promise, as, Heb. 4. 1. And let us uprightly
and perseveringly follow after, and exercise our selves (not to the Form only,
or mainly, but) to the Power and Practice of real Godliness; that so we may
have an Interest in, and an enjoyment of, The Gain and Advantage of Godliness;
both now in this present Day, and to the Day of Eternity. O let us not, by
observing lying Vanities, which cannot save us from evil, nor satisfy us with
good, forsake our own Mercies. God has Inseparably joined together our Duty,
and our Interest; that we cannot Possibly have the Latter, unless we sincerely
perform the Former: nor can we heartily exercise our selves to the Former; but
we shall, without all doubt, be made Partakers of the Latter. What God
therefore has so joined together, let no man fondly imagine, or foolishly
endeavor to put asunder, As by annexing and assuring this general, and most
valuable advantage to Godliness; God does Intimate our backwardness, to
exercise our selves thereto, and our averseness therefrom: So in that he
proposes and promises such a Reward to Piety, He does plainly give us to
understand, that it is his gracious Mind and Will, that we should be Good and
Pious, that we may be truly Blessed and Happy. We must indeed take Christ's Yoke
upon us, and unseignedly undertake his service, if we will meet with, and find
Refreshing to our Souls: But that we may heartily and willingly so do, He does
assure us, that it is an easy, that it is a gainful one: and so draws us, to
take the Yoke upon us, with the Bands and Cords of Profit and Advantage, both
Earthly and Heavenly: And thus he did allure his people, in former times, to
the well-pleasing service of him, by assuring them, that it would conduce unto
their own Advantage and Interest. And now, says he by Moses, What does the
Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his
ways, and to love him; and to serve the Lord thy God, with all thine heart,
and with all thy soul: to keep the Commandments of the Lord, and his Statutes,
which I command thee this day for thy Good? But for what Good should they do
this? surely, for their present, and for their future good; for their earthly,
and for their heavenly advantage. And so much may be signified in what
immediately follows, with a note of attention perfixed thereto: namely, Behold
the Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens is the Lords thy God; the Earth also,
with all that therein is, Deuteronomy. 10. 12, 13, 14. O then! Let us Exercise our
selves unto Godliness -- For Godliness is profitable unto all things, having
promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is to come. This is a
Faithful saying, and worthy of all Acceptance.

THE END.
Books to be Sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside.
A Hundred select Sermons on several Texts, by Tho. Horton, D. D. Sermons on 4
select Psalms, viz. 4th. 42, 51, 63. by Tho. Horton, D. D. Mr. Baxters
Christian Directory. Sermons on the whole Epistle of Saint Paul to the
Collossians, by Mr. J. Daille, translated into English by F. S. with Dr. Tho.
Goodwins, and Dr. John Owens Epistles Recommendatory. An Exposition of Christ's
Temptation on Matthew. 4. and Peter's Sermon to Cornelius; and circumspect
walking, By Dr. Tho Tailor. A Practical Exposition on the 3d. Chapter of the
first Epistle of Saint Paul to the Corinthians, with the Godly man's choice, on
Psalm 4. v. 6, 7, 8. by Anthony Burgess. Dr. Donns 40 Sermons, being his 3
Volumes. Pareus Exposition on the Revelations. General Martyrologia, with the
Lives of 32 English Divines, by Sam. Clark. All four Published by Dr. Titus
Oats. A Narrative of the Horrid Popish Plot. -- A Narrative of Knox and Lane.
-- The Witch of Endor. -- Popes Warehouse.
Robert Jenneson Esquire; His Narrative. Dugdales Narrative. Mr. Tho. Dangerfields
of the Sham Presbyterian Plot. Smiths Account of the 14 Popish Malefactors in
Newgate. Animadversions on the 5 Jesuits Speeches. The Excommunicated Prince, a
Tragedy as it was acted by his Holinesses Servants, By Captain William Bedlow..
Protestant Conformist plea for moderation. A Conference between a Bensalian
Bishop, and an English Doctor concerning Church Government. A Caution to all
English Protestants. A Lenetive for the Clergy. Broughtons Works published by
Dr. Lightfoot.
Books 4to.
The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration, By George Swinnock.
M. A. An Antidote against Quakerism, by Stephen Scandret. An Exposition of the
five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful observations thereupon, by William
Greenhil. The Gospel Covenant opened, by Pet. Bulkley. Gods holy Mind, touching
matters Moral, which he uttered in ten Commandments: Also an Exposition on the
Lords Prayer, by Edward Elton, B. D. The fiery Jesuit, or an Historical
Collection of the rise, increase, doctrines and deeds of the Jesuits, exposed
to view for the sake of London. Horologiographia optica; Dyaling, universal and
particular, speculative and practical; together with a Description of the Court
of Arts, by a new Method, by Sylvanus Morgan. Regimen sanitatis salemi, or the
Regiment of Health, containing Directions and instructions for the guide and
government of man's life. A seasonable Apology for Religion, by Matthew Pool.
Separation no Schism, in answer to a Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor, by
J. S. The Practical Divinity of the Papist discovered, to be destructive to
true Religion, and men's Souls, by J. Clarkson. A Case of Conscience, viz.
whether it be lawful for any person to act contrary to the opinion of his own
Conscience, formed from arguments that to him appear very probable, though not
necessary or demonstrative, by Dr. Collings. The Creatures goodness as they
came out of Gods hand, and the good-mans mercy to the bruit-Creatures, in two
Sermons, by Tho. Hodges. B. D. Certain Considerations tending to promote Peace
and Unity among Protestants. Mediocria, or the most plain and natural
apprehensions which the Scripture offers, concerning the great Doctrines of the
Christian Religion: of Election, Redemption, the Covenant, the Law and Gospel,
and Perfection. Funeral Sermons, Mr. James Janeway, by Nath. Vincent. The Lady
Susanna Keate's, by Richard Kidder, M. A. Mr. Cautons, by Mr. Henry Hurst, and
Mr. Nath. Vincent. Mr. Sorrels, by Mr. Benj. Smith. Mr. Wadsworth, by Mr. R.
Bragg. Mr. Newcomens, by Mr. Fairson. Mr. Thomas Vincents, by Mr. Slater. Mr.
Corbets, by Mr. Richard Baxter. Mr. Bakers, by Mr. Nath. Vincent. Mr.
Marshalls, by Mr. Tomlins. Mr. Johnsons, by Mr. Loid. Mrs. Fishers, by Mr.
Scot. Dr. Whittakers, by Dr. Annesly. Mr. Wells, by Mr. Thomas Watson. Mr.
Stubs, by Mr. Watson. Mr. Stubs, by Mr Richard Baxter. Hodges Vanity of man as
mortal. Mrs. Lies, by Mr. Lamb. Virtuous Daughter by Brion. Sir Thomas Viners
by Dr. Spurslow. Mr. Perns, by Ainsworth. Work and Reward of a Christian, by R.
Raworth. Mr. Wests Funeral Sermon, by Mr. Cole. Mr. Webbs, by Mr. David Burges.
Baxters which is the true Church; Hodges Creatures goodness. Naked Truth.
Doolitles Protestants Answ. to a Popish Quest. Mr. Kidders Charity directed.
Scholars address against Pluralities. Dr. Crossmans Sermon. Humphrys peaceable
disquisitions. Hodges considerations to promote peace. An Endeavor for Peace;
among Protestants. A conference between a Papist and a Jew; and a Protestant
and a Jew. An Essay for the Education of Gentlewomen. A warning for Servants or
the Case of Margaret Clark. An Answer to Dr. Stilling fleets Sermon by the
peaceable design. A Discourse of Pluralities. A Discourse of Excommunication.
The middle way of Predetermination; Popery an Enemy to Truth by Mr. Sheldreck
Dr. Dumoulins conformity of Independent Government to the Ancient Primitive
Christians. Excommunication Excommunicated in a Dialogue between a Doctor of
both Laws. The Case of the Protestants in England under a Popish Prince. A
rebuke to Informers. A modest Inquiry into Dr. Stilling fleet Historical
mistakes. The State of Blessedness. An Answer to Dr. Stilling fleets Book. by
J. H. Liberty of Conscience in order to universal peace. The Lords voice crying
to England. Life of Herod the Great. A Manifesto, or an Account of the State,
and differences between the King of Denmark and Norway and the Duke of
Slesmick. Phelps Innocencies reward. Materials for Union. A sheet of Union.
Rosses Mestogogus Poaeticus. Phelps on the Revelations. Gilaspys Ark of the
Covenant. Present State of New England. Dr. Collings of Providence. Froysells
Sermons of Grace and Temptations. Yarringtons Englands Improvement, First part.
-- Idem second part. Meaning of the Revelation, by John Hayter. The
Morning-Lecture against Popery, or the principal errors of the Church of Rome
detected and confuted in a Morning-Lecture, preached by several Ministers of
the Gospel in or near London Four useful discourses: (1) The art of improving a
full and prosperious condition for the glory of God; being an appendix to the
art of Contentment in three Sermons, on Philip. 4. 12. (2) Christian
submission, on 1 Samuel 3. 18. Philip. 1. 21. (4) The Gospel of peace sent to the
sons of peace, in six Sermons, on Luke 10. 5, 6. by Jeremiah Buroughs. Dr.
Wilds Letter of Thanks and Poems. A new Copy-Book of all sorts of useful hands.
The new World; or new-reformed Church, by Doctor Homes. The Virtuous Daughter,
a Funeral Sermon, by Mr. Brian. The Miracle of Miracles, or Christ in our
Nature: by Dr. Rich. Sibbs. The unity and essence of the Catholic Church
visible, by Mr. Hudson. Brightman on Revelations, Canticles and Daniel. Canaans
Calamity. The intercourse of Divine Love between Christ and the Church, or the
particular Beleiving soul: in several Lectures on the whole second Chap. of
Cant. by John Collins, D. D.

Large 8vo.
The sure mercies of David by Nath. Heywood. Heaven or Hell here in a Good or
Bad Conscience, by Nath. Vincent. Closet-Prayer a Christians duty; all three by
O. Heywood. A practical discourse of Prayer; wherein is handled the nature and
duty of Prayer, by Tho. Cobbet. Of quenching the Spirit; the evil of it, in
respect both of its causes and effects, discovered; by Theophilus Poiwheile.
The sure way to Salvation; or a Treatise of the Saints mystical Union with
Christ; by Richard Stedman. M. A. Sober Singularity, by the same Author. Heaven
taken by Storm. by Tho. Watson. The Child's Delight; together with an English
Grammar. Reading and Spelling made easy; both by Tho. Lie. Aesops Fables, with
morals thereupon in English Verse. The Young-mans Instructor, and the Oldmans
remembrancer; being an Explanation of the Assemblies Catechism. Captives bound
in Chains, made free by Christ their Surety; both by Tho. Doolittle. Eighteen
Sermons preached upon several Texts of Scripture, by William Whitaker. The
Saints care for Church Communion; declared in sundry Sermons, preached at St
James Dukes-place, by Zech. Crofton. The life and death of Edmund Stanton D. D.
To which is added a Treatise of Christian-conference; and a Dialogue between a
Minister and a Stranger. Sin the Plague of plagues, or sinful sin the worst of
Evils; by Ralph Venning. M. A. Cases of Conscience practically resolved; by J.
Norman. The faithfulness of God considered and cleared in the great Events of
his Word; or a second part of the fulfilling of the Scripture. The immortality
of the Soul explained and proved by Scripture and Reason; to which is added
Faiths-triumph over the fears of death; by Tho. Wadsworth. A Treatise of the
incomparableness of God, in his Being, Attributes, Works, and Word; by George
Swinnock, M. A. A discourse of the original, etc of the Cossacks. The
generation of Seekers; or the right manner of the Saints addresses to the
throne of Grace, with an Exposition on the Lords-Prayer. The administration of
Cardinal Ximones. An Essay to facilitate the Education of Youth, by bringing
down the rudiments of Grammar to the sense of seeing which ought to be improved
by Syncrisis; by Mr. Lewis of Totenham. An Artificial Vestibulum; wherein the
sense of Janua Linguarum is contained, compiled into plain and short sentences
in English, for the great ease of Masters, and Expeditious progress of
Scholars, by M. Lewis. Speculum Sherlockianum, or a Locking glass, in which the
admirers of Mr. Sherlock, may behold the man, as to his Acuracy, Judgment,
Orthodoxy. A discourse of Sins of Omission; wherein is discovered their Nature,
Causes, and Cure; by George Swinnock. His Majesty's Propriety in the British
Seas vindicated. Quakerism no Christianity; or a through-Quaker no Christian,
proved by their Principles, and confirmed by Scripture; by J. Faldo.
Differences about Water Baptism no bar to Communion; by Jo. Bunian The
Dutch-dispensatory; showing the virtues, qualities and properties of Simples;
the virtue and use of Compounds; whereto is added the Complete Herbalist. Judge
Dodaridge's laws of Nobility and Peerage. Dinglys Spiritual Feast. Solitude
improved by Divine Meditation; by Matthew. Ranew. A Murderer punished and
pardoned, or Tho. Savage his life and death; with his Funeral sermon. Hurst
Revival Grace. Buryes Husbandmans Companion. -- help to holy walking; Hanmers
view of Antiquity, Nomenclaturas. Wases Grammar. Vincent of Conscience. Gouges
Principles of Christian Religion. -- Christian Direction. -- Word to Saints and
Sinners. -- Young man's guide. -- Christian Householder. Perrots Englands duty.
The Nonconformists vindicated. Wadsworths remains. Shepherdy Spiritualized.
Calamys Art of divine Meditation. Faldos Quakerism no Christianity. --
vindication of 21 Divines.
Small 8vo.
A defense against the fear of death; by Zach. Crofton. Gods Sovereignty
displayed, by William Gearing. The Godly man's Ark, or a City of Refuge in the
day of his distress, in five Sermons; with Mrs. Moors evidences for Heaven: by
Edmund Calamy. The Almost-Christian discovered, or the false-Professor tried
and cast, by M. Mead. The true bounds of Christian-freedom: or a discourse
showing the extent and restraints of Christian-liberty, by S. Bolton, D. D. The
sinfulness of Sin and fullness of Christ, in two Sermons; by Will. Bridge. A Plea
for the godly, or the Righteous man's Excellency. The holy Eucharist, or the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. A Treatise of self-denial. All three by Tho.
Watson. The life and death of Tho. Wilson of Maidstone in Kent. The Life and
Death of Dr. Samuel VVinter. A Covert from the Storm, or the fearful encouraged
in the day of Trouble. Worthy-walking pressed upon all that have heard the Call
of the Gospel. The Spirit of Prayer. All three by Nath. Vincent. The
inseparable union between Christ and a Believer, by Tho. Peck. A discourse of
Excuses, setting forth the variety and vanity of them, the sin and misery
brought in by them, by John Sheffield. Invisible reality, demonstrated in the
holy life and triumphant death of Mr. J. Janeway. The Saints encouragement to
diligence in Christ's service: both by Mr. James Janeway. A discourse concerning
the Education of Children. Convivium Caeleste; a plain and familiar discourse
concerning the Lords Supper; both by R. Kidder. The Saints perseverance
asserted in its Positive-ground against Mr. Ives, by Tho. Danson. A
Wedding-ring fit for the Finger; by Will. Secker. An Explanation of the
shorter-Catechism of the Assembly of Divines; by Tho. Lie. The life and death
of Tho. Hall. A Plea for the Non-Conformists, tending to vindicate them from
Schism, by a Doctor in Divinity. The flat opposition of Popery to Scripture; by
J. N. Chaplain to a Person of Honor. The Weavers Pocket book, or Weaving
spiritualized by J. C. D. D. Two disputations of Original sin; by Richard
Baxter. The History of Moderation. The welcome Communicant. The
little-peace-maker discovering foolish Pride, the Makebate. Philadelphia; or a
Treatise of Brotherly love; by Mr. Gearing. Reformation or Ruin, being certain
Sermons on Levit. 26. 23, 23. by Tho. Hotchkis. The Riches of Grace displayed;
to which is added the privilege of Passive obedience; and 52 proposals in
order to help on Heart-humiliation; by Will. Bagshaw. The parable of the great
Supper opened in 17 Sermons, by John Crump. A present for Teeming-women, by J.
Oliver. Nonconformity without Controversy; by Benj. Baxter. A Treatise of
Closet-Prayer; by Richard Mayo. The Religious Family; by Philip Lamb. A
discourse of the prodigious Abstinence of Martha Tailor. Index biblicus
multi-jugus, or a Table of the holy Scripture; wherein each of its Books,
Chapters and particular matters are distinguished and Epitomized. The day of
Grace, with the Conversion of a Sinner; by Nathanael Vincent. An easy and
useful Grammar for the learning of the French Tongue, by Mr. Gosthead,
Gentleman. The Miners Monitor, or advice to those that are employed about the
Mines. A Protestant Catechism for litte Children. A Scripture Catechism, by
Samuel Petto. A Catechism according to the Church of England. Nero Tragidea.
Cornelianum dolium. Wilsons Catechism. Elenchuus motuum nuperorum in Anglia.
Cackaines Poems. Croftons Foelix Scelus; or prospering-profaneness provoking
holy conference, by Zach. Crofton. Gramaticus Analyticus, by the same Author.
Alexanders advice to his Son. H. Excellency of Christ set forth. Phelps Caveat
against Drunkenness, -- Lamentation for the loss of a good man. -- Antidote
against desperation. Bury against Drunkenness. Wadsworths last warning to
Sinners. Dr. Wilkinsons Counsels and Comforts to afflicted Consciences.
Cappello and Bianco, a Romance. Calys Ghimpse of Eternity. Period of humane
Life. Defense of Period of humane Life, both written by the Author of the whole
Duty of man, etc. An Answer to the period of humane Life. Survey Quakerism.
Tho. Vincents Explication of the Assemblies Catechism. Vincent on Prayer. -- On
Conversion and day of Grace. -- Covert from storm. -- Worthy Walking. Parsons
Letter to VVem. Adams Catechism. Lambs New Years Gift. Perks way to mend the
World. Burys Antidote against the fear of Death. Mr. Corbets Kingdom, God among
men, with a Tract of Schism. Self-imployment in Secret, by John Corbet.
Solomon's Proverbs. Traughtons Popery, the grand Apostasy. Heywoods Christ
displayed. Bishop Reignolds Meditations. Mr. Edward Wests Legacy. Gerhard on
Death. Whole Duty of Youth. Welcome Communicant. Ames Marrow Divinity. Tho.
Vincent against the Quakers, being the sandy Foundation shaken. A warning to
young men, or Brinkhursts Narrative. Mr. Kidders help to smallest Children in
their understanding of the Church-Catechism. Thomas Vincents Himns. Bartlet on
the Sacrament. Greens needful preparatory to the Lords Supper. Dr. Collings of
ordinary matter of Prayer. Wilsons Child's Trade. Scandrets Catechism.
Sheffiields Catechism. Much in a little, or an abstract of Mr. Baxters plain
Scripture Proof for Infants Baptism. Some brief Directions for the improvement
of Infants Baptism.
Books Twelves.
Drexellius Repository. Meads Spiritual Wisdom. Nathanael Vincents little
Child's Catechism. All three by Tho. White. The duty of Parents toward their
Children. A little book for little Children. A method and instruction for the
Art of divine Meditation.
The considerations of Drexelius on Eternity. The shadow of the Tree of Life,
by M. M. The Psalms of David newly translated: more plain, smooth and agreeable
to the Text than any heretofore. Mr. Henry Lukin's Life of Faith.
FINIS.

