THE Antiquity, Legality, Right, Use, and Ancient Usage of FINES, Paid in
CHANCERY Upon the suing out, or obtaining some sorts of Original Writs
retornable into the Court of Common Pleas, AT WESTMINSTER.

BY FABIAN PHILIPPS, Esquire One of the FILACERS of the Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster.

Bracton, Lib. 1. Cap. 3. Longaevi temporis usus and Consuetudinis non est
vilis Authoritas.

Imprinted at London by Ja: Cottrel, for Henry Marsh, at the Princes Arms in
Chancery Lane. 1663.

To the Honorable, SIR Harbotle Grimston, BARONET, Master of the ROLLS.
SIR,
IF the holy Scriptures had not told us, that Rebellion was as the sin of
witchcraft, we have had cause enough to believe it; when in the evil days of
our last twenty years unhappy Wars and Confusions, we have seen so very much of
the folly and madness of that Soul, as well as Kingdom Destroying-sin, and
perceived all that traded therein to have met with Circes, and the fate of
Ulysses his Companions, and to have been almost transformed into Swine, who
muzling in the earth, and looking for some filth agreeable to their brutish
appetite and diet, can without any remorse or pity of better things, turn and
overturn, spoil and trample upon the fairest flowers; and are at the best no
otherwise to be esteemed then as men bewitched, or hugely misled by their own
Fancies, and arrived to a degree beyond Fanatiques, and as near unto madness as
the most outrageous Inhabitant of Bedlam: when as in the beginning of the long
and unhappy Parliament, in the year 1641. it was their common Outcry, that the
Laws of England were their Birthright, and they should be most miserable if
they did not enjoy them; could after that, without any just cause, take Arms to
defend and preserve them; and employ themselves, their Wives and Children in a
procession or Pageant, to dig and make Outworks and Fortifications about the
City of London, to secure their Laws and Liberties, when in effect they did but
keep them out; and after that, engage themselves, and as many as they could
enforce unto it by an illegal League and Covenant to maintain them, and yet
after the Kings Murder, by that rebellious contrivance, and the consequence of
it, and a Declaration made and published by those that called themselves a
Parliament, that those Laws were most suitable to the good and constitution of
the Nation, could in the Hirecano of their pretended Reformation of the same
Laws, agitated and driven on by a Mechanic party that did not understand them,
endeavor all they could to subvert and take away those very Laws, as they had
done the Lives of many, and the Estates of most of those of the Kings party;
who really and not hypocritically fought for them and their King, and
adventured all they had in it; and in that furious, ignorant, and self-seeking
humor of Reformation, could like nothing but what came out of their own
groundless imagitions: the Discipline and Orders of the Church were looked upon
as Antichristian; the Laws were pretended to be chargeable, dilatory and
Antichristian; the equitable sense of Laws and Scripture of their own framing
and picking out, were more (as they said) to be esteemed then the better or
learned Interpretations of them: the inward spirit and intentions of men were
to be the Rule of all our Justice and Actions: old Customs and Constitutions
were to pass away, and be laid by, and the new Inventions and Notions acted (as
they foolishly imagined) by a more Divine Light, were to take place, and rule
in the stead of them. In order whereunto, the common people were taught in all
their discourses to make that which before they had taken so much care of, to
be as a Byword or Reproach; the Law it self must be called a Cheat; and the
Lawyers, Constitut. Othoboni in Lindwood.
whom the Heathen could style Sacerdotes Justitiae, and our Christian
Forefathers Laudabile genus hominum qui in Campo Justiciae tanquam Athletae
militant, so hated and threatened, (except at such times as they had need of
them) as it was some danger to wear a Gown; and one of their mighty Mechanic
Commanders threatened to pull off their Gowns, and hang them up in
Westminster Hall amongst the Scotch Colors. The Judges were many times
threatened to be pulled out of the Courts, and from their Tribunals; the Innes
of Court, the Nurseries of the Law, designed to be turned into Brew-houses,
Tenements or Garrisons, and places for the quartering of their Rabbi Red-coat
soldiers. That which was in our Law Books of French or Latin, must be
translated, and the Writs, Process and Pleadings put into English; and they
that knew not right reason, the Original and Foundation of all Laws, nor the
way or method of it, would like no Laws further then their vulgar and shallow
understandings could come up unto it: and where they might or could reach it,
found it to be no loss unto themselves to pull down old Laws and Constitutions,
to the end they might be gainers by the invention of setting up new. Every
thing but themselves were Grievances: the Moral and Judicial Laws of Moses,
were commended and desired to be introduced by some, and those of Holland and
Scotland by others, that Parliament not long before as much adored by a
factious and rebellious part of the people, as the Rebel- Israelites did their
Golden Calf; when nothing but the Parliament was to be the standard of their
Religion and Conscience: now seemed unto them not to be well constituted, or in
an equal frame or Balance, but would be much better if the Venetian
Balloting-Box were cast in amongst them, the Military Officers and Commanders,
many of whom could not well read English, and worse write it, busying
themselves in reading Livy and Plutarch, and other Heathen Authors translated
into English; and not well observing the many mutinies, seditions, dangerous
and trouble some alterations and changes, which the people of Athens and Rome
had sadly experimented and dearly paid for, and how those levelling humors by
necessity as well as fate fell afterward into the better state and condition
of Monarchy, thought nothing so good and profitable for the good of the people
and of themselves (more especially) then to advance and increase the Changes of
Government, which was most commonly cast into a frame and design of their own
interests. Every common Soldier thought himself as wise and as fit to frame a
Commonwealth, as Lycurgus or Solon; and pretended that their business was not
only to fight, but to be Legislators and Superintendents of our Parliaments as
well as Laws, they were to bind and limit them (to their silly as well as
knavish) contrivances. The Lands of the Crown, Church and Loyal party, were to
be a part of their Land of Canaan: and they were to make what further progress
they could in the altering of Laws and Customs, hitherto, and through many
Ages, so very much approved: put down the old Offices and Employments, and
erect new; and the Citizens and men of Trade finding fault with all but the
multiplied Deceits and Knaveries of their own Trades; which with the
adulterating and enhauncing of all Manufactures and Commodities, have not only
lost and spoiled our Trade in foreign parts, but do by the connivence of their
Companies or Mysteries, and for want of a due execution of Laws, and
Regulations of Falsehoods, yearly cozen and cheat the people at home, as much as
amounts to some Millions of Sterling-money, or a great deal more then doubles
our Taxes, and not understanding the right reason, just ends and intentions of
our Laws, nor distinguishing betwixt the right use and abuse of Laws, of the
which only the Cozening part of the people are guilty, neither contented to
have gained so much as they had done by the Law and its residence at London,
could not be satisfied unless they could pull it all in pieces, and make a
Merchandise of it; and believed a Citizen in a Committee by the study and help
of ^ Diurnals, being the Tinder to the greatest of all Rebellions, to be as
grand a Statesman as the late Lord Burleigh, or as if he had been bound
Apprentice to Solomon, and served out his time in the compiling of his
Proverbs: and their multiplying costly Orders, at 6 s. and 8 d. or ten
shillings a piece for a few lines, to be as great a blessing and refreshing to
the people, as the land of Promise was to those that had endured a forty years
tedious journey through the wilderness; and when as too many of themselves were,
and are by their tricks of Trade, the grand and superlative grievances of the
Kingdom, could at the same time raise their false and groundless clamours and
scandals against the King, the Church, and the Laws; because he would not quit
his Regalities, and suffer a rebellious and prevailing part of the people to
enslave the residue: and our Religion and Laws did forbid it. In the midst of
which Frenzies, whilst the Tradesmen did drive on the soldiers, many of whom
had been their Run-a-gate or Cast-off Apprentices; and the soldiers were driven
on and encouraged by some Lecturers, and men of extempore Nonsense rather then
Divinity; and the Devil leading them with his new lights, and false expositions
of Scripture, and a gaining ungodly part of the people were busy in plundering
and oppressing the loyal, honest, small and remaining part of them, and used
our excellent Laws and Customs as the Bactrians are said to do by their
Parents when they are sick or aged, and set their Canes Sepulchrales, dogs kept
on purpose to tear and devour them: it would have been a wonder how any of the
most refined Right Reason or Constitutions of our Laws, could rest in quiet,
when the Graves of some of our British and Saxon Kings were in a most
unchristian and barbarous manner opened and disturbed, and their dust and bones
cast into the Air and Highways, and the Book of God it self suffered a kind
of Martyrdom, in their suspecting the Original, and covering the sense and
meaning thereof with ridiculous Notions, and ignorant Interpretations.

Or that a very innocent and legal part of the Kings Revenue so well employed
in the support and administration of Justice, should escape a disturbance: and
therefore the Fines which were usually, and through many past Centuries and
Ages, paid in Chancery upon all Original Writs in personal Actions, wherein the
debt or damages demanded exceeded forty pounds, must have its share in the
suffering under those grand and continued persecutions of Truth, Loyaly and
Right Reason, and be forbidden by an Act of a Factious part of the people,
supposing themselves to be the Commons of England, assembled in Parliament, and
sacrificed but to the pretended Liberties of the people, to the intent to leave
them as little as they could of their Liberties in greater matters: which being
with other of our good Laws and Customs, worried and cried down by the causless
outcries and clamors of those that better understood their own evil purposes
and designs in it, then the Original institution, benefit, and right use of
them, could not rise again, or be revived, until that happy restoration of our
King, Religion, Laws and Liberties: nor then neither without the Cicatrices and
skars of the wounds under which they formerly languished; and as the
imagination being once hurt is seldom ever after free from those
melancholicque impressions which it once harbored; so did those of a necessity
of reforming our Laws, or of supposed evils or grievances in them, beget an ill
opinion in the minds of the people, where yet it sticks so much, as some
well-meaning and good men are not so willing as they should be to abandon the
causless suspicions and prejudices which they had entertained of them: and
those illusions, and inconsiderately-received impressions, have as yet kept up
in too many the humor of endeavoring to overthrow those and many other of our
good Laws and Constitutions; which if Understanding or Knowledge may be the
Judges or Touchstone of them, will appear to deserve a better usage.

The more then ordinary misapprehension whereof, by those that build upon no
better a foundation then the ignorance of its Legal, Original and Right Use,
has summoned my Duty to our Sovereign and his Laws to hinder what I may the
unjust Censures and ill-advisedness of some people, who are as ready to cast
away their own good, as those who to avoid a little cold which their delicacy
and a surfeit upon peace and plenty cannot persuade them to endure, can think
it to be no small part of prudence to tear up and burn the planks of the Ship
wherein they are sailing at Sea, and far from the Shore, and run the inevitable
hazard of perishing by the fury of a cooler Element; and that I might satisfy
such as mislike the payment of Fines in Chancery upon some Original Writs, and
that it has for many Ages past been a most Legal and useful part of the
Crown-Revenue, without any the least of grievance to the people, or our so
often reiterated Magna Charta, or any other our Laws or Liberties; and show
them that the usefulness and Legality of it, is not taken away, or diminished,
because a part of it is paid, or goes to the support of the Lord Chancellor
or Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England for the time being, in that great,
and as eminent as careful, place of Administration of Justice, in granting
Writs Remedial, or abating by moderation and equity the rigor and justice of
the Laws, many times too unconscionably made use of, or put in execution by the
people, one upon the other, who are to be enforced and kept from being
over-severe, or taking unjust advantages one upon another, which has taught
the most of Nations to look upon that high and superlative Officer of State as
greatly necessary; and to give him allowances becoming so great and honorable
a charge and employment: insomuch as the very thrifty and prudent Commonwealth
of Venice, well understanding the use and dignity of that great Officer in most
of the Kingdoms and Nations of Europe, and the necessity of his honorable
support, do think it requisite to allow their gran Cancelliero a great Revenue
out of the Public stock.

And that it cannot be a grievance that the Master of the Rolls, and Cursistors
in Chancery, are allowed some part of that small part of the Kings Revenue for
their support and encouragement, which would be more chargeable to the people,
and be more unequal, and not consist so well with the Rules of Justice, if it
should be raised by any other way, or contrivancce, to give them a recompense
proportioned to their cares and labors.

Which my Endeavors, I have presumed to offer unto your view; not that I can
believe that your known integrity, sincerity and care of Justice in that
honorable Office and Dignity wherein his Majesty has worthily placed you, can
by any Bias of Self-interest lead you to a better liking or approbation of
these my Labors in the vindication of a Legal duty which so many are ready to
throw stones at; and do dislike it not because it is not a friend to Caesar,
but because it is. But that I can be sure to be well-weighed in the Balance of
Judgment by you who in the times of our unhappy Wars and turmoils of the Pen
and Sword, when the Seas roared and swelled, the Winds and Waves cuft each
other, and Mountains and short breaking Seas did only busy themselves to run
over one another, would not like the representation of our old Britannia, sit
safely upon the rocks, and contemplate the fury of the Seas, but would with
your Boat adventure to launch into the Deep, and help to rescue as well as you
could the Ship of the Commonwealth, which by the inconstancy of Winds and
Weather, and the rage of many Waters, had lost her Anchors, Rudder, Masts, and
Cables, and was ready to dash upon the next Rock she met with, or founder or
sink into the bottom of an unmerciful heap of Waters: and when the Law was in
Extremis, and at the last gasp, did like the undespairing Roman that bought a
field, when Hannibal being at the Gates with a conquering and prevailing Army,
had put Rome into more then an ordinary fit of an Ague, publish those excellent
Reports of your learned Father-in-law Justice-Croke, to tell as well as
instruct the Students of our Laws, that our Laws would notwithstanding like the
triumphant Laurel and peaceful Palm be green again, and ever flourishing, and
did together with some other good Patriots and well-wishers to your King and
Country, adventure your Estate, and not without some hazards and dangers, did
by all the Rocks, Shelves, and Quicksands, more perilous then those of Goodwin,
over the Scilla of a guilty party on the one hand, and by the Charibdis of a
prevailing interested party of the other hand: and of as many more difficulties
as summed up all together, made a Miracle, help to bring into the Port or Haven
that Weather-beaten and distressed Ship, fraught with the unvaluable Riches of
the hopes of England, and Restorer of our Peace and Plenty; who hath' built up
and repaired our Jerusalem, and brought our Religion, Laws and Liberties from
its captivity, and the waters of Babylon: in contemplation whereof, his Majesty
well understanding how much it would conduce to the good and welfare of himself
and his people, did entrust you with the keeping of his Records, being the
Evidences of the people, as they were called in an Act of Parliament in 43 E.
3. together with those which have been since added thereunto, and do now remain
in the Tower of London, and in the High Court of Chancery; and with the
dispensing of Equity and Conscience in Causes accustomed to come before you: in
which great Office and Employments, and care for the common good, that you may
long continue; is; as it ought to be, the hearty well-wishes and desires of all
that know you: Amongst whom you cannot err, if you shall please to number.

Your most humble Servant, FABIAN PHILIPPS.

THE Antiquity, Legality, Right, Use, and ancient Usage of FINES, To be paid in
Chancery upon the suing out, or obtaining some sorts of Original Writs
retornable into the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster.
THe payment of Fines upon Original Writs in England, were anciently and
originally; not as any exaction, purchase or money given to defile or betray
Justice, but as Retributions or Oblations to the Prince or supreme Magistrate
for his grace and favor in granting Writs Remedial, and as some recompense of
his charges and care in causing Justice to be done to all that have need, or
should seek for it.

And some or suchlike payments to the Magistrates or Ministers of Justice,
were in use more then two thousand years ago amongst the Grecians, Sigonius
lib. 3. de Repub. Athen. 525, 530.
the grand Pretenders to Morality and Justice, that greatest of the Virtues,
where besides a certain sum of money deposited by the Plaintiff for the making
good of his Action or Complaint: he against whom Judgment was given did pay a
Fine as a Vectigal Temerarie litigantis. Rous Archaeologia Attica 119, 135, and
136.


And when Judges were appointed for the hearing of a Cause, which amongst the
Athenians were in many Civil Causes, but as Arbitri or Arbitrators, constituted
by more supreme Judges or Magistrates, they were to meet at the place for them
ordained, there to expect both parties until the evening: at which time if
neither or but one of the parties appeared, it was in their power to fine the
party neglecting according to Law. And at the time they entered the Suit, and
wrote the Accusation with the Fine, which was required for Damages, the Judges
received as a Fee from the Plaintiff one Dram: which according to the Attick
valuation, was in the lowest account seven pence halfpenny; and the Aeginean,
twelve pence halfpenny.

And are nothing like either a burden or oppression, when it shall be, as it
ought to be, considered, that amongst the Romans who imitated them, Rosinus de
Antiquitat. Romans
and were so exact and curious in their Justice, as they would not a great
while permit their Magistrates, Praetors, or Lord Chief-Justices to take their
wives with them into their Provinces, Hottoman in part Juris de Actionibus.
Ne feminae in avaritiam suapte natura propensae potentiae subnixae provinciam
expilarent. And that the Plaintiff could not vetustissimo jure, Sigonius lib.
1. de Judiciis ca. 21. Varro de lingua Latina. Bodin de Repub. lib. 6.
by a most ancient Law or Usage go to Law, as Varro tells us; nor the Defendant
be permitted to make his defense without an equal or certain sum of money
deposited both by the Plaintiff and the Defendant; which the Sponsiones,
Sacramenta, and Stipulationes, amongst the ancient Romans do testify, and that
of the moneys deposited as well by the Defendants as the Plaintiffs. Qui
Judicio vicerat suum Sacramentum, id est, pecunia interpositum auferebat, victi
ad aerarium redibat. But that being found too troublesome, was afterward
reduced only unto the Plaintiffs depositing of the tenth part of the money,
demanded by undertaking that the Defendant should have it if the Plaintiff did
not make good his Action.

Which Justinian at the time of his compiling the Civil Laws, Leg. ult. Antiq.
Cod. Novel. 112
finding almost grown out of use, and thinking it fit to abolish, did
afterward see cause enough to restore and set up again.

And it did come to be so usual and customary, Math. de Afflictis in 4 cap.
praeterea Sect. and de prohibit. feud. alien. per Frederic. n. 6. and
Frantzkius de Laudemiis.
as there were Gratuitae Oblationes for remedies in matters of Right and
Justice, or for lawful favors, and they were sometimes, and not unfrequently
called, Pennam Auream quod tantum habeat Dominus de Assensu and subscriptione
quod posset ^ieri una Penna Aurea, were frequently offered and paid.

And the Primiscrinius, d. l. ^i. C. de princip. again. and Pancirollus Comment.
in noticiam utriusque Imperii*.
or Lord Chancellor, or Princeps Praetorii omnium sportularum quae a
litigantibus solvebantur particeps erat, and majus stipendium quam ceteri
Officii summates perciptebat.

Which necessity or custom of paying Fines for Suits or Controversies, was so
well liked by the Goths, and that inundation of Northern Nations which in the
unweildiness of the Roman Empire and declension of it, had overrun a great part
of its European Territories, as though they hated the Civil Law, prohibited its
use, and did all they could to destroy and burn the Books thereof, it obtained
amongst them as good an entertainment as it had formerly in the Civil Law, by
an allowwance of that manner of depositing of the Decimam partem litis.
Notwithstanding which, they did also after Judgment given exigere, and
carefully collect their Fredas or penalties imposed upon the Vanquished by the
Judges; LL. Salick and Alman.
as the Salique and Alman Laws and Customs do frequently evidence.

From whence it came to be in use amongst the old Franks, (now metamorphosed
into the French) a people once esteemed to be as free as their name imported,
and taken to be the Custodes Libertatis of that part of Germany; there being
then and for many Ages after, no other expensae litis, or charges given to him
that prevailed in Law, but the tenth part of the money so deposited, until that
Charles the fourth King of France, Bignonius in Marcul^i Formulas 496.
who lived in the latter end of the reign of our King Edward 2. made a Law or
Decree Ut victus victori in expensis teneretur, That the party condemned should
pay the charges of the other party; yet so notwithstanding, as the tenth part
continued to be paid to the Exchequer, Sportularum and Judicii nomine, or as
Mercedes Judicantium, for the rewards and fees of the Judges, and their
Maintenance.

In Hungary, In legibus Hungariae Dec^er. Mathie Regis anno 1486. Artic. 76.
being an elective Kingdom, where the people kept a continual guard upon their
Liberties in the Minori Cancellariae Regis Taxa, they did not think it in anno
1486. to be a grievance to pay for certain Writs or Letters a certain rate per
cent. and for many other, Juxta quantitatem possessionis seu rei obtentae
habita concordia inter Causantes and Protonotarium.

And was in other Countries and Kingdoms by a custom of paying moderate Fees
in Chancery upon the obtaining Writs or Process Remedial from the Prince or
supreme Magistrate, so allowable, as in that great Dominion of Burgundy, and
its large extent of Provinces, in anno Domini 1383. which was in the Reign of
our King Richard the 2. the Fees or Rates of the Chancery were set and
ordained: Consuetudines Burgundiae, lib. de Gabels, 1787.
Pour la lettre (a Writ being no other then a short Letter or Rescript) du
petit seel pour le droit de Monseigneur, Six Deniers, pour le droit du
Tabellion, 3 Deniers* and le coadjuteur, 11 Den. litera 3 Francorum usque ad 13
exclusive pro duobus Juribus 2 solidos sex den. Turon. de quibus Dominus Dux
capit 17. Denarios and Tabellio reliquum coadjutor 20. Denarios and sic in
totum duos solidos cum denario litera 120 Francorum, (being but seven pound
English) 15 Solidos, 5 Den. Turon. debet de quibus Dominus Dux capit 10 solid.
quinque Den. Turon. pro Registro Tabellio capit reliquum and pro coadjutore 55
Den. in litera retentionis bestiarum, (like our Writs of Recordari to remove
Plaints upon Distresses) non computatur fructus neque Domus, etc.

Which the Princes of the German Empire, (a people supposing themselves to be
very free) in a Diet under their Emperor Sigismond, in ann. 1425. which was in
the Reign of our King Henry the 6. did hold to be so legal and reasonable, as
they ordained, That in Cancellaria redemptiones literarum Judiciarum and
Conservatarum tenetur Antiqua consuetudo ejusdem Cancellariae; and that for
Fees of Writs in Chancery, pro literis generalibus, 24 Denarii should be paid,
etc.

And in a Diet holden in anno 1546. and 1548. which wa^ in the beginning of the
Reign of our King Edward the sixth, the Princes of Germany did ordain and limit
the Taxes Cancellariae, viz. amongst many other Rates, Goldastus constitutiones
Imperiales, 264. tit. 33. and 447. tit. 25.
pro simplici citatione unus Florenus and quarta pars Floreni. And when an
Inhibition is inserted, duo Floreni and duo pars Floreni, etc. Atqui tamen cum
aequum sit Cancellariae ob laborem and operam in qualibet causa habere rationem
and aequam mercedem accipiat victores causarum quibus expensae adjudicantur in
omnibus causis in quibus nullae sententiarum literae, (which before that time
usually paid great Fees; and being accounted unnecessary, were left arbitrio
partis whether he would sue them out or no) sumuntur teneantur se cum
administratore laborum and operum ergo ad ipsius taxationem (quam quovis
tempore juxta magnitudinem and qualitatem, adeoque conditionem causae ac
partium mediocri and tolerabili modo faciat) priusquam expensae ad taxandum
producantur, aut Executoriales Cancellariae partibus concedantur.
Notwithstanding that there is besides a collecta Provincialis, Besoldus de
Aerario publico Quest. 5. Simon de Praetis, lib. 3.
quae Landsteur vocatur, quae non nude in signum subjectionis, and vi absolutae
superioritatis, sed pro fructibus and emolumentis Jurisdictionis; item procuris
and laboribus, nec non ob recompensationem Expensarum quas Domini facere and
pati debent pro pace and quiet tenenda inter subditos, pro sua dignitate
servanda, pro salariis Officialium ad justitiam administranda exigitur. Which
Oblata' s or Pledges beforehand toward the satisfaction of Costs, and the Fine
pro falso Clamore, were in France by a Law or Edict of Charles the ninth made
to be vectigal Judiciarum ad cohibendam litigatorum hominum indomitam and
effraenatam licentiam, Bodin de Repub. lib. 6.
Quo vix ullum (says Bodin) afflictis aerarii opibus utilius and Galliae
Imperio litium innumerabili multitudine oppressos splendidius cogitari poterat:
a kind of Revenue out of the Law, to lessen or take away those great
multitudes of Lawsuits with which France then abounded; which brought a great
supply to the public Treasury, and produced the effect intended.

And our Reforming Brothers of Scotland have found so little fault with those
or the like Customs, as the Lords of Secret Council and Session (as they there
are called) did no longer ago then in anno 1606, 23 Pa^l. Jacobi, anno 1621.
in the Reign of King James the sixth, by his Commission limit and set down the
Prices or Fees to the Director of the Chancery, (which varied according to the
qualities of the persons, and values of the matters or things, as twenty
shillings Scots money for a second or third Precept; and for a Summons of
Error past the quarter Seal, four pounds Scottish money; and to the Keepers of
the Signet ten shillings Scots money for a Summons: which were ratified by Act
of Parliament in that Kingdom, in anno Dom. 1621. And do at this day keep their
Chancery, and the Fees and Profits thereof, so high, as for a Defendants
entering into a Recognizance or Obligation in a Suit depending before the Lords
of Session, or Court of Justice so called, which with us without passing the
great Seal, would not have cost twenty shillings; being to pass the Seals in
their Chancery, no less then forty pounds Sterling is demanded for the
incident charges thereof.

Long before which, LL. lnae 63. LL Edwardi Regis, 4 Edgari Regis 2 Canuti 12.
Edwardi Confessoris. Gulielmi Conquestoris, LL. H. 1. cap. 35 and 53.
and many of those or the like Customs in other Nations, the payment of Fines
in England upon Original Writs issuing out of the Chancery, did by imitation of
the Greeks and Romans, or the light and law of Nature, and the same or a like
reason, very early come unto us. As may be perceived by that Law of King Ina,
in anno 720. when the Defendant did pignora deponere ante litem aestimatam. And
by the Wytas, Overseunesses, and emendationes pacis, paid to the King in the
time of our Saxon Ancestors, and King Henry the 1. and the Sachas, which were
in that nature paid in those days to the Lords of Manors, upon Suits or
Actions in their petty Courts.

And it appears by the Fine-Rolls in the Reigns of King John, H. 3. E. 1. E. 2.
and until 25 E. 3. that Fines were paid upon very many, if not all manner of
Writs Original issuing out of the Chancery, and even upon Actions of Trespass:
and being since 25 E. 3. by the grace and favor of the Chancery and
Chancellors (notwithstanding diverse Petitions in Parliament in that Kings
Reign, to some of which he had given negative Answers, and to others, referred
them to the Chancellor to deal favorably with them therein) reduced to that
which they now are, viz. where the debt or damage demanded and expressed does
exceed the sum of forty pounds, there is only paid six shillings and eight
pence, from thence to one hundred marks, and thence to one hundred pounds ten
shillings; and so proportionably, according to that rate, as the sum of money
demanded and expressed shall exceed the sum of one hundred pounds.

Which probably might be so limited or restrained, by occasion of a petition of
the Commons in Parliament in the 25 year of the Reign of King E. 3. where they
did pray, That les graces de la Chancellarie pour briefs avoir ne sont desormes
si dures nesi Estreites come ore ont estre de novel quar home en prent ore en
la Chauncellerie Fins de chescun manner de briefs and ceux Fins serront paier
maintenant en le Haneper que de ceo en arere ne estoit fait quel chose est si
grant damage au peuple que gentz ne poient leur droit poursuier par reasone de
le grant charge susdite and en gran^ ^rrerissement de profit le Roy. To. Parl.
25 E. 3. m* 29.
To which the King answered, Il plest au Roy que le Chaunceller soit si
gracious come il purra bonement sur le grant des briefs considerant l'estat des
persons quiles pourchasent.

And may with probability and warrant enough be well conjectured to have been,
if not as those ancient Deposita's which the Romans and the Civil Laws might
long before have introduced; or as the customs in the Empire, or large walk or
extent of the Civil or Caesarean Law, have brought into a well-allowed Praxis;
yet as Honoraria's or Oblata's, Retributions or Free-will-offerings of the
people for favors received.

Of which some of the Fine-rolls of King John's time do bear that Title. Fines
6. Johannis 10.


Where it appears that Abbas de Burgo dat. Domino Regi unum Palfridum pro
habendo brevi de nova disseisina.

Johannes le Tanner dat. dimid. marcam pro habendo Pone coram Justic. domini
Regis apud Westemonasterium.

Magister Honorius Archidiaconus Richemund dat. unum Palfridum pro capiendo
quosdam Excommunicatos.

And before the custom of giving or assessing Costs, either to Plaintiffs or
Defendants, the Plaintiff could not, as appears by the form of the Original
Writs mentioned by Glanvil, Lord Chief Justice of England, when he wrote his
Book de Consuetudinibus Angliae, in the Reign of King Henry the second,
prosecute his Action upon an Original Writ: which was then, for ought appears
to the contrary, long before used and accustomed, nor have any thing done by
the Sheriff to whom it was directed, or any process out of the Court of Common
Pleas, where it was made retornable, before he had put in to the Sheriff two
real Sureties or Pledges de clamore suo prosequend. which for some Ages after
continuing, it was in 36 Edward the third, 3^ E. 3. ca. 3.
ordained by Act of Parliament, That Costs should be taken before the Justices
in the presence of the Pledges, and that the Pledges know the sum of their Fine
before their departing. But it being afterward found to be an obstruction of
Justice, and a denial or delay of it where poor men, or of low and mean
condition were not able, or could not without great trouble or inconveniences
beforehand procure Sureties in their Suits, or seeking for Justice, especially
against rich or potent Adversaries, (although the Judges did by discretion of
Court not seldom, as the Records do witness, propter paupertatem, dispense
with the putting in of Sureties to prosecute) it did by reason of a more
rational or speedy way and course of taxing or assessing Costs, and putting it
in the same execution for the principal debt or cause of Action, grow into a
desuetude, and a mere formality of retorning Pledges or Sureties for the
payment of the Costs to the party vanquishing, and the Fines which were before
carefully collected for the King, and together with the Misericordia's, which
upon non Prosequendo's, and upon every Judgment, are now only entered with a
Misericordia in the Margent, and made a considerable Revenue to the King, (as
by the Estreat-Rolls of the Iters or Circuits in the Reign of King Edward the
first, may appear) being not now imposed, the feigned and usual names of John
Do and Richard Roo, to avoid alterations in the Formula's or Proceedings of
the Law, and the evil consequences which do often happen by Innovations, do
only yet remain, to tell us the former reason and design of the Law therein.

Which payments of Fines upon the suing out of Original Writs in debt, for sums
of money for which Fines are to be paid according to the usage and course of
Chancery, may be as warrantable as that which is not to this day complained of,
or denied upon Writs of Formedon, and other real Actions, but willingly paid in
to the Hanaper in Chancery; or that profit which heretofore came to the King
upon Writs of Assize of Novel disseisin, where the Sheriffs did before the
Statute of Westminst. 2. take an Ox of the Disseisee, Westminster. 2. cap. 25.
or of him which purchased an Assize: and were by that Statute commanded that
they should not upon Writs of Assize (which were then the usual remedies in
many real Actions, and sometimes in Trespass) from thenceforth take an Ox of
the Disseisee, but of the Disseisor only, nor receive any Ox but of five
shillings price or value. Or the half Mark usually paid by the Tenant (or
Defendant) upon the Mise joined in a Writ of Right, that the grand Assize might
enquire of the time that the Demandant alleged he was seized of the Lands in
question: for it seems, Littleton, tit, Releases*
says Littleton, who was a Judge, and wrote his Book after the fourteenth year
of the Reign of King Edward the fourth, that the grand Assize ought otherwise
to be charged only to enquire of the mere Right, and not of the Possession,
etc.

And was no selling and bargaining for Justice, as some have groundlesly
supposed, and may rectify their errors by a due consideration that for our
Magna Charta it self, which was confirmed in the ninth year of the Reign of
King H. 3. and wherein nulli vendemus Justitiam is provided and ordained, the
people of England did give to the King the fifteenth part of all their
Movables: that in the levying of Fines for common assurance, there is and has
been anciently a Dat. Domino Regi, money given or paid to the King pro licentia
concordandi, in the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster: that for private Acts
of Parliament at this day as well as heretofore, Fees to the Speaker of the
House of Commons, and the Clerks thereof, are usually paid without any sale of
Justice, or contradiction supposed of that branch of Magna Charta: that in the
Statute of 18 E. 3. and the Oath thereupon given to the Judges, that they shall
take no gift or reward, nor any Fee of any person, there is an exception,
unless it be meat, drink, or of small value.

For by the same reason that Fines upon some Original Writs, (for they are but
upon some few) are supposed to be a selling of Justice, the Cursistors Fees
ordained by the Statute of Westminster the second, in anno 13. E. 1. to be but
a penny for every Writ, which the price of victuals and way of livelihood
(which is now a great deal more then formerly) considered, amounts unto as much
as ten pence for every Writ; and will not now buy as it would do then, the
sixtieth part of an Ox, which was then valued but at five shillings: and the
Fees of the Virgers, and the Chyrographer in the Court of Common Pleas, and all
those many other Fees ordained by Act of Parliament, would be (as they are not)
a selling of Justice, and a breach of Magna Charta, and unwarrantable.

And howsoever those due and warrantable Fees which are paid to Clerks and
Officers of Courts, and the Fines which are paid upon Original Writs, (excusing
greater Fees to the Cursistors, who could not otherwise be contented with a
pitiful Fee of six pence for the writing of every Original Writ) cannot bear
any proportion or resemblance of a Bribe, or of the Kings or any of his Judges
selling of Justice: and if it did (as it cannot) being always paid by the
Plaintiff, must then conclude that all Plaintiffs must of necessity never or
seldom fail of their designs or recovery; which daily experience manifestly
contradicts, nor can possibly be so understood, whenas in every Action the
Defendants do pay Fees as well as the Plaintiffs.

Neither can it be any breach of Magna Charta, or injury done to the clause
therein of nulli vendemus Justiciam; when as the wisdom of former as well as of
later Parliaments did always foresee and allow of a necessity of something to
be paid to the Judges, Officials or Ministers of Justice in the obtaining or
expediting of it, for a provision and maintenance to support and encourage them
in giving a dispatch to the people who came for remedies to the Courts of
Justice, or the Chancery.

And the Statute of Westminster the second, which was not long after the making
of Magna Charta, intended certainly just recompenses to the Clerks and
Officers, when it ordered them to use so great a diligence and care in the
dispatch of justice to all that came for it, as ne deficiat Justicia
conquerentibus concordent Clerici, etc. all good ways and means were so to be
taken by framing and forming of Writs according to every man's particular case,
ut nullus recedat a Cancellaria sine remedio.

For which the King was at charges to the Officers and Clerks of the Chancery
for Robes and Liveries to be yearly given them; Claus. 24. E. 3.
and the Keepers of the Seal took care for their Diet, and other conveniences,
Rot. Pat. 7 E. 3.
as may appear by the usage and course of that Court, in the Reign of King E.
3. when the King conceived himself to be so much concerned in it, as Writs were
frequently sent to the Sheriffs and Bailiffs, tam infra libertates quam extra,
to be aiding and assisting to the Pourveyors for the Chancery, in diversis
providenciis, or Pourveyances, de Pane, vino, Cervisia, Carnibus, puletria and
aliis victualibus feno avenis litteris and cariagiis ad opus ipsius
Cancellarii, (the Bishop of Winchester being then Chancellor) pro denariis suis
solvend. when as also the profit arising by the Fines in those times, and long
after, were collected and accounted for in the Exchequer.

And that or the like maintenance or support is again to be given to them, or
the Lord Chancello^ for them, if the King should not be pleased to allow the
profits arising by his Fines upon Original Writs in personal Actions to the
Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper, and the Master of the Rolls, for the support of
those high and honorable Offices and Places which they hold, and the
Cursistors for their better encouragement in the service of the King and his
people in Chancery in their several Orbs and employments; or otherwise the
people who will not do anything themselves without pay, or sell their victuals
to them without money, are to pay the Cursistors such other Fees as their
attendance, skill and labor shall merit.

And therefore if the Statute of Westminster the second had not informed us,
that besides their provisions and livelihood then provided for them, they had
their Sportula's, Fees and encouragements allowed them for making of every
Writ, which with their victuals and necessary provisions made a greater
benefit, considering their then most commonly single and unmarried condition,
then the Cursistors Fees and parts of the Fines do now amount unto.

It will be no more improbable, that the Clerks and Officers of the Chancery*
when they either lived in the House with the Lord Chancellor, or had their Diet
and necessary maintenance elsewhere provided for them, had their Sportula's
also and Fees for their labor and care in the making and dispatch of Writs
Remedial.

Then that the Secretaries and Clerks attending upon a Lord Chancellor, or
Keeper of the great Seal, of the Judges, should as they now have and ought to
have, besides their Diet, Lodging, and other necessaries, some Fees and
establishments for their rewards in their care and dispatch of businesses.

All which that Parliament which was almost in the infancy of our then lately
settled and contested for Magna Charta, well understood when they limited and
settled Fees, and legal and just rewards in the Courts of Chancery, Common
Pleas, and Kings Bench, and all our succeeding Parliaments did the like in
their creating other Fees, or giving allowance to those which they found to be
rationally introduced by time and ancient usage, though no Original
constitution or creating of many of them by a Law can be found, but only by
the Authority and power of Courts, and discretion of Judges, or the light and
guidance of common Reason, which teaches the Clyents themselves, or the most
ordinary sort of men, to know how to reward or value benefits and
accommodations received, and to proportion payments or satisfactions for one
another labors.

And King Richard the 2. was well informed of, when by advice of his Council
learned in the Law, and otherwise, he did in the fifth year of his Reign to the
Petitions of the Commons in Parliament, who prayed, Pet. Parl. 5 R. 2. par. 1.
nu. 88.
That Come per le grand Chartre soit ordene and affirm communement en touz
autres Parlaments que la ley ne serra point deny ne venduz nullui a contraire
de que le Chartre est use en la Chancellarie de prendre Fins pur diverses
briefs avoir a grant arrerisement de l' estat de tout le peuple and de la ley
que plese ordener en ce present Parliament que chescun qui vendra purchaser
brief en la dite Chancellarie eit le dit brief sans Fin fair; answer, That
nostre Seignor le Roy nentende mye de soi desinetra de si grant Commodite quad
este usez continualment en dit Chancellarie si bien avaunt come apres la
confection del dit Chartre en temps de-touz ses nobles progenitors qui depuis
aient este Rois dengleterre.

And is no more a buying of Justice then the Fees taken by the Stewards of the
Lords of Manors in their Court Barons, wherein an inferior sort of Justice is
administered when they take Fees upon Plaints and Actions, and largely enough
for Admissions, Surrenders and Licenses; or the Fees which are taken by Guilds,
Corporations and Companies of Trades for binding or making free Apprentices, or
for Quartridges to their Halls for the maintenance of the good and credit of
their Companies; or which is paid by the poor Tankard or Water-bearers at the
Conduits in London, where every one pays three shillings six pence at his
admittance, and a penny a quarter for the support of that poor and pitiful
society.

No more a buying of Justice then when every Ship trading to Ligorn or Smyrna
pays a certain rate of ten shillings per cent. toward the support of the
Consuls there resident, to assist them in the matters of Trade, and procuring
Justice from the Superiors of the Territory.

Or the Espices, or money in lieu of them, given to the Judges and Ministers of
Justice in France, in the Parliament of Paris, or other Parliaments or Courts
of Justice in that Kingdom.

But may be the more approved, whenas our Sportulae and Fees allowed in England
are not without some resemblance (if it extend not to a direct pattern or
warrant) of the courses held by Gods own appointment in his righteous Theocracy
or Government, which he himself framed for his chosen people of Israel; where
the Levites and Priests of the Jews, whose Offices were not merely or
altogether Ecclesiastical, Cunaeus de Repub. Hebraeorum, ca. 12. Grotius in
Deuteronomy. 17. 19.
but having some mixture of civil Affairs and Judicature, as in the cases of
Leprosy and Jealousy, hard matters and controversies, and the like, had
besides the forty eight Cities, with their Suburbs belonging and given unto
them for their support and maintenance, 2 Chronicles. 19, 5, 6.
some parts of the Sacrifices and Offerings, Levit. 7. 8.
as not only to eat of the flesh of the Sin and Trespass-offerings, Deuteronomy. 17. 8
but were to have the Shoulders and Heave-offerings, Lev. 14. 29
the Wave-brest, Numb 3. 47, 48. cap. 18. 11, 15, 16, 17, 18.
and a part or Oblation of every sort of Oblations, with the redemption of the
firstborn of men, as casualties and fees happening unto them in their several
Offices and Employments, Ezekiel. 46. 24.
by an eternal Law and Statute of Gods own making, Grotius Comment. in 17 Deuteronomy.
9.
appropriate and allowed unto them: Qui quod pingue haberent otium, non tantum
omnia legis, sed and medicinae aliarumque artium diligenter ediscebant ut and
Egyptii sacerdotes: who having leisure, did as the Egyptian Priests, not only
diligently study the Law, but Physic, and other Arts and Sciences. Ideoque
Ibidem.
(says the learned Grotius) primis Saeculis ex illis ut eruditioribus Senatus
LXX. virum legi maxim solebat. And therefore in the first Ages the Senate of
LXX were for the most part commonly chosen out of them.

Which the light of Reason, that Divini luminis radius, did so well inform
other Nations, as the Athenians would not think it fitting that their standing
and continual Senate or Court, and their Judges, should be without their
competent allowances and rewards. And their famous and popular Orator
Demosthenes understood to be so necessary, as in his Oration against Timocrates
he says; Lex est vobis si qua alia praeclara ut qui sacras publicasque
Demosthenes adversus Timocratem.
pecunias possident in Curia pendant, sin minus ut Senatus ab eis ^^gibus usus
telonic is exigat hac igitur legeres communes administrantur, si quidem quae in
conciones, and Sacrificia, and Senatum, and Equites, and alias res pecuniae
impenduntur hujus beneficio legis abunde suppetunt, cum enim vectigalia non
sufficient quae adpensiones dicuntur metu legis hujus penduntur quomodo igitur
non omnes Reipublicae parts dissolventur cum vectigalium pensiones non fuerint
satis neque hac nisi in exitu anni capere liceat Senatus autem and Judices eos
qui adpensiones non solvant vinciendi potestatem non habeant quid agemus? non
conveniemus? nec deliberabimus si opus erit and amplius popularem statum
retinebimus? non judicabunt fora and privata and publica? non inibit Senatus
and tractabit ea quae legibus continentur? at gratis scilicet haec faciemus?
quid vero iniquius est quam si ex lege quam tu mercede corruptus tulisti
populus and Senatus and Judices mercede sua priventur. And Sigonius, who had
very learnedly and industriously searched and traced their customs, adds
hereunto his own opinion, That hanc consuetudinem Atheniensium intuens.
Aristoteles qui suos de Reipublica commentarios diligenti omnium rerum
publicarum observatione and maxim si quis attendat Atheniensis confecisse
videtur scripsit populare maxim esse mercedem omnibus dare concionibus Senatui
Judiciis and Sigonius de rep. Athen. lib. 2. cap. 3. 495, 496.
magistratibus and ex concionibus maxim ordinariis and magistratibus imprimis
iis qui una esse and inter vesci quotidie cogerentur.

For when the Scripture it self can tell us, that Operarius mercede dignus, the
workman is worthy his hire, or to be paid for his labor; and Justice it self
persuades it, if the Client or party immediately concerned, who is most
properly to do it, shall not pay it, the King is to do it by a Stipend or
Salary yearly to be paid out of the common Treasury: which being to be
furnished or supplied by the people, will return heavier again upon them, and
lay a burden upon those which should not bear it, or never in their lives may
have any occasion to sue for remedies at Law, or be Petitioners either as
Plaintiffs or Defendants for Justice.

And the Defendants, and such as are innocent, and Victors, must in those
public Assessments or Contributions help to bear the Princes charges, and pay
for the Plaintiffs unjust vexations, if no Fees or Sportula's should be taken,
but a constant and yearly Salary should be given to Officers and Clerks; which
unless it be large, cannot probably be adaequate to the skill, industry,
labors and fidelity of the Officers and Clerks, which in the Casualties and
Contingencies of Actions and Business, cannot well be foreseen, or made to be
proportionable thereunto by any just measure to be taken before hand, or any
prospect which can possibly be made of it.

And therefore a yearly Stipend or Salary being likely to be either too narrow
or too large,

Will, if plentiful, or too much, violate the Rule or purpose of Justice: or if
too little, put a sinful necessity upon the Officers to do their business
lazily and carelessly, or stir up in them a greedy and craving appetite, and
temptation of taking the advantages of all opportunities to satisfy those
Appetites, or that which they shall sinfully conceive to be a recompense for
their labors: the wickedness and inconveniences whereof, have been
sufficiently held forth unto us by what has been seen, felt, heard and
understood in the yearly Stipends or Salaries, with a restraint of taking any
other Fees heretofore given to Officers and Clerks, both in England and
Scotland, in our late times of Pretenses, rather then Reformations; when those
Public Spirits, as they thought themselves, made up of the Outsides of
Holiness, did only gather in their prey, and a greater then otherwise they
could have done, under color of it.

And the Plaintiff by paying and depositing that most commonly small sum of
money beforehand, or giving of it, does it but in the confidence of the Justice
of his Cause, and hopes to recover it of him that did him wrong.

And if his Action proves to be unjust, did but justly pay for his abusing of
the Ears of Justice by his unjust complaint or vexation put upon the Innocent,
who having Costs allowed him, and a means to recover it, has no reason to
claim any share or part in the money paid for the Fine, if it were a Depositum,
for that it would then be as a Caducum, or thing which neither the Plaintiff
nor Defendant, after it is paid, can have any Title unto; and is therefore,
according to the ancient custom, if it were not an Oblatum (which it is rather
conceived to be) to be paid to the King: whose Lord Chancellor has toward
his support in that high and eminent place and care of Justice under the
Sovereign, one part in four allowed him, the Master of the Rolls another part;
and the Cursistor or Clerk that makes the Original Writ, the moiety or the
other two parts. And in the highest time of Suits in Law of that kind, when
they were four times as much or more then now, amounted to no more then 5000 l.
per annum amongst them all; or little more then a third part of that miscalled
sum of 12000 l. per annum, which some of the Members in the Long Parliament
were (by the factious and giddy Calculations of those little Foxes that could
spoil any Vineyard they did but bark at) well contented to believe.

And must otherwise as to their support and employment have been satisfied
either by the people or the King; which as the Head and well-being of the Body
Politic, is, as in the Natural, to be supported by the Members. And with the
greater reason in this particular of the Fines upon Original Writs issuing out
of the Chancery, for that whether they be as Deposita's or Oblations, or Mulcts
imposed profalso clam^re, if the profit were greater, it will be but a small
part of the peoples retribution and thankfulness for the great charges of the
King, amounting to near as much as twenty thousand pounds per annum, for the
Salaries of his Judges and Ministerial Officers in the administration and
execution of Justice, the safe-keeping of the Records thereof; and giving cheap
and easily-to-be-obtained remedies to his subjects and people for all their
complaints and grievances; who cannot without the blemish of a great
Ingratitude, take it to be any thing less then Right Reason, says the
excellently learned Sir Francis Bacon, that the benefited Subject should render
some small portion of his gain, as well for the maintenance of those Rivulets
and Springs of Justice, and his own ease and commodity arising thereby; as for
the supportation of the Kings expenses, and the reward of the labors of those
who are wholly employed in the making of Writs Remedial. And therefore it was
well said by Littleton, 34 H. 6. so. 38. That the Chancellor of England is not
bound to make Writs without the due Fees for the writing and seals of them.

And has had so general an allowance of Nations, as that the custom of paying
Fines, or some little Oblations at the commencement of their Suits, is at this
day continued amongst many of our Neighbour-Nations.

For the Emperor or great Duke of Russia has five Alteenes, Fletchers Hist of
Russia.
or so many five pences sterling for every name contained in every Writ which
passes out of his Courts of Justice, besides a penalty or mulct of 20 Dingoes
or pence upon every Rubble or Mark which is to be paid by the party convicted
by Law.

In Florence and Tuscany, Segethus de principatibus Italiae.
Litigantes omnes cum primum actionem suam instituunt certam summam Duci
solvunt quam Sportulam vocant. And by an Edict or Proclamation of King Charles
the 9. who reigned in France in the time of our Queen Eliz. every man is to
deposite two Crowns upon the commencing of any Action, eosdem ab eo quem
Judicio superasset recuperaturus, aut suae temeritatis si vinceretur Justam
poenam laturus, Bodin lib. 6. de Repub.
to be had again and recovered of him which is overcome, or otherwise, is to
loose it as a just punishment for bringing his Action for that which he had no
right unto.

And the Dutch, who pretend so very much to Liberty, have taken it to be so
little or no prejudice at all unto their freedom, as they do in this our
present Age or Century, besides two Stivers taken upon every Order or Petition
in any Court of Justice, for the lesser Seal with which the paper upon which it
is written is marked, and four Stivers or our four pence halfpenny for a
greater Seal imposed, and do take at the beginning of every Action or Suit to
be paid to the States, thirty Stivers, or three shillings English, for every 50
Florens, or five pounds English of the sum demanded, as a Vectigal temerarie
litigantium, Philippus Caesius a Zesen in Leone Belgico.
a fine or punishment for those which do not maintain or make good their
Actions: which far exceeds the rate and manner of our Fines paid upon the
beginning of every Action.

And by laying some charge upon the fertility of contentious, and in punishing
such as without just cause of Action do molest and trouble one another, have
but done therein as the Hebrews or children of Israel did, upon whom the light
of the wisdom of the most High did first shine, when finding that Nation, as
Rabbi Maimon says; to be litigiosum genus hominum duplum rependere coegerunt
qui debitum scienter denegarent, and non incongruum sacrae paginae videtur; and
is not repugnant to the reason and equity of Gods own law, Exodus 22. 9.
wherein he ordained, that the trespasser should pay double damages: which the
paying of costs with us, either single or double, in fineable or not fineable
Actions, did never arrive unto.

And is much better then, when as anciently, until a better course and way of
bringing men to justice was found out, by establishing of fixed and certain
Courts, times and places of justice with less trouble to the people.

They did, where they did not foully contend or fight it out by the bloody and
direful chance of might or power of parties, make choice of Arbitrators, and
bear their charges, (which when the law was in Cunabulis, every one which has
traveled but easy journies in the Civil Law, and the Law of Nations, knows to
be frequent) to meet at an equal distance, or other convenient place, or at
their houses.

Or when as it appears by Marculfus, who living near the time of Charlemain
the Emperor, Marculfus Formulas, and Bignonii notae in eundem.
wrote about 800 years ago; and Bignonius Notes or Comment upon him; it was the
custom in the reign of Charlemain, that Judges being made itinerant by
commission to hear and determine causes at the houses of those that complained
for want of justice, did not only Freda exigere, take a third part of the fine
or penalty for themselves, and enforced their entertainments to be defrayed;
but redhibitiones, some other fees and rewards to be given to them.

Insomuch as some Abbeys and Monasteries beyond the Seas, and our largely
privileged Abbey of St. Albons in England, who were well enough sitted for
public entertainments and Hospitality, and much used unto it: and diverse great
Cities and Towns did so little like of that trouble which those kind of Judges,
Mat. Patis.
and their then necessary and greater trains and retinues brought upon them, as
they made shift to obtain immunities and privileges from their Kings to be
freed from those kind of troubles.

Which may the more persuade the right usage and reasonableness of Fees in
Courts of Justice or Chancery, where the reason and difference of Fees in and
through all ages and times, in the custom and usage of Courts in this and all
places of Christendom, have been grounded and made to be, 1. According to the
labor in writing. 2. A more special care and skill to be taken and used, as in
a Real Action more then a Personal. 3. The quality of the Judge. And the
superiority or eminency of the Court which grants it. As more in Parliament,
where the House of Commons takes for the least Order that is made 6 s. 8 d. and
the House of Peers 14 s. 6 d. or more, according to the length; more in the
Chancery for an Order then in the Kings Bench or Common Pleas; and lesser Fees
in the inferior or Pipowder Courts then in the superior: and therefore when a
Justice of Peace shall take 2 s. 4 d. for his Warrant or Writ, a Writ issuing
out of the high Court of Chancery may justly claim to be as much, that of six
pence which they have now for every Writ besides the Fine; or where it is not
fineable, being far too little, and so below an encouragement of their labors,
fidelity and well-being, as may put them either into a carelessness of doing
their business as they should do, (which when the Fines were put down, were
sufficiently experimented) or a temptation to do things which they should not
do.

Or if the Fee but of six pence more should be added to their Fee for common
Writs, if the Fines should be taken away, and a recompense of 700 l. or 1000 l.
per ann. granted by the King to the Lord Chancellor, and as much to the Master
of the Rolls and their successors for what they shall be loosers by the taking
away of the Fines, it would all together amount to a greater charge upon the
people then it was twenty years ago, when the account of the Fines was a great
deal more then in the last year.

And if they should have so much for every common Writ, whereupon no Fine is
paid, which in London, where most Fines are paid, are not one in every twenty;
and in the Country where few fineable Writs happen, are not one in every two
hundred; the charge thereof making many to bear the burden of a few, would be
unequal and unjust, and more to the subject in general, then that which upon
seldom or particular cases are now paid.

Which may please the peoples fancies, but will in the end or consequence of it
but delude their imaginations; and they will really find no more ease thereby,
then he that is to carry a bushel of Wheat shall do, when he shall put some in
his large Pockets, some in his Boots or Stockings, or some in a Hawking-bag at
his Girdle, and carry the rest upon his Shoulders; or one that shall be so wise
as to think a pound of Feathers to be less in weight then a pound of Lead.

Wherefore all things being as they ought to be duly considered, and the great
benefit which all the people of England do receive by having a Court of
Chancery, and Officina Justitiae, and the several Offices therein open, as well
in the Vacations as Terms to resort unto for their Writs Remedial, and of
course, being as a Balm of Gilead, never denied to any that want it; and not
being put to peitition for them to the King or his Lord Chancellor, as
anciently and originally all men did for their Writs, or to be at much expense
of money and time to obtain Orders thereupon; and that men of no ordinary
judgments and experience in the Courts of Common Pleas, did find themselves
deceived in their opinions, when they did verily believe that when the Fines in
Chancery should be taken away, as they were for six or seven years in the time
of the late confusion and usurpation, by an Act of Parliament, as it was then
so called, a great increase of business would have followed in that Court, but
could never perceive any: or if any, it was so very small as it was not
discernable.

When it is well known, that Fines (when the business was by many times or
parts a great deal more then now it is) were cheerfully and willingly paid.

That the unwillingness of some of the people to pay them, is by reason of an
illegal track or beaten road of suing Actions in the Kings Bench, which do by
Law belong to the Court of Common Pleas; and that the Attorneys of the Court of
Common Pleas do more then needs, for their own ease and advantage, and to
trouble themselves as little as they can with the learning of the Law, or the
knowledge how to frame an Action, sue almost as many Actions out of that Court
as their own, the cheapness of the Latitat and other Fees in that Court being
more then is or can be in the Court of Common Pleas, if the Fines were taken
away.

That the cheapness of process, and contention, does not seldom breed,
encourage and heighten the humor of suits and controversies, as is daily
experimented in ten or twelve thousand Bills of Midlesex, taken forth to arrest
men in every year in that small county and jurisdiction, because they are
easily and quickly had for 18 d. apiece.

And by the Broom-men (since the extravagancies of the Marshalsea-court, by
their taking cognizance of all manner of personal Actions within the Virge, or
twelve miles of the Kings Courts, where neither Plaintiffs or Defendants are of
the Kings household) who whilst they are crying Brooms in the streets and in
Cliffords Inn, can ask at the same time for the Office of the Marshalsea, and
for a Writ of eighteen pence, and go to Law with one another for many times
less then the Writs cost them.

And that such a cheapness may be as prejudicial to the people, as that old Law
was amongst the Romans; which when money was more scarce then it was
afterward, did enact, That whosoever did strike a man upon the mouth or face,
should pay to the party beaten twenty and five Asses, which were a certain
small coin, about the value of our English halfpenny.

But the wealth of Rome increasing, and that penalty coming to be very little,
one Neratius a rich Hector, or debaucht Gentleman of those times, finding how
cheap it was to beat men, did frequently as he went along the streets, strike
on the mouth or face such as he thought fitting, and presently command his
servant attending him with a bag of money, to pay him the money or recompense
which the Law awarded him: which gave the Senate of Rome the occasion to repeal
that Law, B^din lib. 6. Repub. 1196.
and put the power in the Praetor, or Lord Chief Justice to punish such
offenders arbitrarily.

And it will not once only, but always be more for the good of the people,
that the very ancient, rational and legal usage now held of paying Fines in
Chancery, be continued: which cannot in a more easy and just way be charged
upon the subjects who receive a benefit by them. And that for a supply of the
Kings now languishing and too small a Revenue.

The Courts of the Kings Bench and Marshalsea, and Office of Pleas in the
Exchequer, upon their Writs of Quo Minus, which of all the Kings Courts should
most advance and least hinder his Majesty's just Rights and Revenues, if they
will (as they should not) stretch their jurisdiction further then they ought to
do, and hold Pleas, or take a cognizance where they should not, may be ordered,
as is usually done in Chancery upon Writs retornable in the Court of Common
Pleas, to pay Fines upon such Writs, and that upon every of such Writs taken
forth, and before they shall be sealed, the Plaintiffs Attorney do endorse the
sum of money which he demands Bayl for, or intends to declare for, and pay to
the Kings Receiver to be appointed for that purpose, such Fines as shall be due
and payable, according to the rates now used in Chancery.

Which will the more conduce to the good of the people, then their not paying
of Fines upon some few Original Writs, when as those troublesome and vexatious
Writs of Latitat Quo Minus, and Bills of Midlesex, shall be thereby somewhat
kept within their legal bounds and limits, and not be made use of upon mere
fictions and pretenses, to promote the malicious ends and designs of ill
disposed people, and the process of those Courts abused, and made the
instruments of men's oppressing one another. Not to be suffered by those whose
Oaths are not to permit any thing to be done in disherison of the Crown. Nor to
be practiced by the people, whose oaths of allegiance and supremacy should
dissuade them from diminishing or taking away any of the Kings regalities or
jurisdictions, when as their forefathers and the days of old may tell them and
their posterities, and after-generations will find it, that their welfare and
happiness is included in the Kings; that the lessening of his legal revenues
will but lessen and inconvenience their own; that his good is more to be taken
care of then any man's particular, by how much every man's particular is
comprehended in the universal; and that the King cannot well protect and defend
them and their particular estates, if his own shall be daily diminished,
purloined, or kept from him.

FINIS.

