THE Mistaken Recompense; OR The great Damage and very many Mischiefs and
Inconveniences which will inevitably happen to the KING And His PEOPLE, By the
taking away of the KING'S Praeemption and Pourveyance, or Compositions for them.

By FABIAN PHILIPPS Esquire.

-- Sic maesta Senectus
Praeteritique memor flebat metuensque futuri
Lucan. lib. 3, LONDON, Printed by R. Hodgkinson for the Author, and are to be
sold by Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-Lane, 1664.

TO THE Old-fashioned and True-hearted Gentry, and others of the English
Nation, and all who are wel-wishers to the Honor and Happiness of it.
THe design of these few sheets of paper in a second Justification of the
Antiquity, Legality, Use, Right, Reason, and Necessity of the Kings
Pourveyance, or Compositions for them, and a Demonstration of the many great
Mischiefs and Inconveniences which will unavoydably happen both to the King and
his People by the taking of them away, which was the endeavors of a larger
Treatise, is not only to epitomize some part of what is therein already
expressed, but to add many things which were before omitted, to the end that
such as being employed in the public cares and concernments of the Nation,
and have very little or no spare time at all to converse with books, or that
those who do prefer the interests of their vanities or avarice before such
better company, may with no great trouble or labor, read that which is more at
large to be seen in the former Book: but to take off the Opinion and Objections
lately made of some who would persuade themselves and others, that the
Compositions for the Kings Prae-emption and Pourveyance either taken for the
King, or served into his House in kind or money, or by allowances for them,
were when they were paid or served, a great burden to the people, and none or
very little profit to the King, by that time that the cozening of so many
Officers and Servants in his Household, and their appetites of spoil and rapine
by their selling the Kings meat as well cooked and dressed as undressed, and of
his bread, beer, and all manner of household provisions to the Inhabitants and
Housekeepers in the parts adjacent were satisfied, and other their purloyning
and trimly varnished over pilfrings and disorders, which an unpaid Army, and
the most unruly Camps of Soldiers or military men are not often guilty of; and
the tricks and artifices of the Pourveyors and Managers of the household
provisions which in Queen Elizabeth's time made a Kentish Yeoman pleasantly
demand of her, being in her Progress, when she was pleased to talk a little
with him, and he perceived she was the Queen, If it were she that did eat up
all his Poultry, which upon her second thoughts and examination, and proof made
of the knavery of one of her Pourveyors, procured him shortly after a legal and
wel-deserved hanging. That too many of his Majesty's Servants employed in the
Affairs of his Household Provisions* are little better then Thieves in an yearly
Pay or Pension, ravening Tartars, or neatly cozening Banyans; and that the
Jews, or the most nimble Cut-purses, Jugglers, or Hocus-pocusses do not, if any
thing at all, much outdo them. But that being said and imagined only, and not
ever likely to be admitted into the virge of Truth or Evidence, will for the
most part be proved to be mere suggestions contrived and cast abroad by the
insinuations of some who do seek to preserve their own, as they deem it
happiness, and increase of fortunes, by the ruin and miseries of multitudes,
or such as will take up reports, as many Gentlemen do Tradesmens deceitful
Wares upon trust, and will prove to be no otherwise then as the blind man in
the Gospel did in believing men to be walking Trees, when that which made them
seem to be that which they were not, was his own mistakings, and by those, and
other ungrounded scandalls, do as much service to the King by it, as the
devouring Ingrossers do usually do unto the People, when they take away the
more honest gains of the Retailers, to create unto themselves a liberty of
imposing what rates they please upon them, and may be easily enough convinced
by a discreet and juditious examination of particulars, h^aring of parties
accused, survey of the excellent Orders and Government of the Royal Household,
(which are so exact, and limiting every Officer to their Liveryes, or stinted
proportions, as some ancient and very able knowing Officers of the Household who
do well deserve to be believed, have averred, and will be ready to assert that
the Orders of the Kings House are so very watchful, vigilant, and preventing
of chea^s and cozenings, as without a^ universal combination of all the
Servants of the Kings House* which is never likely to be accomplished it is
impossible that there can be so much as a Loaf or Manchet cozened from the
King) and the daily care of the Lord Steward, White-staved Officers, and of the
Green-cloth, although the yearly Salaries and Pensions be the same for the most
part which were in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, when the Kings
provisions were so near the th^n cheap Market rates and prices, as they had not
so much as an aspect of grievance, when ten thousand pounds was a good Dowry
for the Kings Daughter in marriage with the King of Scotland, Accounts inter
Evidentia Comitis Oxon.
ten pounds per annum a good Annuity for a Kinsman to an Earl, a penny was but
reckoned to an Earl of Oxford by his Wardrobe keepers for a pair of Gloves for
his own wearing, and the value of silver by the ounce was then but little more
then half a Crown, Stows Survey of London.
and but creeping up toward three shillings four pence the ounce: and Nicholas
West Bishop of Ely in the 23th year of the Reign of King Hen^y the Eighth*
keeping yearly one hundred Servants in his house, gave the Gentlemen and better
sort of them but 53 s. 4 d. and to the inferior sort but 40 s. per annum, and
the next year after that the ounce of silver was brought up to 3 s. 4 d. a fat
Ox was sold at London for six and twenty shillings, Beef and Pork for an
halfpenny a pound, and a half penny farthing a pound for Veal and Mutton, was
by an Act of Parliament in that year understood to be a reasonable price, and
with gain enough afforded; and due consideration shall be had of the necessary
differences which are to be observed betwixt the Pensions, allowances and
expenses of many of the Nobility and Gentry of the best extraction and houses
of the Kingdom serving and attending in the Kings House: those that stand
before Princes, and are to be clothed, as the holy Book of God has told us,
with Silk and soft Raiments; and those that are none of these, but do serve and
take wages in Houses and Families of private men; and that the Majesty and
Honor of a King in the Order and splendor of his House is not to be reduced
to the pattern of private Housekeepers, and the narrow and unbeseeming Customs
of their smaller Estates and Families. That the wast of honor and the more then
ordinary Fragments left in the Kings House, as the remainders of the Diet
provided for him and his servants for the food and sustenance of the Poor, and
such as will be glad of it, are but the requisites and appurtenances to the
Majesty and Honor of a King, that Sir Richard Weston afterward Earl of
Portland, and Lord High Treasurer of England, Sir John Wo^stenholme Knight, Sir
William P^t^, and others, commissioned by King James to make a Reiglement and
Espa^gne in his housekeeping, being men of known and great experience in the
management of their own Estates, could not then find any such things as have
been since laid to the charge of the Kings Officers and Servants in his House,
that the pretensions not long after of better husbandry in the Kings House by
some niggardly contrivances, and serving some of the Tables with half a Goose
instead of a whole, came to no more at the last then the obtaining of the
pretenders self ends, and an Annuity of 500l. per annum for the lives of the
pretender and his wife, and the longer liver of them, that the Lord Chamberlain
of the Kings Households yearly Fee of 100 l. the Treasurer of the Households
yearly Fee of 123l. -- 14s. and the Cofferers yearly Fee of 100l. measured and
proportioned to the ancient and former cheapness and means of livelihood, would
have even then been very deficient for the support of such persons of Honor and
Quality, if they had not had at the same time some seldom falling expectations
of other favors and rewards from a Princely Master, and a present liberal
allowance for their Tables, which although it does now stand the King, by the
enhance of his rates and prices, in a great deal more then it did formerly, yet
unto those that received those allowances for their Tables and Diet, it is no
more then formerly: for if an estimate were taken how much it would cost the
King to make and increase the Salaries and wages of his Servants and Officers
of all ranks and sorts, which in all the several Offices and Places, and
Dependencies about the persons of the King and Queen are above one thousand,
all or most of whom did when the Tables and Diets were allowed, intercommune,
one with another, and were with many also of their Servants fed with the Kings
Victuals, and Household Provisions, to be according unto the rates of wages and
Salaries, and as much as they are now taken and given in private Families and
all were to be paid in money, and nothing in diet, the Kings Treasury, Purse,
or Estate would soon be brought to understand, that such increased Allowances,
or other Allowances, Pensions, Wages and Salaries, which must according to the
rise and enhance of all manner of things conducing to the support and
livelihood of such Servants be now necessarily paid and given over and above
the ancient Fees and Salaries, would arise and amount unto more then all the
charge of the Pourveyance or Compositions for them, whether it were thirty and
five thousand pounds a year, or fifty thousand pounds per annum, which was laid
and charged upon the Counties, or more then the King is unjustly supposed to be
deceived or cheated by his servants, or those which do direct the affairs of
his Household; when it cannot escape every private man's Judgment and experience
in housekeeping that he that does give his servants forty shillings per annum
Salary, and as much more to be added unto it in certain Fees and Profits well
known, and calculated to amount unto no more then another forty shillings per
annum. does give his servant but four pounds per annum in the total, and is
not at all cozened therein; and that it would otherwise be no Honor to the
King, but a diminution of Majesty, and a temptation or necessity enforced upon
his servants to deceive him, if the Sergeant of the Ewrie and the Sergeant of
the Bakehouse, to mention but a few of many, should have but their ancient and
bare Salaries of 11 l. -- 8 s. -- 1 d. per annum, and want their anciently
allowed Avails and Perquisites. That such short and now far too little Wages
and Salaries to be given to the Kings Servants in their several honorable and
worshipful Stations, would be unworthy for them to receive, and dishonorable
for the King to give.

And that the no inconsiderable sum of money which was yearly and usually
saved by the venditions of the overplus of the Pourveyance or Compositions for
them, and employed in the buying of Linen and Utensils for the service of the
House; the now yearly allowances for Diet to eight principal great Officers
and to seven of the next principal Officers, and what his Majesty pays
yearly to others for Board-wages, and what is enhanced and laid upon him by
unreasonable rates and prices, now that his Officers are constrained to buy
with ready money, and to pay a barbarous Interest and Brocage to provide it,
compared with what he now spends in his private allowances for his own and the
Queens Diet, and some other few yet allowed Tables, will make a most certain
and lamentable demonstration, that the King and his Honor were gainers by the
Pourveyance os Compositions for them, and very great loosers by the taking of
them away. And that he did meet with a very ill Bargain by the Exchange of his
Pourveyance or Compositions for them, for a supposed recompense of Fifty
thousand pounds per annum intended him out of the Moiety of the Excise of Ale,
Beer, Perry, etc.

But if the abuses committed by the Servants and Officers of the King within
the house were so great, or any thing at all, as is pretended (for as to the
Pourveyors, and those that act without doors, the Law has sufficiently
provided) they may certainly be rectified and brought under a reformation,
without the abolishing or total taking away of the right use of them, or that
which cannot be spared, or by any means be abandoned, but may be dealt with, as
we do by our Wines, Victuals, or Apparel, which as necessaries of life are in
their right use to be kept and retained, notwithstanding any misusage of them.

Or if the Pourveyance or Compositions for them were so much diverted from the
use intended by them, yet that will not be any reason for the quitting of them
without a due exchange or recompense, for that if they were all of them, (as is
merely fained or fanci^d) misspent or misimployed yet those that do mispend
them, and they that have the benefit of them (not that I would be an Advocate
to justify the selling of the Kings meat or household provisions unto any in
the Neighborhood, or any accursed cheatings of the King, which I wish might be
punished as Felony) are neither Enemies or Strangers to the Nation, but the
Kings Subjects and Servants, and the Children, Friends and Kindred of many of
those which do contribute toward the Pourveyance or Compositions for them; and
that which is so misimployed, serves instead of some other largesses,
allowances, or connivencies, which are usually in Kings Houses; and whether
well spent or misspent, being Oblations and Offerings of duty made by the People
to their Sovereign, are not to be denied or retrenched, no more then the
misbehaviour of the Sons of Ely, with which the Almighty was so much offended,
would have been any just cause of the Children of Isreal's forbearing to bring
their Offerings.

It being no Paradox, but certain enough that those seeming, but not real
grievances to the People, by the Kings Prae-emption and Pourveyance, or
Compositions for them, have no other source or original, then the rise and
enhance of the Markets, and all Victuals and Provisions, by which all the
selling and richer part of the People are ten to one more gainers by the Kings
Pourveyance or Compositions for them then they can be loosers, and are better
able to bear it; and the poorer sort of the people were less grieved when it
was not taken away, then they are now by the Excise of Ale, Beer, etc. which
comes in the place or pretended recompense of it, that the Gentry and Landlords
of the Lands in the Nation, who by heating of those Lands that were cold,
drayning and drying of those that were wet and moist, watering of such as were
dry and sandy, and planting of Wood and Fruit, have brought their lands to a
greater increase and fertility, not yet come to its Acme or just height, then
the former ages, and a thousand years knowledge or practice of our Forefathers,
the Inhabitants of this Nation could before this last Age or Century wherein we
are now* ever reach or attain unto: and the Landlords of Houses, Innes,
Taverns, Shops, or Stalls in London, who have now by the increase of Tradesmen
rather then Trade raised their rents ten or twenty to one more then what they
were One hundred years ago, might in some measure or moderation have taken
their advantages of the improvements of their Lands, Rents, Houses, and Shops,
without such an overstretching their Rents, as the Tenants where they have no
Leases, but at will or from year to year in some Counties of England should be
enforced, as many have lately been to throw up and forsake their Bargains; And
that all or any of that over-high racking the Rents of Lands and Houses, or a
supposed plenty of money, (which in the time of the greatest enhance and rack
of rents, rates, and prices which ever England did see or endure, is now so
scarcely to be found, as the universality of the people do heavily complain of
the want of it) and the product or consequence of that evil in a like enhance
of rates and prices by the Freeholders and Copyholders, who pay no rents, (as
Farmers do) and by the Tenants of the King, Queen, Prince, or Bishops, and some
of the hospitable and well minded Nobility and Gentry, the Tenants of the
Church and College Lands, and of Lands belonging to Cities, Corporations,
Companies, and Hospitals, who have cheap and comfortable Estates and Bargains,
and yet do all they can to imitate them, although they have no cause to do it,
which would be much higher.

If all the Copihold Estates in England and Wales were at as great a rack of
rent as the Lands of the most of Farmers.

If all the Privileges and Rights of Common Estovers and Turbary, Modus
decimandi, and Exemption from the payment of Tithes and Tolls were abrogated.

And if the King should keep the same rule and measure of high rating and
racking of his Revenues certain or casual, as many Landlords do; Or make our
East India Merchants pay for their license or privilege of trading to the
East Indies, Sieur Colberts Remonstrance of the benefit of the Trade to be
driven by the French in the East Indies.
all others being excluded for one and twenty years, a share or proportion
amounting in the whole very near a Million sterling money, as the Dutch have
made their East India Company to do, could not be the only proper or efficient
causes of that long-strided and swift progress, and increase of the rates and
prices not only of victuals and all household provisions, but of all manner of
commodities, apparel and necessaries either for use or ornament.

So as we shall not conclude without premises, or be thought to want a ground
or foundation of an irrefragable truth, that Lucifer the great Merchant and
furnisher of our sins and excess, and of the great and intolerable pride of
all the degrees and ranks of men, women, children, and servants in the Nation,
as far beyond the former ages as a Giant is to a Pigmee, or Paul's Steeple in
London when it was highest, to the Pissing Conduit (as they call it) in
Cheapside, and the avarice of the people to maintain it, together with the
necessities attending their pride and vanities, have been no small part of the
cause of it; for otherwise it would have been some difficulty to find or give a
reason why we should not in England, a Kingdom, until our late times of
confusion, of the greatest peace and plenty in Christendom, be able to afford
victuals, and all manner of provisions for the belly and back as cheap as in
France, where notwithstanding the heavy oppressions and burdens of the
Paysants, who do fare hard, and are ill clad; and by reason of the frugality of
most of the Gentry, a Partridge may be bought for ^our pence, and a Gentleman
and his horse at night be very well entertaind for four shillings: or as in
Spain, where a Bando is yearly made by the Corrigidores of every City and Place
(which the Civil Law does allow and direct, Lessius de Just. and Jur. lib. 2.
cap. 21. n. 148. Cokes 4. part. Institutes 12 Ed. 4. c. 8. 25 H. 8. cap. 2.
and our Laws of England do as to victuals also intend) setting yearly the
rates and prices not only of all victuals and household provisions for the
belly, and of fruit and Apples, but of all Commodities, as Linen and Woollen
Cloth, Silk, Knives, Ha^s, etc. where notwithstanding their continual Wars,
and multitudes of heavy Taxes to mainteyn them, there is a cheapness of
victuals, and such an absence of deceit, as a child, or the most ignorant way
as to measure, weight, and prices, buy and not be deceived. Or as is in the
same manner done at Rome, Naples, Florence, Milan, and most of the
Principalities of Italy, not so freed from public Burdens as our more happy
England is at this present; which neither would nor could be there ever
submitted unto and obeyed as it is, if the pride and necessities, or avarice of
the Landlords, and the pride of the Tenants (which the Pragmatico's forbidding
the pride and excess of apparel, do in Spain very much eradicate) were not less
then ours, and their frugalities more; and such restrictions and reglements
thereby made to be the more tolerable and contenting.

And those that do like it more then they should, and shall be content to
employ their times in the pursuit of vanities, and means to mainteyn it, and
forsaking the old and good ways, and seeking gain, do sacrifice unto their
nets, and burn incense unto their drags, may have that said unto them which the
Apostle St. Paul did ^n another case to the Romans; what fruit have the
intolerable pride and excess of the Nation, Epist. Romans 6.
and the high racking of Rents to mainteyn it, brought unto those that have
taken pleasure in it. And they that have so much delighted in it, may now, if
they please, or at one time or another, understand whether they will or no,
that the overmuch raising and stretching of the rents of the Lands and houses
in England, since an excessive pride and folly of the people is come to be so
much in fashion amongst us, have been no gain to the Nobility and Gentry, but
will be a great loss and damage unto them by that time that the wastfull and
prodigal part of them have bought and furnished their Household provisions at
the dear rates of their Tenants and others, of whom they do buy them, and their
apparel and other the Merchandises of their follyes of the Citizens and
Tradesmen; and not only therein bear the burden of their own, but of the
intolerable pride and gallantry of the Citizens, Tradesmen, Mechanics,
Artificers and their Wives and Children, and in all that they do buy of them,
do contribute to the costly Pearl, Neck-laces, Diamond Lockets, and other
Jewels, satin and cloth of silver Peticoats, plush Gowns, Embroderies,
Gold-lace, Gorgets of threescore pounds a piece, and Lace of twenty or forty
pounds a yard, worn by the Merchants, Drapers, and Mercers Wives, and the
Silk-Gowns, Hoods, Laces, and over-costly Apparel of the Mechanic and
Artificers Wives in their desires and ambition to live like the Nobility and
Gentry, when no man can tell they are any, or ought to be.

That the enhance of all provisions of victuals brought to London out of the
Countries, has made the Country people pro^der then they should be, and the
City Wares and Commodities dearer then otherwise they would be, and made the
Citizens, in the pursuit of pride and luxury, run out of their wits and estates
to purchase it.

That it was better in former times for the Artificers and Day-labourers, whose
more moderate expenses in their ^^veral conditions and qualities made them
heretof^re with a fourth or fifth part of what they do now earn, greater
gainers by their labors then now they are, and better for servants, whose far
lesser wages then now, they will be contented with, did amount unto more, or as
much as they do now gain, by reason of their former smaller expenses in clothes
and apparel.

The Tenants and farmers lived better when they plowed their Landlords lands,
mowed, reaped, and helped in with their Harvests carried home their wood, and
paid small rents, then they have or can do now that they are strained to the
highest, those labors and services coming far short (if they were at the now
rates to be hired or paid for) of the addition, which time and change of
manners and customs have since made to their ancient and unimproved rents.

That the people of England, if there had been no other ground or reason for
it, might well have afforded to have given the King so much as they were yearly
charged with the Pourveyance or Compositions for them for an acquital of more
then twenty years arrears of it by the Act of Oblivion.

That if an estimate could be made of those Millions or sums of money
sterling, which the en^hanced prices and rates of victuals and household
provisions did amount unto yearly since the 24th year of the reign of King
Henry the Eighth, and what the rise of victuals and household provisions have
come unto yearly since the Pourveyance and Compositions for them were laid
down, and what it may more be stretched unto, if pride and price, not like
Castor and Pollux, to bring our Ship into the Port, but to ruin it, should go
on in that carreer it is now in, and private and particular interests more
mighty and prevalent then all those imaginary monsters which Hercules is sa^^
to have subdued, and of a greater force then that Devil and his heard called
Legion, which our blessed Savior did dislodge out of the man possessed with
them, shall be ayders and abetters of it. There is no man that has not bid
defiance to his reason and understanding, but will acknowledge that the people
of England had better give ten times or more the yearly rate or value of the
Pourveyancees or Compositions for them then endure the Impositions, which they
have, or shall put one upon another whilst every man will seek to save himself
and make his labor or commodity afford him as much as he can to recompense him
for it.

That the unreasonable rates and prices put upon all the Kings occasions or
services by Land and Sea, are and will be the cause of Taxations and
Assessements in times of peace three to one more then formerly.

And the Levies of moneys to hire Soldiers, and raise and maintain mercinary
Armies, will amount unto and charge the Public ten or twenty to one or more
than when by the help and ready ayds of Tenures in Capite and by Knight service
our gallant and well-armed Nobility and Gentry could upon any occasions of
war or distress either at home or abroad be suddenly summoned and made to
appear from Ireland as well as from all parts of England and Wales.

And so readily as King William Rufus sitting at dinner in Westminster Hall,
and hearing that Main a Town in Normandy was much distressed by a sudden Siege
laid unto it by the French King, Speed Hist. of England.
and resolving in the greatness of his mind not to turn his back toward it
until he had relieved it, could cause the wall to be broken down on the South
side, and passing toward the sea coast, command his Nobility and Knights
speedily to follow him.

That the unparrallel'd pride of almost all rancks and degrees of the people
not permitted in France, Spain and other Neighbor Nations brings our Foreign
Trade almost to nothing by the adulterating of our Commodities, and making them
false and slight, and causing the charges to be much more then formerly in the
work and making of them, pay of our Mariners and greater rates of victualling,
so as we being not able to make our manufactures so cheap as other Nations, and
making them slight and false, our Trade must of necessity more and more decay,
and will never increase or be advanced, if the Dutch were banished out of the
world, or ordered to trade only in the Bottom of the sea, and leave all the
Surface or Top unto us; the cheap diet and clothing of their Common people, the
neat and frugall diet, and the apparel of the Burgers, and those that they call
the Gentry, giving them the advantage of under-selling us.

For we may be sure that there will never be cheapness of victuals, or
household provisions, or good trading, and truly called plentiful living, if
Citizens Wives, and some of no higher a rank then Sc^iveners, shall have their
Trains born up at Funerals, as if they were Countesses, or Baronesses, and
give the world to understand by that Nove^int universi, that pride has made
them run out of their wits, and may in a short time, after that rate make their
Husbands run out of their Estates. And if Tailors Wives may, as they are not
now ashamed to do, wear Pearl Neck-laces of 100 or 120l. price, and some of the
greater sort of that now too overbusied Profession, keep their Coaches, and
make their Customers pay for it. A Linen Draper being to buy an Horse for his
own use must have one at no less a price then forty pounds: the Wife of a
Sales-man, or one that sells Petticoats, Wastcoats, or Gowns, trimd, and made
up in a seeming cheap, but a most deceitful manner, for Servants, or people of
ordinary quality, can wear a Neck-lace of forty pounds price: And some
Shoemakers Wives do not think their Husbands do go to the Devil fast enough, if
they do not so abuse the more honest intentions of their Trade, as to make
their Wives learn to hold up their heads to show their Pearl Neck-laces of
forty or fifty pounds price, which is many times more then all the shoes in
some of their Husband Shops are worth: Every Cook, every Alehousekeeper, and
the lowest and meanest sort of Mechanicke and Handicrafts men, and their Wives,
shall be permitted to vie in (...) Apparel, and manner of living with the
Nobility and Gentry: A Frock-porters little Daughter shall go with her breasts
and shoulders naked, white shoes, Coif and Pinner well laced, and all to be
ribboned: and a Day-labourers Wife in the Country, within the infectious breath
of the pride of London, wear her Taffata Hoods Gold and Silver-lace, and a
Gorget not much below the yearly rent of the little Tenement her Husband is at
night glad to rest his weary and durtied limbs in: and that there will be never
any hope or possibility of any thin^* but high rates and prices, vices and
villainies, when th^^ do so hugely ^ise and ^ncrease by reason of the pride of
the Nation, as the Keeper of the Bo^^om^^ss pit, and its everlasting burnings,
may well rejoice in the plentiful coming in of his Harvest and Merchandise;
and that if there were nothing of wickedness to be found in the heart of
mankind, that most fertile Seminary and seed-plot of it, and no other cause for
it, the only excessive pride of the Nation would by a necessity of providing
maintenance for it, be a cause efficient and impulsive to make or foment all
manner of wickedness, fraud, cheating and cozenidg, drive the Wives and
Husbands to betray one another, Servants their Masters, Children their Parents,
Parents their Children, and Brothers and Sisters to forego all natural
affection, care and honesty one toward another.

That it is, and will be impossible by any Trade or Industry to mainteyn this
Nation in either peace or plenty, when all the men in it shall in their
Apparel, Diet and Expenses make it their business to live as the Nobility and
Gentry do and most of the female Sex (Servants not excepted) shall not be
contented themselves, or let their Husbands live in any quiet, unless they may
live like Ladies and Gentlewomen, and be the Daughters of vanity and folly.

That at Paphus and Ciprus the old and ancient Countries of venery as well as
vanity, where their Daughters do, (as some Authors have written, and Travelers
do report) entertain strangers by prostitution of their bodies, to get Dowries
or Portions for some mad Husbands to marry them.

And in all the Luxuries and pride of Rome, Asia, Tire and Sidon, and all other
the destroyed and ruined Nations by it, there were some distinctions in
Apparel, Diet, and Expenses; some Servants distinguished by their Habit, and
not all Masters or Mistresses to be found amongst them.

And that England being overchaged with a Generation of too many Proud, Lazi^,
and Lavish People, is not* nor ever will be able to maintain them without a
sinful necessity put upon the Nation, as there is too much already, to cheat
and oppress one another to support them in it.

And should have more reason to believe then to doubt, that the honor of a
Prince is the honor of a People, and the people so much concerned in it, that
it was wont to be a cura curarum, one of the greatest cares of the Magistrates
under Kings and Sovereign Princes seculis retroactis in the old and long ago
past ages of the word attested by the hoary heads of time and antiquity
practiced by a Jus Gentium, universal Law of Nations, rude and untaught Indians
not excepted, and continued to this day in many foreign parts, and most of the
Western Nations, to give an especial honor by gifts, enterteynments, and
presents to Embassdours, who in those particular employments were but the
images and representations of foreign Princes sent on Embasses unto theirs: And
that we ought to take it to be a duty incumbent upon us not to want, or be to
seek for as much goodness as the old Heathen Persians were Masters of when
Artabanus told Themistocles the Grecian Ambassador that apud nos ea Lex
praestantissima qua^ venerati Regem tanquam Dei effigiem jubet, with us* that
Law which commands reverence to the King as Gods Image, is accounted to be
the most excellent.

And therefore until the wisdom of our Parliaments shall by some sumptuary
Laws to be enacted, which may as easily be done, and put in execution, without
any damage or loss unto Trade, or his Majesty's Customs, a^ those that were
made and enacted in the Reigns of King Edward the Third, Henry the Eighth, and
Queen Mary, unhappily repeald by King James, or those not long ago made and
kept alive by our Neighbors of France and Spain, or lately ordained by the
sage Venetians: Or by the Swedes, those strangers to the Sun, and Inmates of
Snow and Ice, after they were grown rich and proud by the spoil and plunder of
the unfortunate Germany, and a way may be found out to drive back, and reduce
unto some Order, as formerly the unchristian liberty of pride now in fashion
amongst us, which is so horrid and ridiculous as might turn the weeping and
laughing Philosophers out of their humors, and make Heraclitus laugh, and
Democritus weep; together with the daily more and more growing and encreaeasing
high rates of victuals and household provisions, which is, and will be the sad
consequence of it.

And is so fixed and pertinacious, as that the Kings own example of plain and
uncostly Apparel, the care of the Church and Pulpits, the scourging and
detestation of vice appearing in some of our Plays and Interludes, and the
jeers and scoffs of some people as they meet with it in the streets, have not
yet been able to bring or persuade too many of them into their wits again, the
compass of their estates, and sobriety of their forefathers. We may wish and
pray that all the Common people were in the moderation of their Apparel,
Quakers, as they are called; that all our Market-folk, Tradesmen, Artificers,
and Servants, as to the justness of their dealings, and buying and selling,
were Quakers, and that it may not be our sad, and never enough to be lamented
experience; that as Doctor Peter Heylin well observed, Heylin. hist. Ecclesiae
Anglicanae domes reformatae.
the afflictions of the Church of England in the Martirdomes and Persecutions
of the Protestants in the Reign of Queen Mary, and the restoring afterward of
many Godly Divines that fle^ from it, brought (...) the Genevian Schisms and
Discipline (...) since almost undone and (...) which were heretofore purp^s^ly
^own and cherished to enervate and destroy ^ona^chy joined with the ^ll Manners
and Customs of some Neighbor Nations, may not likewise by some that might be
better Englishmen, and his Majesty's better subjects* be more then should be
endeavored to be planted amongst us which being abundantly and sufficiently
tri^d to be evil, did never, nor will ever attain unto the reason, right use
goodness and perfection of our good old English Customs, amongst which is, and
ought to be more especially ranked the honor and support of the Royal Court of
England, Majesty, and honor of our King and Sovereign: Which the Romans, who
would not endure any Commonwealth, Competitors, nor think themselves to be in
any condition of safety until they had ruined and destroyed Carthage, and
those Commonwealths of Achaia, Athens, and Sparta, were so unwilling in the
height of their glory, their Senate, Magistrates and Republic should want, as
the Comminalty of Rome did in a popular Election, deny to make Elius Tubero, a
most upright and just man, the Nephew of L. Paulus, and Sisters Son of the
great and famous Scipio Africanus, Waler. Max. lib. 8. cap. 5. and Cicero in
oratione pro Muroena.
to be a Prat^r or Lord Chief Justice, for that he being employed by Fabius
Maximus publicquely to feast or entertain in the name and at the charge of the
people of Rome, his Uncle Scipio Africanus in the preparing and making ready
the Triclinia, or Tables lectulos punicanos pellibus ^aedinis straverat, had
covered the Carthaginian Beds whereon the Guests were to sit or lie, with
Goat Skins; and pro Argenteis vasis samia exposuerat, and instead of silver
Vessels made use of Earthen; which due observance of a Heathen Republique,
being under no obligation of any Divine Praecepts or Examples to honor their
Governors or Assembly of wise men, may teach us that are Christians how very
necessary it will be to take more care of the Honor of our Prince, then of any
our own estimations or honors, which for a great part of them are, or have been
derived from him or his most noble Ancestors: and by so much the more for that
the honor to be done unto him is every where to be found commanded, directed,
exampled, and encouraged in and by those sacred Registers, the holy Scriptures,
which are to conduct us through the Red Sea of the miseries and troubles of
this life to that of a blessed and everlastingly happy in the heavenly
Jerusalem, in the way whereunto will be no small helpers and assistants, the
rendering to Caesar all his dues and rights, who is the protector of ours, a
more exact and careful observance of Religion, Laws of nature and Nations,
right, reason, our Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and the love and honor
of our King and Country, the n^w almost forsaken virtues of our Ancestors, and
the good old Customs of England, which should not like some rustie pieces of
old neglected Arms be hung up in our Halls, and now and then only talked of; or
like as if they were some race of Wolves come again to inf^st us, or our
profits, be hunted and persecuted, but recalled, revived, and practiced; In
which, as a fidus Achat^s, shall never be wanting the wel-wishes and endeavors
of

FABIAN PHILIPPS.

BY the Laws and Custom of England as well as of other Nations where Monarchy,
or the right way and order of Government has any thing to do, the King has a
Control of Markets, may regulate and order the price and rates of victuals and
household provisions, and hinder it from being excessive: As likewise may the
Lords of Manors in their Leets, the Sheriffs in their Tournes, the Justices of
the Kings Bench, Justices of Peace, and Justices of Assize at the
Quarter Sessions and Assizes by an authority derived from him.

Which when it was better observed then now, made the Market Rates about the
fourth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth to be, if any thing at all, but
little different from her price, or those Compositions for her household
Provisions, which by agreement made by the Justices of Peace of the several
Counties, with the Offficers of her house were to be furnished according as the
Counties were more or less distant from London, the place of her Residence, and
the profits which they received thereby in the improvement of their Lands, and
selling their Commodities at greater rates unto others.

And was the cause, besides the duty and obligation of it, that the Kings
Praeemption which should not be denied, as long as civility and good manners,
and the Fifth Commandment shall continue or be in use amongst us.

And the Royal Pourveyance, (warranted by the Laws of God, Nature, and
Nations, as well as by the Civil Law, the universal and refined reason of the
civilized part of the world, and the Common Law of this Nation:) having dwelt
here amongst us above the age of Methusaelah: and as Retributions and
Gratitudes in sign of subjection, paid and allowed in other Nations by the
Heathen and Savages as well as Christians, were not in the right use of them,
until our late Times of Rebellion and Confusion taken to be either a grievance
or burden unto the people.

For that which (besides the designs of the Levelling Party, and such as were
the professed Enemies of Monarchy and Majesty, and the ill Impressions which
they have cast into the minds of such who have too much believed them,) has
made them to seem that which they are not. Has been the Rack and Enhaunce of
the Rents of Lands by the Nobility, Gentry, and Landlords.

The increase of Servants and Laborers wages, and the high rates imposed by
Tenants and Farmers upon victuals and household Provisions which (if it were not
for the pursuit of pride and vanity, and the peoples racking of one another to
maintain it,) might be afforded cheaper then it was in the 4 th year of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth. And as they are now raised to immoderate rates and
prices do make a Desert in our Land of Canaan, and a general Enhaunce of all
things in the midst of a plenty; wherein every one is sure to be a gainer or
saver, but the King.

Who by the loss of his Praeemption and Pourveyance is made to be the only
Sufferer, and as to the Market rates in a worse condition then any Lord of a
Manor or Clark of the Market.

To his damage, besides the Loss of hono^ in his house, and many other
inconveniences of more then one hundred thousand pounds per annum.

Which may appear by a true and exact Calculation or Estimate following.

In 35o. Eliz. the difference between the Market and the Queens Rates in the
Composition made for the Pourveyance, (the Spices, and Grocery-ware, excepted
which does now yearly cost the King three thousand pounds per annum) was but
Twenty five thousand, Twelve pounds four shillings eight p^nce.

When the price of the Oxen as they a^e now bought, is three to one, more than
they were then, of the Lambs eleaven to one, Fat Sheep four to one, Chickens
eleaven to one, Wheat five to one.

In Yorkshire and some other remote Countries, the price of the Oxen near four
to one, and in Suffolk, and other Southern Countries, course Butter then at
something less then two pence halfpenny a pound, now six pence a pound.

Which difference betwixt the Kings price and the Market price but according to
three to one, will after the Rate of Twenty five thousand pounds per annum,
multiplied three times over; Amount unto one hundred thousand pounds per annum,
and make the Kings loss to be as much, and the Counties (especially many of
them which are near adjacent to London) so much and a great deal more, the
gainers by selling to their Fellow Subjects after those more then formerly
enhaunced Rates.

And what wanted in those Provisions or Compositions served in by the Counties
(for that did not reach to the defraying of all the Charges in the house,) as
to Diet, and Servants Wages, and the buying of some Utensils and necessary
Household Stuff to be used in the affairs of the Household.

Being supplied by some yearly Assignations and Additions out of the Royal
Revenue, and some of them by several Acts of Parliament: And King Charles the
Martyr, after a putting down of more then a third part of the Tables and Dyets
in the Royal household, as they were in the Reign of King James his Father, and
putting many of the servants unto Board-wages, with some short and prejudicial
allowances for their Dyets (which lessened his charge as to the Dyets, as much
as Thirty thousand pounds per annum, and was the cause of as much loss to the
servants) making his Assignation, together with what the Compositions for the
Pourveyance, did then amount unto (which in the difference betwixt the Kings
price and Market rates, at that time was estimated to be less then fifty
thousand pounds per annum,) to be one hundred and twenty thousand pounds for
the defraying of the charges of his Housekeeping.

In which yearly charge of the Household, the King allowing seventy thousand
pounds per annum toward it.

And the benefits by the compositions for the pourveyance, as to what the
Countries paid, (and as to what the King saved by it,) being reckoned but at
Fifty thousand pounds per annum, which is much too low.

There will by the taking away of the Prae-emption and Pourveyance, or
Compositions for them be not only that Fifty thousand pounds per annum, in
damage and loss to the King, but a great Addition of losses, and damage, as
follows, viz.

For the Carriages now, that the price is raised two in three and more then
formerly encumbered. per ann.- 3000 l. -- 0 s. -- 0 d. And when there shall be
Progresses, will at the least amount unto two thousand pound per ann. more-
2000 l. -- 0 s. -- 0 d. The Venditions, which were the overplus, and what was
not spent or used of the Provisions of the Countyes; with the profit of Hydes,
and Tallow, etc. and were usually sold toward the furnishing of other
occasions of the house; as for buying of Linen, and other Necessaryes and
Utensils thereof per ann. -- 12000 l.-0 s.-0 d. The profit and benefit of lean
Cattle, served in at small prizes, and heretofore Fatted in the Kings Pastures
at Creslow in Buckinghamshire; the Rent deducted. per ann. -- 1000 l.-0 s.-0 d.
And was wont besides to furnish for the Stables as much Hay as was worth. per
ann. -- 300 l. -- 0 s.-0 d. And as many fatt Cattle sold as yearly yielded. --
1000 l.-0 s.-0 d. The Kings Pastures and Fatting grounds at Tottenham-Court in
Middlesex, and Sayes-Court in Deptford in Kent, yielding for the aforesaid uses
more then the now Rent which is reserved upon them. per ann. -- 500 l. -- 0
s.-0 d. Allowances in satisfaction of Diet now made unto eight great Officers
or principal Men of the household for their Tables and Diet after the rate of
four pounds per diem. being 1560 l. to every one of them, and the Moiety or one
half thereof reckoned at 730 l. and multiplied by eight, amounting unto per
annum. -- 5800 l. -- 0 s. -- 0 d. Allowances made unto 7 next principal
Officers of the house in recompense of their Diet and Tables after the rate of
30 s. per diem to each of them being 547 l. 10 s. 0 d. and but the Moiety or
one half thereof brought to account, which is -- 273 l. 15 s. 0 d. and
multiplied by 7. amounts unto per annum. -- 1915 l. -- 5 s. -- 0 d.
(Besides many other allowances unto diverse others of the household who had
formerly three dishes of meat allowed them every day in the year not here
reckoned.)

For Board wages to many other Officers and Servants in the Royal Family, whose
wages when there was Diet in the Court to suffice all the Servants of it* and
reteyners unto it; will fall far short of what they will have a necessity
as well as reason to demand. per annum. -- 6000 l. -- 0 s. -- 0 d. The
Compositions of the Brewers of London and the adjacent Villages, in lieu of a
groat for every quarter of Malt which they brewed, which was formerly paid, and
is now remitted by reason of the Excise. per annum. -- 3500 l. -- 0 s. -- 0 d.
The Excise which the King pays for his own Beer per ann. -- 300 l. -- 0 s. -- 0
d. The 2 d. a piece every day to as many poor people at the Gate, now given
more then formerly, by reason of the fragments of the Tables, put down, and
other Charities heretofore allowed them taken away per annum. -- 140 l. -- 0 s.
-- 0 d.
The future and continual enhance of prices assisted by that accursed way of
poundage of Twelve pence in every pound for all that he buys or pays for;
which he will be sure to pay for at the last, though others are constrained to
abate and pay for it at the present.

And his too often buying upon credit and paying for many things as much as an
interest of 15 or 20 per cent.

Which put together may in the usual and annual expenses of his household
instead of the 50000 l. (if so much) were contributed by the pourveyance,
amount unto little less then a half more then formerly laid out in most parts
of his provision, and a th^^d part in the residue, he being now enforced to
purchase the victuals and food for Himself and his household, at a far greater
rate then any of his Subjects. -- 20000 l. -- 0 s. -- 0 d.
Besides what may be added, for the tricks and pilferings of inferior Servants
of the household, and their taking indirect courses, and advantages to make up,
or recruit their Losses and the damage which the King may susteyn by having
such his servants Metamorphosed and turned into hunger-starved Ratts, which
will be nibling and gnawing at every thing which they can come at; and may be
catched, but are not to be destroyed by drowning or poisoning.

And the loss and diminution of the Honor of the King in his Royal Household,
which is, and ought to be inestimable, and as much beyond a valuation.

As the Honor of a Sovereign Prince, is, and ought to be above, and beyond that
of the vulgar, or any private person,

Which may bring us to this conclusion

That although Fifty thousand pounds per annum were in the granting of a Moiety
of the Excise to the King, his Heirs or Successors intended to be allowed for
the Pourveyance or Compositions for them which did cost the Kingdom yearly,
and Communibus Annis, but Twenty five thousand and twelve pounds, or
thereabout, in the 35 year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; and in the third
year of the Reign of King James not much above Forty thousand pounds per annum;
and in the Reign of King Charles the Martyr, at the most but fifty thousand
pounds per annum; (...) whether more or less, is not to be found in the Receipt
or yearly Income of that Revenue of the moyty of the Excise.

For that the total of the clear yearly profit of the moiety of the Excise,
allowed unto the King for the Exchange of his Tenures in Capite, and by Knights
service, and the Pourveyance or Compositions for them, does not amount unto
(the charges of the Collection deducted) above One hundred and twenty thousand
pounds per annum.

Is likely to be less by reason of an universal poverty of those which should
pay it, making a large account of many desperate Arrears, and of the Farmers in
many places letting it three or four times over to others under them, and so
very much racking and oppressing of the people; (if but half of what is
complained of be true) as many private Families do to avoid the gripes of the
Excise-men, and the knavery of the Common Brewers, set up Brewhouses for their
own occasions.

And will be too little for the exchange or purchase only of such a principal
flower and support of the Crown, and an eminent part of the Royal Prerogative,
as the Tenures in Capite and Knight Service are, which in yearly revenue
yielded him above One hundred thousand pounds per annum.

And for that the Power, Might, and Majesty of a King being unvaluable, is not
to be balanced by any thing which is not as much.

So as the damages and losses sustained by the want of the Pourveyance or
Compositions for them, besides what shall be paid more then formerly for the
charges of the Stable, impressing of Workmen for the Kings occasions by the
Master^ of the Works, the King now paying every Workman eighteen pence, or two
shillings per diem, when it was before but twelve pence, and the charges more
then formerly in the Pourveyance for the Navy, Ship-Timber, Ammunition, and
carriage thereof, etc. and many other losses not here enumerated, will be no
less then the sum of One hundred seven thousand and fifteen pounds five
shillings.

And a too certain Total of that which is here valued and brought to account,
besides the unvaluable honor and power of the King, loss and ruin of his
Servants, and what indirect courses may entice them unto.

Which needs not be doubted, when as by an exact and careful account given
unto the Lords in Parliament, in or about the third year of the Reign of King
James by Sir Robert Banister Knight, then one of the Officers of his Household,
of what was yearly saved to the King by the Compositions for the Pourveyance
over and above the yearly value of what it cost the Countries (when the rates
were both in the Country and City of London not by a third part, and in many
things a half and more, so much heightened as now they are; and a project of
purchasing the Pourveyance from the Crown for Fifty thousand pounds per annum
was in agitation) there appeared to have been yearly saved* by the Compositions
and Commissions for Pourveyance the sum of Thirty four thousand eight hundred
forty six pounds* ten shillings and six pence; and in the Office for the Stable
Two thousand six hundred ninety and eight pounds; which made a Total of Thirty
seven thousand five hundred forty and four pounds ten shillings and six pence;
and probably might be the reason that that unhappily after accomplished design
did then vanish into nothing.

1. Nor will the yearly damage and losses of the people in the total arrive
unto a less, when they shall find the moiety of the Excise not amounting to
One hundred and thirty thousand pounds per annum in the utmost extent and
income of it, without deductions or defalcations to the Officers employed by
his Majesty therein to be doubled and made as much again upon them by the fraud
and oppression of the Brewers, little malt put into their Beer, and ill boiling
of it, and lesser measures sold by the Inkeepers and Alehousekeepers: And yet
the Brewers being paid the Excise of Beer and Ale by the housekeepers and
Retailers, as much as they do pay to the King, and a great deal more, by reason
of the Excise of three Barrels of Beer, and two of Ale in every twenty, allowed
them will not think it enough to cozen and abuse the people whose good and
evil, and profit and loss is included in that of the Kings, unless they do also
by false Gaugings concealed Brewings, and other ill Artifices, use all the
ways and means which they can, to make themselves great gainers by deceiving
the King as well as the people, and will like too many of their fellow
Citizens, the great Tax-Improvers and Advantage-catchers of the Kingdom, be
sure to be as little loosers by it as the Fox would, if a monthly Assessement
should be set upon him for his subterranean Boroughes and dark Labirinths; or
the griping Usurer, the biting Broker, and the knavish Informer would be if an
yearly Imposition or Tax should be laid upon their ungodly and oppressive gains
and Employments.

2. Neither will the peoples loss and damage be lessened when there shall be a
scarcity of Food and Provisions at the Markets in regard that the Kings
Officers and Pourveyors for his Household shall now be constrained to buy his
Household provisions in great quantities at the Markets or Shops in London, or
in the Counties adjacent, which were wont to be served in kind by the several
Counties of the Kingdom.

3. And there shall be an enhaunce of prices and Market-races, which since the
acquittall or laying down of the Pourveyance or Compositions for it, are
already about London and Westminster found to be at the least two pence in a
shilling more then it was before; which being a sixth part, will when it shall
be raised and made to be an ordinary rate through the adjacent Counties to
London and Westminster make no inconsiderable burden or charge to the
Inhabitants, and a greater, if either all or some part of that more th^n
formerly raised price, shall by necessity or imitation, and the vast and
excessive pride of most sorts of people, diffuse and spread it self into all
other parts of the Kingdom, and a great deal more if those insana praetia,
unreasonable rates, shall, as they are most likely, by the high rack of the
Rents of Lands, Servants, and Laborers wages, and all manner of Commodities
which are sold, either for the Belly or the Back, or for necessity or pleasure,
creep and climb higher and higher, until pride and excess shall have made our
heretofore more prudent and frugall England, by too many of her Natives want of
money, for want of wit, to be a Bankrupt.

Which may well be suspected, when as experience, the Mistress of Fools, but
the guide and direction of wiser people, has assured us that the price
extorted from the King will make the Nobility pay the dearer; and the rates
which their example will enforce or entice the Gentry to pay, will infect and
prejudice the Marketings of the Common and buying part of the people; as we
have lately seen in the rates and prices of Horses; not by reason of any
exportation or sca^city, manage or fitness for war, or extraordinary
swiftness for running or races; but by the careers of Prodigality, Humor,
Affection, or Fancy of too many of the Nobility or Gentry, mounted from ten or
twelve pounds price for a horse for a man of worship within thirty years last
past, to the ordinary rate of 20, 30, 40, or 50 l. and sometimes 100 l. which
has unnecessarily drawn some hundred thousand pounds sterling out of the
purses of such who are but small friends to their own Estates, in bidding too
much, and accustoming the Sellers to demand or insist upon such excessive and
reasonless rates and prices.

4. And by the want of Progresses, when the King not having his Pourveyance or
Compositions for them, and Carriages as formerly, shall not be so able as he
should, to make our Pool of Bethesda itinerant, and visit the several Parts of
his Dominions, either for his recreation, or the better survey and inspection
of the Government, and his peoples grievances, as King Alfred, King Edgar, and
King Henry the first, and all their Successors, his Majesty's Royal
Progenitors were wont to do, whereby to diffuse their comforts and graces, with
which many a Family, and many a Town and Corporation have been blessed and
bettered; and otherwise would not have had an opportunity to obteyn them.

5. When there shall be necessities and poverty put upon some hundreds of
Families, which were either his Majesty's Servants, or in relation unto them;
and upon many an Housekeeper in Westminster, and the Neighborhood of the Kings
Residence, who have had a great part of their subsistence by the influence of
it.

6. And the Peoples damage and losses shall likewise be heightened and increased
by the many cravings and projects which the wanting or necessitous part of the
Kings Court may trouble both him and his people withal.

7. Or by the casting the King into importunate and irresistible necessities;
and forcing the Lion to hunt and range the Fields and Forests, and prejudice
the people more then otherwise he would in the quest and pursuit of what is but
his own; or to couch and lie down in his den, and resolve to lay his paw upon
what are his own rights, and be less liberal in his favors.

8. Or by denying him what is his own, be, for want of a lesser sum of money
for defraying of necessaries, a cause of raising Subsidies, or Taxes, which
cannot be so equally or justly charged, as to even, and make them to be no more
then the sum of money demanded, and to be furnished.

9. And by compassing and encircling their Sovereign with wants and pressures
more then would otherwise be, if he had either his own, or a sufficient supply,
make themselves the efficient causes of what they compleyn of; and by being
stubborn, stiffneck'd, unquiet, and disobedient, instead of duty and
retributions to a gracious King for the daily blessing of peace, plenty,
protection, pardons, and multitudes of favors, gifts, and grants, outdo the
ungrateful Israelites in murmuring with Quails in our Mouths; not in the
Deserts of Arabia; but a more plentiful Land then that which was said to flow
with milk and honey.

And a cause also of increasing their own Taxes which are more many times the
impositions by themselves upon themselves then impositions of their King, and
rendering themselves thereby as much guilty of folly, as they that will not be
diswaded from planting and sowing Weeds and Tares and will notwithstanding come
weeping home from their expected better harvest, for that their Carts are not
pressed down with sheaves of Corn and Wheat, and their labor was but to fool
themselves.

All which and many more inconveniences losses and damages to the people by the
Kings want of the Royal Pourveyance or Compositions for them, which was the
smallest and least chargeable part of an yearly thankfulness and oblation which
ever was given to a King by a people, would neither happen nor needs to be at
all.

If they would but remember the days of old, the kindness of the King and his
Royal Progenitors, and the cheerfully heretofore paid Duties and retributions
of their forefathers, and take it for some of their happiness that they are not
by God Almighties displeasure for their unthankfulness put in mind of their
former miseries by any new adversities, or made to keep an yearly Passover
with bitter Herbs, And now that the Royal Revenue has been so much impaired by
a continual bounty unto many of themselves or their Ancestors and their
supplies of it do fall very short of what was expected or intended, and the
Fifty thousand pounds per Annum intended as a Recompense for the Pourveyance or
Compositions for them proves to be not only not a recompense sufficient but a
mere nullity, and if it had come up as high as it was supposed appears to be
but a damage and a Canker or Gangreen eating up or taking away too much of the
rest of the Kings Revenue.

Be sorry that it is so, and make haste to return again those little oblations
unto their King, when London, and 12. or more adjacent Counties unto it do
yearly gain 20 times more by the Residence of himself and his Courts of Justice
then they do amount unto, and do unto him in the easing of his burdens, as he
and his Royal Progenitors have done unto them in any of the complained of
burdens of them and their Forefathers, by many times laying to sleep some good
Laws and Constitutions, which though at the making thereof they were most just
and rational, would now by the rise of silver two to one more then formerly,
Gervasius Tilburiensis.
and the change of Times and Customs, be very prejudicial and burdensome unto
them. As King Henry the First did by no Law or Act of Parliament, but his own
good will and promise, calculated only for that present Age or Reign; but since
observed by all his Successors, in the change of his rent provisions into Rents
of money; many of which being now and ever since paid in small quit-rents, made
that part of the People very great gainers, Assisa panis and cervisiae, and a
Statute for punishing the breach thereof by Pillory and Tumbrell Anno 51 H. 3.
and that King and his Heirs and Successors to be loosers more then Fifty
thousand pounds per annum, or the greatest extent of the Nations yearly charge
for the Royal Pourveyance, or Compositions for them did ever amount unto.

And as the Asise of Bread, Bear and Ale in 51 H. tertii, which holds no
proportion with the now Assize or rules for Bakers and Brewers, but very much
differs from it, and exceeds it, was not for many ages past, and in some
plentiful years in our memory kept, when Corn, Wheat and Malt did fall within
the virge or direction of that Act of Parliament, or Ordinance rather of the
King, without an Act of Parliament.

Nor did hold those kind of Trades to the Assize made and appointed by King
Henry the 7 th. nor by any Act of Parliament or otherwise, restrain the
Shoemakers to the prices appointed by the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. (repealed in the
5 th year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth) when there was an allowed
transportation of Leather, and scarcely half so many Cattle bred in England,
and brought from Ireland and Scotland; nor any Leather at all imported from
Russia, as it is now in great quantities, when they do now by their own and the
Tanners knaveries, and enhaunces, take for a pair of shoes, which in the Reign
of King Edward the 2 d. might be bought for the use of a good Knight or
Gentleman, for a groat, Rot. Fin. 11 E. 2. Cokes 1. part. Institutes 70
and in Yorkshire for some of the best Gentry of that County in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth but for little more; where also a pair of shoes for a Lady of a
good Extraction and Quality, were in the beginning of the Reign of King James
sold for sixteen pence; and a pair of shoes for a man in the memory of middle
aged men were made and sold in London for two shillings six pence, and eight
groats a pair, no less then four shillings eight pence at the lowest, and many
times five shillings and six pence, or six shillings a pair; which (as Mr.
Richard Ferrour has judiciously and ingeniously observed) does yearly cheat
and cozen the people, besides the inconveniences by ill wrought and half tanned
Leather, six or seven hundred thousand pounds, or a Million Sterling per
annum; which might well have been spared, or better employed.

And be as willing to ease his burdens and grievances, as Queen Elizabeth, that
mirror of Women and Princes, was in theirs, by the repealing of so much of the
Statute for limiting the wages of laborers in the 25 th year of the Reign of
King Edward the Third (when Churches, Castles and Abbeys we^e wont to be built)
as concerned the wages of Labou^ers that Master Masons, Carpenters, and Tylers
should take but three pence a day, and others of that Trade but two pence a
day; a Tylers boy a penny per diem; Rot. parl. 25 ^* 3. m. 56.
that none other should take above a penny for a days work; for mowing five
pence, for reaping of Corn in the first week of August two pence, and in the
second week, and unto the end of that month not above three pence: And by the
making of an Act of Parliament that the wages of Artificers and Laborers, then
six times more then they were at the time of the making of the said Act of
Parliament in the 25 th year of the Reign of King Edward the Third, should be
yearly assessed by the Justices of the Peace, and Magistrates in every County,
City, and Town corporate at their Quarter Sessions, with respect unto the
plenty and scarcity of the time, and other circumstances necessary to be
considered; for that (as the praeamble thereof declared) the wages and
allowances limited and rated in former Statutes, were in diverse places too
small, and not answerable to that time, respecting the advancement of the
prices of all things belonging unto Artificers and Laborers; that the Law
could not conveniently, without the great grief and burden of the poor
Laborers and hired men be put in execution, and to the end, that there might
be a convenient proportion of wages in the times of scarcity and plenty.

Which was the cause that King James by an Act of Parliament made in the first
year of his Reign, upon compleynt, that their wages were not rated and
proportioned, according to the plenty, necessity, and scarcity, and respect of
the time, as was politiquely intended by the said Queen Elizabeth, did amongst
other provisions, give a further power and authority to the Justices of Peace
in every County at their Quarter Sessions, from time to time, to limit and
regulate the wages and hire of Laborers and Artificers (although their wages
and hire were then much increased, and are since very excessive, and
immoderate) which by an Act of Parliament made in the third year of the Reign
of King Charles the Martyr, being continued until the end of the first Session
of the then next Parliament, is for want of continuance expired, and did
repeal, as Queen Elizabeth, and other of our Kings also did, many an Act of
Parliament in regard of Inconveniences or damages arising to the people or
because they did not answer the expectations of the makers thereof.

And may as little grudge the King his Pourveyance, or Compositions for them,
though the richer part of the people, who are only contributory to the
Pourveyance or Compositions for them, may by their own excessive raising of all
manner of prices of household provisions, and their unreasonable gains by it,
seem to be something more then formerly burdened with it; as they did the late
King Charles the Martyr his indulgence to them, and dispensing with a Decree
made in the Star Chamber in the 11 th year of his Reign, by the Lords of his
Privy Council, and other the Judges of that Court, after consultation had with
Judge Hutton and Judge Croke (who were well known to be very great well-wishers
to the peoples just and legal liberties) and the other reverend Judges and
diverse Justices of the peace of the Kingdom, confirmed by the Kings Letters
Patents under the great Seal of England, which did forbid the Vintners to dress
any meat for their Guests or Strangers, and limited the Inkeepers of London and
Westminster, and within ten miles distance thereof, unto six pence for a day
and night for Hey for a horse, now ^^shamefully and unconscionably raised by
themselves unto eight pence; and six pence for a peck of Oats not measured by
Winchester measure, but the knavish peck of the Ostlers (to whom the dying
horses might well bequeath their Halters) at the rate of eight groats a
bushel, when they have many times bought them in the Market at Twelve pence a
bushel, or less. And directed that that Ordinance should continue in the
County of Middlesex, until it should appear unto the Justices of the Kings
Bench, and in other Counties and Places to the Justices of Peace, that because
of the increase of prices in the parts adjoining, greater rates should be
necessary to be permitted; and that thereupon other rates should from time to
time be set; and being set, were commanded, and enjoined to be strictly and
duly observed, until they by the like authority should be altered.

And might be as little troubled at his Pourveyance, as they were with his
Royal Fathers remission, or not putting in execution the Assise (in imitation
of one which was made in anno 12 H. 7.) made in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
by the advice of the Lord Burghley, and other of the Lords of her Privy
Counsel) of Flesh, Fish, Poultry, butter, and most sorts of Victuals, and
household Provisions; as also of Hey and Provender: and another likewise set and
made by the Judges of the Kings Bench in or about the first year of his Reign,
by the advice of all the other Judges of England, at the instance of Mr Noy his
Atturney-Generall.

Which might persuade us to be something kind to our selves, and our posterity,
in being kinder unto him; for that the losses and damage to the King and his
People without the addition of their losses by the taking away of the Tenures
in Capite, are and will be so very great and evident; and the loss of the King
may by a necessity of their supplying of it, be in the end a means of doubling
or trebling the losses of the people, and should therefore deter us from any
endeavors to eclipse our Sun, and bereave our selves of the light and comfort
of it; and diswade us from the purchase of so many mischiefs and inconveniences
as have already happened; and are like to multiply upon us, by making our
selves the most unhappy Instruments of the dishonor of our King and Country in
the diminution of the accustomed grandeur and magnificence of his Court and
Hospitality, wherein plenty and frugality, largess and providence, satiety and
sobriety, honor and hospitality, were so excellently and rationally combined,
and confederated, as the best of Oeconomies; and the greatest vigilance, daily
care, and inspection in the most methodicall and best ordered House and Family
of England, or any other the Kings Dominions, consisting of 10 or 20 persons,
or a lesser number (a few being commonly the easiest governed) could never
arrive unto (...) ^erfection of government, and good order of the Kings
Household, consisting of a numerous Retinue of above One thousand or twelve
hundred persons, and many of them of the best extraction, and noblest houses of
the Kingdom, where besides the charge of his most pious and devout yearly
Maundy, or washing as many poor men's feet every year upon the Thursday before
Easter as he is years old, and giving unto each of them a Jowl of Salmon, a
Poll of Ling, 30 red Herrings, and as many white, 4 six penny loavs of bread,
Cloth for a Gown and a Shirt, a pair of new Shoes and Stockings, a single
penny, and a 20 shillings piece of Gold: Two pence a piece was given to poor
people every day at the Gate, besides the Kings Alms-dish every meal from of
his Table, and the fragments carefully gathered up from the many Tables of his
Servants, put into an A^mes-basket, and daily distributed unto them by two
Officers, yearly kept in pay and pension for that purpose: Six Mess of Meat,
240 Gallons of Beer, and as many of loaves of Bread, with a liberal proportion
of Sack and Claret as wast; and entertainment for all comers for the Kings
honor, where were great yearly Festivals, the Lord Stewards Table completely,
and more then ordinarily furnished during all the time of the sitting of the
Parliaments, to entertain such of the Lords and Commons as would come thither
to dinner, and where when the Nobility and Persons of quality in the absence of
Parliaments, came either to attend the King, or petition him in any of their
Affairs, they were made the Guests at some of the Tables of his great
Officers, as well as those of meaner ranks were at the Table of the lesser: And
the Chambers and Galleries searched for (...) strangers and fit persons as
might deserve to be invi^ed to the Tables and Diet of his Servants, to the end
that any that were fitting to partake of his hospitality might not be omitted.
Ambassadors which came sometimes two at once from several foreign Princes
found themselves royally enterteyned for certain days out of the diet and
provision of the Kings house, (and nothing of State or Provision wanting at the
same time in the Kings own Court or House) and attended with as great or more
plenty and solemnity, then many of their Kings and Princes had at home, and
where no Country Gentleman or Yeoman, which had contributed to the Pourveyance
but at one time of the year or other, had upon all occasions of business at the
Court, either with the King or his Servants, a large part or share of what he
had contributed.

And was so gratefully and well accepted, as some have anciently, (when
gratitude and thankful respects were more in fashion than now they are) so
highly esteemed the respects and favors of the Kings Servants and Officers,
when they had occasion of business to his Court, as Robert de Arsic, a man of
great note and eminency in the County of Oxford, did give Lands in Newton by a
Fine levied thereof unto one Robert Purcell, and his Heirs (who was then one of
the Porters at the Gate of the Kings House or Court by inheritance, upon
condition, that whenever he and his Heirs should come unto the Court, the
said Robert Purcell and his Heirs, whilst they should be the Kings Porters,
should attend their coming, come out of the gate to meet them; and walk before
them with his rod or staff unto the Kings Hall, and at their return or going
out of the gate, call for their horse or Palfrey, and hold their stirrup whilst
they got up or mounted: and if the said Robert Arsic or his Heirs should send
any Messenger to the Court, should as much as in them lay, and according to
their ability, with their good word and well wishes, faithfully assist him: And
was so unwilling to loose that Service or Duty as upon the refusal or omission
thereof by the said Robert Purcell, he did in the 11 th year of the Reign of
King Henry the 3. bring an Assise or Action against him for it: Inter Recorda
in Recept. Scaccarii inter Fines de tempore H. 3.
(for as for our Industrious Speed setting forth in his History of England,
that Rhese ap Gruffith Prince of Wales, coming out of Wales as far as Oxford,
to treat of a Peace with King Richard the First, Speed Hist. of Great Britain.
did take it in so high a scorn, and indignation that the King came not in
person to meet him, as he returned home into his own Country without saluting
the King, though Earl John the Kings only Brother had with much honor
conducted him from the Marches of Wales thither, and that by that means the
hopes of the expected peace vanished, and came unto nothing) has observed that
the meanest from whom love or service is expected, will again expect regard.

And therefore the care of our Kings was not a little employed in that way of
imparting of their favors, and increasing and cherishing the love and good
will of their people, when King Henry the Seventh, whose troubles and tosses of
fortune before he came unto the Crown, had together with his learning and
princely education, made him a great Master in Policy, and good Government, and
one of the wisest Kings that ever swaied the English Scepter, did in his
prudent Orders concerning his Court and Household, and the State and
Magnificence which he desired to be observed therein, communicated unto me by
my worthy and learned Friend William Dugdale Esquire Norroy, M. S. in custodia
Gulielmi Dugdale.
King at Arms, out of an ancient Manuscript, sometimes in the custody of
Charles de Somerset Knight, Lord Herbert and Gower, Chamberlain unto that King,
amongst many other Orders for the honor of the King and his House, ordain that

If any stranger shall come from any Nobleman or other, the Gentilmen
Huysshers ought to set him in such place convenient within the Kings Chamber
as is mete for him by the discrecion of the Chamberlain and Huyssher, and to
comaunde service for him after his degree; and the said Huyssher ought to speak
to the Kings Almoigner, Kerver, and Sewer, to reward him from the Kings Board;
this is to say if the said Stranger happen to come when the King is at dynner.

Item, The Gentilman Huyssher, if there come any honorable persons to the
King at any other time, they ought to call with thaym the said persons to the
Seller, Pantry, and Buttry, and there to command forth such bread, mete, and
drink, as by his discretion shall be thought metely for thaym; and this in no
wise not to be with said in noon of thies Offices aforesaid, It is to the Kings
honor.

Item, that no Gentilman Huyssher be so hardy to take any commandment upon
him, but that it may be with the Kings honor, by his discretion in these
matiers to myspende the Kings vitail, but where as it ought to be; and if he
do, he is not worthy to occupy that rowme, but for to abide the punishment of
my Lord Chamberlain.

Item, A Gentilman Huyssher ought to command Yeomen Huysshers, and Yeomen to
fetch bred, ale, and wine at afternoon for Lords and other Gentilmen being in
the Kings Chamber, when the caas so^ shall require.

Which and the like Magnificences of Hospitality in the Houses and Courts of
our Kings and Princes, supported by the Pourveyances without which the elder
Kings of England before the Conquest, could not have been able to susteyn the
charge of their great and yearly solemn Festivals at Christmas, Easter and
Pentecost, when ex more and obsequii vinculo antiquissimo, as that great and
learned Antiquary Sir Henry Spelman has observed by duty and ancient custom,
the Lords and Barons of England did never fail to come to the Kings Palace
(where the Magna Concilia and wittena gemotes and conventus sapientum, now
called Parliaments, were at those times to be holden and kept) cum ad Curiam
and personam ejus exornandum, Spelman Annotat. ad Concilia decreta and leges
Ecclesiastica 349.
tum ad consulendum de negotiis regni statuendumque prout fuerat necessarium
and providere de rebus illis Rex solebat corona redimitus and profastu Regio se
in omnibus exhibere, for the honor of the King and his Court who then with his
Crown upon his head, and other Princely habiliments, did use to show himself
unto the people and advise what was necessary to be done for the good of the
Kingdom. And was such an attendant upon the Grandeur and Honor of their
Monarchy, as it began with it, and continued here amongst us till the Council
of some foolish and factious Shrubs had by a fire kindled in our then unhappy
Kingdom, overturned our Cedars of Libanon, and made an accursed and wicked
Bramble their Protector, and was so necessary to the Government and Authority
of our Kings, Asser Menevensis de gestis Alfredi 19. and 23.
and the increase and preservation of the love and obedience of the people, as
we find it neither repined nor murmured at in the Reign of King Alfred, who
being of an almost unimitable piety and prudence, and to whom this Nation ows a
grateful memory for his division of the Kingdom into Shires and Hundreds, and
for many a Politic Constitution, did (now almost 800 years ago) keep a most
Princely and magnificent House, and a numerous company of Servants; gave
enterteynment of diet and lodging to many of the sons of his Nobility, who were
therein trained up to all manner of Courtly and honorable exercises, had three
Cohorts or Bands of Life-guards, every Cohort according to the ancient
computation consisting, if they were Horse of 132, and of Foot, of a great many
more; the first Company attending in or about his Court or House night and day
for a month, and returning aftewards home to their own occasions, tarried
there by the space of two months; the second Cohort doing likewise as the
first, and the third as the second by their turns and courses, and had a good
allowance of money and victuals in the House or Court of the King, who had his
ministros nobiles qui in curio Regio vicissim commorabantur in pluribus
ministrantes ministeriis, noble and great Officers in his Court, which attended
in their courses, and took so much care also for them as in his last Will and
Testament he gave cuilibet Armigerorum suorum, to every one of his Esquires 100
marks. Henry Huntingdon and William Malmesbury de gestis regum Angliae.


Or that King Hardi Canutus caused his Tables to be spread four times every
day, and plentiously furnished with Cates, and commanded that his Courtiers,
Servants, and Guests should rather have superfluities then want any thing.

That William Rufus when he had built Westminster Hall 270 foot in length, and
74 in breadth, Speed History of England.
thought it not large enough for a Dyning Room.

King Richard the Second kept a most Royal Christmas where was every day spent
26 or 28 Oxen, 300 Sheep, with Fowl beyond number; and to his Household came
every day to meat ten thousand people. as appeared by the Messes told out from
the Kitchen unto three hundred Servitors, Stows Survey of London.
and was able about two years before, when the Times began to be troublesome,
to give a Guard of 4000 Archers of Cheshire with their Bows bent, and their
Arrows hocked ready to shoot, Bouche of Court, to wit meat and drink, and wages
of six pence a day then accounted a very great pay.

Or that King Henry the 7 th. then whom the Kingdom of England never had a more
thrifty Prince, did the morrow after Twefthtyde in a great Solemnity keep a
Feast in Westminster Hall, where he being set at a Table of Stone (which
remained until the middle of our late Rebellion) accompanied with the Queen
and many Ambassadors and other Estates, Stows Survey of London, and Chronic.
Robert Fabian --
60 Knights and Esquires served 60 Dishes to the Kings Mess, and as many to the
Queens; and served the Lord Mayor of London at a Table where he was set with 24
dishes of meat to his Mess.

And our succeeding Kings understood to be so much for the good and welfare of
the people, as King Edward the Sixth, that great Blossom of prudence and
piety, and all manner of Princely virtues, when a surfeit of Church Lands and
Revenues, had like the coal carried into the Eagles nest, reduced the Royal
Revenues into a consumptive and languishing condition, had by the advice of his
Privy Council suppressed (but with no advantage to the Revenue or curing the
diseases of it, as it then, and has since happened in many of those pretended
rather then really effected dishonorable Espargnes; Heylin History of the
Reformation of the Church of England.
witness the putting down of fourteen Tables at once by King Charles the
Martyr, which gained in one year Thirty thousand pounds to some few of his
Officers, who did advise him to do it; but nothing at all for himself) the
Tables formerly appointed for young Lords, the Masters of Requests, and
Sergeants at Arms, etc. he did not howsoever think fit to diminish or lessen
any more of the Royal Hospitality.

And King James when he had by an overgreat bounty to his Countrymen the
Craving Scots, and their restless importunities, brought himself and Revenue
into many streights, and was contented to seek out ways of sparing, did in the
inquest and seeking to abate the charge of his housekeeping, in his Letters to
the Lords of the Council, bearing date in November 1617. and pressing earnestly
to have it done, Scrinia Ceciliana 198. and 199.
to the end, that he might equal his charges to his Revenue, direct them to
abate superfluities in all things, and multitudes of unnecessary Officers, and
to do things so as they might agree with his honor; but concluded that there
were twenty ways of abatement besides the House, if they be well looked into.

Which may give us a Prospect, which a larger Treatise of the Antiquity,
legality, reason, duty, and necessity of Prae-emption and Pourveyance for the
King, or Compositions for his Pourveyance, as they were used and taken for the
provision of the Kings Household, the small charges and burden thereof to the
People, and many great mischiefs and inconveniences which will inevitably
follow the taking of them away, will more fully evidence how great a damage the
King susteyneth by the want of them.

How unbecoming the Majesty and Honor of a King and his many Princely affairs
and occasions it will be that the people should deny him that granted or
continues their Profits in Fairs and Markets the benefit of Prae-emption,
which all Princes as well Christian as Heathen do enjoy, and is but conformable
to the Tenor and meaning of the Fifth Commandment in the Decalogue, and the
Honor due unto common Parents and Magistrates enjoined thereby.

How unsafe to the peoples consciences, when they do by their Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy swear to maintain and defend his Regal Rights and
Jurisdictions not to allow his Prae-emption, (...), or forecheapum, and the
(...) in the Saxon Times (...) signifying ante, and (...) prendere, which is
Prae-emption, and was then (as it has been ever since) so just and legal a
part of the Kings Prerogative, as King Ina, who reigned here in the year 720.
did by a Law prohibit, Spelman glossar. in voce Forefang, and LL. Inae ca.
altero ante penult. Somners glossar. ad Brompton and alios veteres Angliae
Historicos.
that Fore fang, or Captio obsoniorum in foris aut nundinis, non ab aliquo fit
priusquam minister Regis ea ceperit quae Regi fuerint necessaria, the taking or
buying of Household provisions by others in Fairs or Markets before the Kings
Minister or Pourveyor should take those things which were necessary for the
King.

And was not then any Novel constitution, or acquired Right or Praerogative, or
without a Divine pattern, but so inhaerent in Monarchy, and Kingly Government,
and so becoming the duty and gratitude of Subjects, as we may find the
Vestigia, or Tracs of it in the morning of the restored, Genesis c. 41.
not long before drowned and washed world, when Joseph that great and happy
Minister of State under Pharaoh King of Egypt did by the help of that Royal
Right of Praeemption, keep the Lean Kine from eating up the Fat, and save that
Kingdom, and many other neighboring Nations from an irresistible famine and
ruin.

And how contrary it will be unto the duty of Subjects to refuse him their
Carts to convey his Carriages, unless they may have two parts in three more
then formerly, when the Earl of Rutland, and Countess Dowager of Pembroke, and
many other of the Nobility have not only their Pourveyances, but can have their
Tenants Boon Carts upon any of their occasions for nothing; and every Lord of a
Manor, or Parson of a Parish do seldom fail of as much or greater courtesies, or
respects from their Tenants, or Parishioners, or that the Kings Harbingers
should from some of the Tribe of Naball receive uncivil and churlish answers,
that they are not to loose the advantage of six pence more which may be given
by any other, or that his Pourveyors should not have the benefit of
Praeemption, as one of them lately was refused in the buying of a Salmon, or be
wrangled with; and have Fowl taken out of their hands, as one lately did, and
when he was told it was for the King, could say he cared not a turd for him, or
that his Officers should be exposed to the humors or incivilities of Clowns,
Quakers, or disaffected persons.

And that strangers who have commonly and usually seen foreign Princes
travailing in any parts of Christendom out of their own Territories and
Jurisdictions to be by a general and never intermitted custom, honorably and
respectfully received in all Cities and Places of note, and presented with Wine
Fish, and other provisions; such as the place and season of the year afforded,
which even those Commonwealths, States, and Places of incivility, Trade and
selfishness, such as Holland and Hamborough do never omit, should see the King
of Englands Servants and Officers so little respected in their attendance upon
him in his Journeys, or Progresses, as not to be trusted with a small hire of a
Cart, unless like some beggars in the streets, buying an halfpenny or a
farthing worth of pottage at a Cooks Shop, they do first lay down or pay their
money for it.

And how ungrateful it will be (if they were not Subjects or obliged by the
Laws of God, Nature and Nations to an obedience reverence, retributions and
oblations to their Prince, to receive a daily and an hourly protection, and as
many benefits and blessings as their almost always craving necessities and
importunities can get or obtain, or his munificent and ready heart and hand
impart and bestow upon them.

And yet be so barren in their retorns or thankfulness, as when there is not a
Family or Kindred in England, but has at one time or other been raised or
enriched by the King or his Royal Progenitors, or tasted of their favors or
mercies, and that those who did eat and partake of his Pourveyance or
Compositions for them, and were maintained by them, were for the most part
their Sons and Daughters, or some of their Kindred or Generations, to deny him
that which was such an ancient and unquestionable Right, as all the Judges of
England did no longer ago then the third year of the Reign of King James, Sir
Francis Moors Reports 764.
declare it to be a Prerogative of the King at the Common Law, and was no less
in the Times of our Saxon and British Monarchs, and so much in use in the
Kingdom of Ireland, as it does yet retain the custom of Pourveyance ad alendum
Proregis Familiam, Camden 2. part Annalls of Queen Elizabeth.
for the maintenance of the Lord Lieutenants House and Family, as an antiquitus
institutum, an ancient Constitution, and Jus quoddam Majestatis, Vide Act of
Parliament or Declaration touching the Settlement of Ireland.
a part of the Right belonging unto the Sovereign Prince and his Pre-eminence
or Kingly Prerogative. And in their Act of Parliament lately made for the
Settlement of that tossed and turmoild Kingdom, consented that the Lord
Chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of King-Bench, the Lord Chief Baron of the
Exchequer, and the Master of the Rolls, or any other of his Majesty's Officers
of that Kingdom for the time being, shall and may have and receive such
Port-Corn of the Rectories, Impropriations or appropriate Tithes forfeited
unto, or vested in his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, which have been
formerly paid or reserved.

The furnishing of Carriages and Ships for public uses are in Scotland justly
numbered amongst those Regalities which are annexed to the Crown, Craig de
Feudis apud Scotos dieg. 14.
and was by the consent of the Estates there so called, allowed to conserve the
dignity of that Kingdom the Borrough Mealis, Parliament James 1. c. 8.
where quilibet Burgensis debet domino Regi pro Burgagio quinque denarios
annuatim and dicuntur incorporari annexique Fisco and Patrimonio Regis, every
Burgess is to pay five pence per annum for his Mealis, which Sir Henry Spelman
interprets to be a Farm appropriated to buy Provisions in Regiae mensae
apparatum for the Kings Table or Household, Spelman Glossar. in voce Borrow
mealis.
and are said to be incorporate and annexed to the Patrimony of the King and
his Exchequer.

And the right of Pourveyance so little there esteemed to be a grievance, as in
a Parliament of their King James the 4 th holden in the year 1489. The Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and other his Lieges, 2 Parliament King James the 4
th.
did declare, that it was the Kings property for the honorable sustentation of
his house according to his Estait and Honor, quhilk may not be failized
without great derogation of his noble Estait, and that his true Lieges should
above all singular and particular profit desire to preserve the noble Estait of
his Excellence, like as it was in the time of his may noble Progenitors of
good mind.

And is conform unto that rule of reason which other Nations do measure their
Actions by; for in France, Choppinus de Domainio Regum Franciae lib. 1.15.
as Renatus Choppinus, a learned French Advocat, says it is Dominicum jus
primitus sceptris addictum in necessarios Regiae mensae Aulaeque sumptus and
honorificum ad suum Imperii and inclitae decus Majestatis conservandum, a part
of the Demeasnes belonging and annexed to the Royal Scepter, and appropriate
to the necessary uses and provisions of the Kings Court, and Household for the
honor and conservation of the Rights of Majesty.

Our long ago old and worthy Ancestors, the stout hearted Germans, Tacitus de
moribus Germanorum.
did as Tacitus sua sponte and ex more viritim confer principibus armenta vel
fruges quae pro honor accepta necessitatibus subvenirent, man by man of their
own accord customarily bring or send unto their Princes Herds of Cattle, and
some of the fruits of the earth as Presents and Oblations, which being taken
for an Honor due unto them, did much conduce unto the defraying of their
charges or necessityes: the people of Italy and the Princes and Nobility
thereof did acknowledge them to be inter Regalia amongst the Regalities of the
Emperor, Radenicus de gestis Frederici lib. 2. ca. 5.
and the Law of the Empire, formerly of Rome, now of Germany, does strongly
assert the Praestationes Angariarum Plaustrorum and Navium, Besoldus de AErario
principis and Bullinger de vectigalibus.
etc. Pourveyance of Cart-taking, and impresting of Ships Regi competere
ratione excellent^ae ejus dignitatis quae Regalia dicuntur, to belong unto the
King by reason of the excellency of his dignity, Et multa adjumentaei
necessaria ut dominium intus and externe tueri valeat, Zecchius de principat.
administrat.
and that many ayds and helps are necessary for a Prince to defend his
Dominions at home as well as abroad. And is as much a Custom of Nations, as
covering of the head, washing the hands, wearing of shoes, and retiring to rest
or sleep in the night, and so usual as the Barbarians, some of whom have not so
much good nature as to diswade them from selling their Children, like Calves or
Cattle at a Market, or the savage part of the Heathen, who have not attained to
so much of reason, as to persuade them the use of clothes and apparel, are
glad their Kings and Princes will accept of.

And the Inhabitants of that large Empire of Japan, Varenius de Regno Japan.
who in many of their National Customs and Actions, do delight to be contrary
to the people of Europe, and most other Nations, as to have their Teeth black,
when others do desire to have them white; do mount their horses on the right
side; and not uncover their heads in saluting each other, but only unty some
part of their Shoes and Sandals, and sit down when others do come to salute
them, are notwithstanding unwilling to come behind other Nations in the Duty of
Pourveyance and Honor of their Prince,

Practiced and allowed by many approved examples in the sacred Volumes, where
Melchizedeck King of Salem, Genesis c. 14.
the Priest of the most high God, brought forth bread and wine to Abraham, and
his household Servants in their little Army upon their return from the rescue of
the righteous Lot, which was, says the great Grotius, a Custom then in use
amongst the neighbor Nations: Grotius Anonotat ad Genesin.
that of Jesse the Father of David, who being commanded by Saul his King, when
he was not in the Army, but enjoyed the blessings of peace, to send David his
Son unto him, laded an Ass with bread and a bottle of wine, and a Kid, and
sent them by David unto Saul; and not long after sending him into the Army to
visit his Brethren, commanded him to take an Ephah, and 1 Samuel 17.
ten loaves, and carry them into the Camp unto his Brethren, and ten Cheeses
unto the Captains of their Thousand.

The worst of women, the Witch of Endor made have to kill her fat Calfe, 1 Samuel
25.
took flower, and kneaded it. baked unleavened bread, and caused Saul and his
Servants to eat.

The Moabites who were David's Subjects, after he was King, 1 Samuel 25.
sent him gifts pro pace ac tutela, as gratifications for their peace and
protection, and continued and paid it unto the Kings of Israel, until after
the Reign of Ahab King of Israel, 2 Samuel 8.
Shobi Machir, and Barzillai in the midst of his afflictions by the Rebellion
of his Son Absalom, sent victuals and provisions to him and his Army, 1 Chronicles.
21.
the dutiful and honest-hearted Araunah would rather give him his Oxen to
sacrifice, then take money for them: the Sunamitish woman would in honor and
respect unto Elisha the Prophet, not only constrain him to eat bread, but
advised her Husband to make a little Chamber in the Wall, and set for him there
a Bed, 2 Reg* ca. 4.
a Table, and a Stool, and a Candlestick, to the end that when he passed that
way, he might turn in thither.

The Moabites having after the destruction of the Kingdom of Israel
discontinued their Pourveyance, were in the judgments denounced against them
for their pride exhorted by the Prophet Isaiah to an obedience, Isaiah 16. v.
1. and Grotius Annot ad locum.
and to send the Lamb (viz. that Pourveyance) to the Ruler of the Land, which
was Ezechiah King of Juda, the lawful Heir of King David.

And the Children of Israel and Juda, after a return from a long and a
sorrowful captivity, could not when they bare burdens, and wrought with one
hand, and held a weapon with the other, in their building and repair of
Jerusalem, forget the custom of Pourveyance for the good Nehemiah their
righteous Captain and Governor. Nehemiah 4.17.


Which might induce the people of England to cover their faces with shame, and
blush through that thin-leafed Mask of a Recompense by the Excise, supposed to
be given in Exchange thereof, when they can at the same time, whilst they
denied it to the King believe that the Pensions and Payments in Universities,
Colleges, and Innes of Court and Chancery, for the honor of their Societies,
and defraying of charges ordinary or extraordinary. The assistance or supports
which the Lord Mayor of London, the Companies or Guilds of Trades therein, the
Magistrates of every City, Borough, or Corporation; and Churchwardens of
every Parish, do by permission of him and his Laws exact and enforce for the
credit or worship of their Societies and their maintenance and affairs one
under another, and one of another to be as legal as they are necessary.

And the dignified Clergy, as Archbishops, Mr. Stephens Treatise of Synodals
and Procurations
Bishops, Archdeacons, Deans, Prebends, and Canons, many of whom do enjoy
Commendams, and Prebends, and yearly receive Pensions (some of which were for
superstitious uses) Synodals, Procurations, money for Proxies, Cathedratica
Quarta's, Episcopales Corredies, Somner Glossar in appendice ad Brompton and
ali^s veteres Historicos Angliae*
or Entertainment-money, Penticostalia, Waxscot, or Cyrick sceat, which in some
places was recompensed by the yearly Tribute of Hens, or some other household
provisions; and in many places do receive the long since abolished Romescot, or
Peter Pence, and many other Emoluments, and the inferior part of the Clergy
their Mortuaries yearly Oblations, and many other Profits and Free Will
Offerings toward their Hospitalityes and Housekeeping.

And many of the Laity can think it reasonable by privileges of some
Religious-houses whereof their Lands before they were granted unto them by the
Kings Royal Progenitors were parcel to pay in many places no Tithes at all,
and in as many or more do claim and receive the benefit of a Modus decimandi,
or paying a small rate or proportion for them* and in their own Leases and
Grants, not only in former ages, but lately find it to be most for their
benefit, to reserve as a convenience for their housekeeping, as their Ancestors
or Predecessors formerly did their duties of work in Harvest, or payment of
Muttons and Poultry, etc. And can retain their Rights of Patronage and
Advowsons, Skaeneus tit. de Herezeldis in Quon. Attach. c. 15. Alciat. lib. 1.
Parerg. c. 45. and Spelman Glossar. in voce Heriotum and Neostadius de Feudis
Hollandicis.
take and receive Herriots, which were gratuitae donationes domino suo datas
ratione dominii, and reverentiae, the gifts or remunerations of Tenants to
their Lords in the reverence or respect which they do bear unto them, after the
rate of 4 or 5 l a Cow, many times the only remaining substance of a sorrowful
Widow and Fatherless Children, when the price of an Ox was in the Reign of
King Edward the First, and many years after but 5 s. or an eighth or tenth part
of it. Reliefs and Chiefage, which Cowell understands to be pecuniae annuo
datae potentiori tutelae patrociniique gratiae; and the Tolls in Fairs and
Markets, by his Grants, or by Prescription, Cowell interpret. verborum.
or allowance (which do in yearly profit twice or thrice over exceed the charge
of the Counties or Cities of the Kingdom toward the Pourveyance or Provision
of the King and his Household, and the Owners of above three thousand and eight
hundred Impropriations which originally were designed for hospitality, can
require and receive Pensions, Synodals, Procurations, Proxie-money, and Waxscot
money.

And very many of the Laity yearly demand and receive Romescot, Peter pence, or
Chimney-money of their Tenants in some Manors, amounting unto a considerable
value, which notwithstanding that by the Statute of 25 H. 8. ca. 21. it be
forbidden under severe penalties to be paid any more to the Popes use, have
since either by ignorance of their Tenants, or a custom of paying it to the
Lords of such Manors, or their Stewards or Bailiffs, been collected or gathered
to the use of the Lords of those Manors, and be very industrious in the
enforcing the payment of Street-gavel, which in the Reign of King Edward the
First was claimed by the Lord of the Manor of Cholmton in the County of
Sussex, for every Tenants going out of the Manor, or returning unto it: and in
many or some of their Manors do receive Quit-rents of their Tenants for
Bordland, or provisions of victuals for their houses; Drofland, Mich. 4. E. 1.
coram Rege.
for driving their Cattle to Fairs and Markets; Berland, carrying provision of
victuals upon the removal of the Lord of the Manor, or his Steward; Potura
drinklan, or Scot Ale, Somners Treatise of Gavelkind.
a Contribution of Tenants toward a Potation drink, or an Ale provided to
entertain the Lord or his Steward (those charges being now defrayed by the
Lords of the Manors) Cart-silver, Ward-penies, and Hoke-Tuesday money (for a
liberty probably of giving their Tenants or Bondmen leave to celebrate that
day wherein the English did every where slay the Domineering Danes Gavel-Corn,
Gavel-Malt, Gabulum mellis, Rent-honey, Oate-Gavel, or Rent Oats, Woodlede,
for carrying home the Lords wood; Hidage, or an Arbitrary Tax imposed upon
every Hide of their Tenants Lands, afterward turned into an yearly payment;
Gavel-Foder, for Litter, Hay, and Provender for his horses, paying of certain
Cows, Cart. 17 H. 3. m. 6. in 2. part Dugdales Monastic. Anglic.
or a rate for them, quae dari solebant pro capitibus Utlagatorum, to redeem
the forfeitu^e of Outlaws; Gavel or Rent-timber for the Repair of the Lords
house; Gavel Dung to carry his Dung; Horse or Foot Average, carrying of the
Lords Corn to Markets and Fairs; or of his domestique utensils, Smith-land, for
doing the Smiths work; Gavel-erth, for t^lling some part of the Ground; Gavel
Rip, to help to reap their Corn by one or more days; Gavel Rod, to help to
make so many Pearches of Hedge; Gavel Swine, for feeding of Swine in the Lords
Woods; Carropera, to work with their Carts or Carriages: Ale-silver in the City
of London; Were Gavel, in respect of Wears and Kiddles to catch Fish, besides
(which some have not long ago valued in the sale of their Manors) many Boons,
Presents, and New-years-gifts, and other Retributions yearly given to Landlords
or Lords of Manors, in lieu of their Pourveyance, who paying for it one to
another, do receive and take Fines uncertain at far greater rates then
anciently they were, and many times so unreasonably as the King in his
Superior Courts of Justice is many times enforced to regulate and reduce them
to a moderation; and can also receive many other small yearly payments paid by
Tenants in acknowledgement of favors or help received, or to be received; and
demand and receive Quit-rents for Common Fines of some Hundreds, and for Fines
pro non pulchre placitando, or pleading in their Courts so fair as they ought,
prohibited to be taken by several Statutes made in the reigns of King Henry the
3 d. and Edward the Third; receive in some places, as in the Counties of
Cumberland, Westmerland, and some other Northern Counties a 20 penny Fine* and
in Wales a Payment or Oblation called Mises, upon the death or change of every
Landlord; and be at the same time unwilling, that the King should have any
retributions or acknowledgements for one hundred to one favors and helps not
seldom, but very often; nor to some or a few particular men, but to very many,
and the universality of all his Subjects.

Be well contented that he should have no bette^ a Bargain to release their
Duties of Tenures in Capite, Knight Service and Pourveyance, which would have
yielded and saved him at least Two hundred thousand pounds per annum, besides
the vast yearly charge of a great part of his Guards, much whereof might be
spared, if he had, as his Royal Progenitors had, the benefit, support, and
accommodation of Tenures in Capite, and by Knights-service, which were so
greatly and very necessary in the honor and incidents thereof, to the exercise
of a just and well regulated Monarchy, and Royal Governments; and more
advantageous then the decaying and every day diminishing Revenue of that Moiety
of the Excise, which half or moiety from the time of the granting thereof,
until the last year, did yearly yield unto him but One hundred thousand and
ten pounds, or thereabouts; and for this last year but One hundred thirty and
three thousand pounds Sterling or thereabouts; (out of which, the Salaries and
allowan^^ unto the Commissioners, Auditors, and Surveyors, etc. and many other
defalcations are to be deducted) attended with the daily discontents of the
Common people, and as a Fine and Income for that so greatly prejudicial and
inconvenient Bargain, release and abate unto the people more then a Million and
a half Sterling money due unto him for the Arrears of the profits of his
Wardships and Tenures in Capite, and by Knight Service; and for the Arrears of
his Pourveyance after the rate of Thirty five thousand pounds per annum charges
to the people, six hundred and fifty thousand pounds Sterling; and if the
charge thereof shall be deemed to amount unto Fifty thousand pounds per annum;
may without any stretching of the account, be very justly reckoned to be no
less then Nine hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling.

And take notwithstanding (as his blessed Father did, the profits of his Wards
after a tenth part of the true yearly value of the Lands and his Ayds to make
his eldest Son a Knight, and to marry his eldest Daughter, which the Socage
Tenures are likewise obliged unto at a very low and easy proportion) very many
of his Reliefs after the rate which the value and Rent of Lands were at four
hundred years ago, now that they exceed it Fifteen or Twenty times more in
value then they were then; his Subsidies and Fifteens secundum antiquam
taxationem, after the old and long ago accustomed old rates with considerations
and abatements to be made in respect of Debts* Children, and weakness of
Estates, when as the rates in every Parish, for the maintenance of the Poor,
mending of Highwayes, repairing the Church, payment of Tithes for
Pas^ure-groun^s, o^ upon any other their Parochial Duties, or occasions, are
made and laid by the people themselves, and Justices of Peace by the Pound
rate, as they call it, and to the utmost yearly value, and improvement, or very
near it.

Receive his First Fruits and Tenths at great undervalues, Prae-fines,
Post-fines, Lycenses and Pardons of Alienation at less then a Tenth. Take no
more for the Fees of his Seals in Chancery, and the Courts of Kings Bench and
Common Pleas, then as they were in the Reign of King Edward the Third, (now
that every penny which was then, is more in value then three) and for the
original and Judicial Writs in Wales no more then they were in he 34 th year
of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; his Fines upon Formedons and Real
Actions, his Customs inward and outward at gentle and undervalued rates,
allowing the Merchants notwithstanding a Twelfth part of their Wines, a Fifth
of all other Commodities imported, and a Tenth of all that is exported, most of
which particulars, in his so daily accustomed and continued favors seperately
and singly considered, would either out-goe, or come very near up unto the
charges which the Kingdom did yearly expend, and disburse for or toward the
Royal Pourveyance: Allow^ three or four pounds in every Pipe of Wine for
Lekage: takes for his prisage of Wines brought into London for his two Pipes of
Wine one before, and another behind the Mast in every Ship of every Freeman,
being an Housekeeper of that large and largely privileged City, but seven
pounds ten shillings for every Pipe of Wine, which is seldom less worth, if it
be Sack, then thirty pound a Pipe, or four and twenty pounds a Pipe if it be
Claret. And give^ B^lls of Store to multitudes which have occasion to pass or
repass (which is not seldom) into or out of the parts beyond the Seas, for
their Trunks and other necessaries to be Custome-free.

Allows and permits the Dukes, Marquesses and (...) to enjoy their Creation
money toward the supportation of their honor; and they as well as the rest of
the Nobility, and all or many of the Gentry to enjoy great quantities of his
Crown Lands, turned from small and easy old-fashioned Reserved Rents upon
Leases for Lives or years into Estates of Inheritance; and very many Liberties,
as Fishings, Free-Warrens, Court-Leets, Court-Barons, Eschetes, Felons,
Fugitives and Outlaws Goods, Deodands, Forfeitures, Waiss Estraies, Fines and
Amerciaments, retorn and execution of Writs; and in some Manors, a liberty of
receiving to their own use Fines for licenses of concord or agreement upon the
making of Conveyances, and Post-Fines upon Fines leavied in the Kings Courts,
Profits of the year, day, and wast, and all Fines, Issues Amerciaments*
returned, set or imposed upon any of their Tenants in any of the Kings Courts,
Rot. pat. 27 and 30 H. 6.
or by any Justices of Assize, or of the Peace.

With many other Franchises, Liberties and Participations of his Regality,
which they do now enjoy tanquam Reguli as little Kings in their several Estates
and Dominions, in many of them, more by claim and prescription, allowed by the
favor and indulgence of the King and his Royal Progenitors and Predecessors
Kings and Queens of of this Nation, unto them and their Posterities, then by
any any Grants they can show for it, very much exceeding in yearly profit and
con^ent, the small charges which they have used to have been at for the
Pourveyance or Provisions for the Kings Household.

Take his Fee-farme Rents which do amount unto above threescore thousand pounds
per annum; but according to their first and primitive small reservation, though
the Lands thereof be now improved, and raised in some a ten, and in others a
twelve to one mo^e then they were then accounted to be either in the intentions
of the Donors or Donees, and many other his Fee-Farmes of some casual Profits,
and Revenues granted to Cities and Corporations, which do now ten to one exceed
what they were when they were first granted.

Grant and confirm to the Vulgus or Common people many great immunities and
Privileges, as Assart Lands, and permit them to enjoy in his own Lands and
Revenue large Common of Pasture, and Common of Estovers and Turbary in his
Forests and Chaces; and protect from oppression in that which are holden of
their Mesne Lords, their Copihold Lands, Customs and Estates; which being at
first but temporarily permitted and allowed and patientia and charitate in
quoddam jus transierunt* are now by an accustomed and continued charity, taken
to be a kind of Tenant Right and Inheritance. Grants and permits many Charters
of Liberties, Privileges and Freedoms to the Cities, Boroughs and Towns
Corporate of England and Wales, and to the Lord Mayor and Commonalty of London,
all Issues, Fines, Ex antiquo Codice M.S. de customs de London in Bibliotheca
Cl. viri Galfridi Palmer Milit. and Baronetti Attorn. Generalis Regis Caroli
secundi.
and Amerciaments ret^rned and imposed upon them in any of the Kings Course,
freedom from payment of Tolls and Lastage in their way of an universal and
diffused Trade in all places of England: and for a small Fee Farm Rent of
Fifty pounds per annum for the Kings Tolls at Queen-Hithe, Billingsgate, and
other places in the City of London, accepted in the Reign of King Henry the
Third, suffers them to have and receive in specie, or money toward their own
Pourveyance, as much as would go a good way in his.

Allows the Tenants in ancient Demesne their Exemptions from the payment of Toll
for their Household Provisions, Coke Comment. in Artic. super Chartas 542 543.
which in the opinion of Sir Edward Coke was at the first in regard of their
helping to furnish the Kings household Provisions: and suffers the Universities
of Oxford and Cambridge, and the Colleges and Halls therein; Colleges of
Winchester and Eaton, and the Re^ients in the Cinque Ports, Act of Parliament
for Subsidies in 3 and 4 Car. primi.
and Rumney Marsh, to enjoy a Freedom from Subsidies.

Who, together with all the people of England, may by the Account of benefits
received by, and from him, and his Royal Progenitors and Predecessors, know
better how to value them, if they had not received them; and if he should but
retire himself into himself, and withdraw his bounties from us.

Or take his Customs and Imposts inward and outward, Reliefs, Ayds, Subsidies,
Fifteens, Tenths, and First Fruits, Profits of his Seals, P^ae-fines,
Post-fines, Licenses, and Pardons for alienation of Lands, Fines upon Fo^medons
and real Actions, at the full value and rate which the Law will allow, and the
rise of money might persuade him unto; or take all occasions to invade or clip
the peoples Liberties and Privileges, as they do his.

Charles Loyseau traicte des Seigneuries.
Or seize and take advantage of the forfeitures of our sufficiently misused
Fairs and Markets, which without the many inconveniences of Barrage, Billets
peages, or Tolls taken at many places as they pass thither; as the people of
France, and our Fashion makers are tormented with, do yield and save the people
yearly in that which otherwise would be lost some hundred of thousands pounds
per annum, or should withdraw his favors and countenance from the Trade which
our Merchants have into foreign Parts since the Reign of Queen Mary, by the
benefits and blessings of the Leagues and Alliances of him and his Royal
Progenitors made with foreign Princes, continued with a great yearly charge of
Ambassadors Ordinary and Extraordinary sent and received, and render it to be
no no more then it was in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, when
the difference of the gain of foreign Trade and Merchandise, betwixt the
little which was then, and that which is now, by reason of the East-Indie,
Turkey, Muscovie, Ligorne, and East-land Trades, and our many flourishing
American Plantations would appear to be some millions sterling money in a year.

And were notwithstanding never so grateful to our King for it* as the English
Merchants of Calais were, whilst King Edward the Third caused the Staple of
Wool to be kept there, who so ordered the matter, as the King spent nothing
upon Soldiers, in defense of the Town, which was wont to cost him eight
thousand pounds per annum; and the Mayor of that Town could in Anno* 51 of the
Reign of that King, furnish the Captain of the Town upon any Rode to be made
with one hundred Bill-men, Stows Survey of London.
and two hundred Archers of Merchants and their Servants, without any wages.

Or if the Peoples Liberties, acquired by the munificence and Indulgence of our
Kings since the making and confirming of our Magna Charta, in the ninth year of
the Reign of King Henry the Third, 9 H. 3.
now 437 years ago, when they took it to be for their good as well as the
Kings, to give him a Fifteenth part of all their Movables (not by a conniving
and unequal, but a more real and impartial Taxation, in recompense, and as a
thankful Retribution for their Liberties then granted and confirmed) which are
now as many again, or do far ex^ed them, were bu^ justly value^* or if the
benefits accrewed unto foreign Merchants, or those of our own Nation, by the
Char^a Mercatoria, granted by King Edward the First in the 31 year of his Reign
to the Me^chants Strangers, and confirmed by Act of Pa^liament in Anno 27 Ed.
3. for the releasing of an ancient Custom and Duty to the Kings of England, of
permitting their Officers and Servants to take what the King pleased out of
Foreign Commodities, and Merchandise brought into England upon payment of such
rates as he pleased, which amount unto no small yearly profit for an Exchange
and grant by the Merchants Strangers of three pence per pound (now called the
Petit Customs) of all foreign Merchandises imported, except Wines; for every
Sack of Wool forty pence, for every 300 Wolfels forty pence, and for every last
of Leather to be exported half a mark over and above the Duties payable by
Denizens, were but rightly estimated.

Or the benefits which the Subjects of England have had and received by the Act
of Parliament made in Anno 14 Ed. 3. granting that all Merchants, Denizens and
Aliens may freely and safely come into the Realm of England, which before they
could not, or durst not adventure to do without special license and safe
conduct under the great, or some part of the Seal of England, with their Goods
and Merchandise, and safely tarry and return, paying the Subsidies and Customs
reasonably due: together with the ease and benefit, but to the great loss and
damage of the Crown, which the Merchants of England as well as those of
foreign Parts have by the loss of Calais since Queen Mary's time, and the
remove of the Staple from thence, whither all Goods Exported out of England
were to be first brought, and a Custom Inward the second time paid, and for so
much (which may be believed to be the greatest part) as was again from thence
Exported into other Countries, the Customs a third time paid, which made the
Customs and Subsidies only for Goods Exported in the later end of the Reign of
King Edward the Third, and during the Reigns of King Richard the Second, Henry
the Fourth, Henry the Fifth, and the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the
Sixth, as appears by the Records of the Exchequer to amount unto threescore,
or threescore and ten thousand pounds per annum, which according to the
valuation of money at this day, says Sir John Davies, Sir John Davies Treatise
of Impositions.
the ounce of Silver being raised from twenty pence unto five shillings, would
amount unto two hundred thousand pounds sterling per annum. And the difference
betwixt the payment of Customs and Subsidies then paid three times over for
one and the same thing, and the payment of it but once, as is now used, with
many other great benefits beyond a valuation not here particularized.

And consider how unworthy it would be for the Natives and People of England,
after many Knights Fees, and Lands freely given and granted by the Kings Royal
Progenitors to their Forefathers and their Heirs, to be holden by
Knight Service and in Capite; of which, if the sixty thousand Knights Fees, and
more reckoned by ancient Authors, should be no greater a number then ten
thousand, and valued but at twenty pounds per annum, as they were reckoned in
anno primo Edwardi secundi, they would amount unto two hundred thousand pounds
per annum; and if but at three hundred pounds per annum, which is now the least
^mprovement, would amount unto three Millions per annum, besides great
quantities of other Lands being twice or thrice as much more in the several
Reigns of his Majesty's Royal Progenitors, freely granted and given unto
othe^s of them and their Heirs to be holden in Socage, to endeavor to
extinguish the right use of them, and forget their Obligations to their Prince
and Common Parent, and his Royal Progenitors.

And in too many of their Actions and business cozen or beg all they can from
him; and in stead of saying Domine quid retribuam, Lord what shall I render
unto thee for all thy benefits, make it the greatest of their care, employment,
and business, not only to take, but keep from him all they can, even at the
same time when they had obtained of him an unparralleld Act of Indemnity and
Oblivion, and to to forget all their evil designs and offenses intended or
committed against him and his blessed Father, and to pardon and give them as
much as fifteen or sixteen millions sterling in the Arrears of his own Revenue
and two or three hundred millions Sterling at least for the forfeiture of
theirs. And might have remembered, how they promised him their lives and
fortunes, and to be his Tenants in Cord; and with what a Princely and Fatherly
affection he told their Representatives, that he was sorry to see so many of
his good people come to see him at Whitehall, and had no meat to feed or
entertain them; and how ashamed and unwilling they are in their ordinary and
daily Actions and Affairs to come behind or be upon the score one to another in
their reciprocations, retributions, and retorns of gratitudes, and take it to
be a disparagement not to outvie or undo one another therein: how willingly
they can part with their money to their children at School, to make Oblations,
or Presents to their Schoolmasters at their Intermissions or Breaking up of
School at Christmas, Easter, or Whitsontyde; a course newly invented by
Schoolmasters to better their Allowances and Incomes; and chargeable enough to
the Parents, as may appear by the Offerings at a Christmas, made unto some
Capital Schoolmasters, which have singly amounted unto five or six hundred
pounds, which with the Beds and Furniture, and silver Spoons to be brought
thither by the Boarders, and left behind them at their departure, do make as
great or a greater charge to many Parents, then what they were ever rated for
the Pourveyance: And how accustomed and willing an expense all people are
desirous to put themselves unto pro honestate domus, for the good and content
of any Inn, Tavern, or Alehouse, to make them some recompense for but coming
into those houses upon any occasion or necessity of business. And can
notwithstanding so readily find the way to that unchristian River of Lethe and
sin of unthankfulness, which God and all good men do abhor, and the most
fierce and savage of the Beasts of the field, and Fowls of the Air do scorn to
be guilty of, and make it their business to desire the King to foregoe his
Pourveyance, and take a seeming recompense of fifty thousand pounds per annum
for it of the moyty of the Excise to be raised out of the Moans and Laments of
the multitude, which are the laboring and poorer sort of the people, to free
richer and better able from their heretofore small Payments or Contributions in
Cattle, and other Provisions for the Royal Pourveyance, now that England
enjoys a greater plenty then ever it did by some hundred thousand Acres of
Fenne Lands drained, many Forests and Chases deafforrested many Parks converted
unto Tillage or Pasture, great quantities of other Lands enclosed; and as much
or more of Abbey and Religious Lands returned into Lay-hands, fewer Taxes and
public Assessments by one to ten, then are in the Kingdoms and Dominions of
Spain, France, Empire of Germany, and other Kingdoms and Principalities of
Christendom, the Republique of Venice, and that Corporation of Kings, the
States of Holland, and the united Provinces, greater Improvements of Lands and
prices for the fruits of the Earth, then former ages ever saw, or attained
unto, ten to one more Cattle, Sheep, Swine, and Poultry fed and sold in England
then formerly; a freedom from the Popes and Romes former and many and daily
heavy Taxations, carrying away much of the Revenues thereof, the universality
of the people 10 or 20 times richer in movables and household Furniture then
ever their Forefathers were, every man of 10 or 20 l. Land per annum, now
having one, if not many pieces of Plate in his house (heretofore not to be
found but in the houses of the Nobility or persons of great quality) many
Alehousekeepers, a piece of Plate, if not as many as his occasions call for,
instead of Black po^s; every Artizan a piece or more of Plate; and many of the
richer sort of Citizens, Merchants, and Retaylo^s, do take themselves to be
disparaged and the Sons of contempt, if they have not half; and others almost
all their Table-service in Silver Plate, their Dyning Rooms, and Lodging
Chambers, richly hung with Tapestry of 30, 40, or 60 l. a suit, too many of
their Wives hung with Pearl Neck-laces, Diamond Lockets, and the most costly
sort of Jewels, and little Tablets of their Husbands Pictures richly enameld or
set in gold at the charge of 25 or 20 l. a piece, to hang at the outside of
their hearts; and some of the retailing part of them think they come to far
behind their betters, if they have not a kind of S^ate or Carpets to spread
within their Chambers or Apartments, or shall not be enough talked of or looked
upon if they have not an Indian Footboy with a Collar of Silver about his neck
to attend them; and their delicacies and wantonness better attended then the
afterward destroyed and vagabond Jews ever had, when the Almighty sent his
Prophets to preach, and inveigh against their excessive pride and wickedness, a
greater by many degrees more then heretofore increase of Trade, until our long
and accursed Rebellion spoiled it; more money put by Countrymen, and such as
were not Traders, to Interest and Usury (which may show how great an overplus
many have beyond their necessary expenses) then former ages were acquainted
with as much Wood and Timber sold in our late times of prodigality, as would
have bought the Fee-simple and Inheritance of all or the greatest part of the
Lands of the Kingdom, many Rivers made navigable, and Havens repaired, the
loss of Cattle, and damage by Inundations and some unruly Rivers prevented by
several Statutes o^ Commissions of Sewers, Depopulations prohibited, many an
unjust Title in concealed Lands made good after sixty years quiet possession,
Interest for money lent, reduced to a lower rate then formerly; and Brocage
forbidden, diverse Statutes restraining Aliens not being den^zend to Trade or
keep Shops, the bringing of silver Bullion into England by our Merchants
encouraged, transportation of Gold and Silver prohibited, Merchants of Ireland
and Aliens ordained to employ their moneys received in England upon the
Commodities thereof, many great Factories and Trades erected and encouraged,
the Lands of Wales greatly improved, and freedom, formerly denied, had of
Trade and Commerce with them; the Marches of Wales secured from the Incursions
of the Welsh and the Northern Counties from those of the Scots; abundance of
Markets and Fairs granted more then formerly; great store of Cattle brought in
yearly from Ireland and Scotland; and many a good and beneficial Law and Act
of Parliament made to remedy the peoples grievances, and better enabling them
to perform those very ancient and legal duties of Pourveyances, or
Compositions for them.

Which may with us be understood to be the more reasonable, when the
Pourveyance or Compositions for them in England, if they did yearly charge the
people, or amount unto, as they did not, fifty or sixty five thousand pounds
per annum, or thereabouts, did not yearly draw out of their Pu^ses or Estates
so much as that which is yearly laid out in their buying of Babies,
Hobby-horses, and Toys for their Children to spoil, as well as to play
withal: or in the yearly charge of the Counties in the amending of the
Highways, Treatments given to Harvest folk, Expenses of an Harvest Goose or
Seed-Cake, given to their Plowmen; and keeping a Wake or Parish Feast every
year, or the moneys which the good women in every Parish and County do gladly
rid themselves of in their Gossipings at the Birth of their Neighbors
Children, and many other most trivial, cheerful, and pleasing disbursements;
and nothing near so much as this last years excess in the wearing of Perrukes
or Periwigs; some at three pounds, others at five or ten pounds price, which
Clerks, and the smallest size of Tradesmen and Journymen, Apprentices, Ba^be^s,
and Vintners boys must of necessity have to hide their heads and little wit is.
Or in the women's long and needless Trains, or unreasonable length of their
Gowns (every Lady or Gentlewoman, or many ridiculous proud Citizens Wives being
certainly not Dutchesses or Countesses, or allowed to have their Trains carried
up) to show the length of their vanities, and inform the Common people, who do
with abhorrence behold them how much better it would be to bestow that ten or
twenty pounds per annum, so foolishly expended, upon the Poor in charity and
alms deeds, then to make their tails the Beesoms or Deputy-Scavengers of the
streets or places where they walk; or the money which has been lately expended
in altering or putting too many of the Common people into the low crowned
little Hats or flat Caps, to cover the folly of every Absalom or Inhabitant in
a hideous bush of hair or Periwig; or their adorning them with as many Ribbons,
as the vanities they are guilty of: or in the yearly or never murmured at
charges or expenses of almost all sorts of people, as well in the Countries as
Cities, in the exchanging or following of Fashions, as if they were to make all
the have possible they could to purchase them, lest there should not be fools
enough in the Nation, or that the ridiculous French Ape should not have enough
to be of his Livery or Retinue.*

And as to the several kinds of all those several particulars, would make the
foot of the Account to be a great deal more then that of the Pourveyance or
Compositions for them, which was so easy and petit, as in most of the Counties
of England it was many times not singly rated or assessed, but was joined with
some other Assesse. And in Kent, where ten or twenty times more being gained by
the Kings residence at Westminster, more was paid then in any one County of
England, was so little felt and regarded, as a Tenant paying One hundred pounds
rent per annum for his Land, did not think it worth his care to reckon it to
his Landlord, and demand an allowance for it. The Counties and Places which did
pay most toward the furnishing of the Kings Household provisions, being those
which abound most with them, and were the greatest gainers by their
neighborhood to the constant residence of the King and his Courts of Justice:
And those which were more remote, had but little charged upon them, as all the
13 Shires of Wales but three hundred sixty pounds per annum, Herefordshire One
hundred eighty pounds per annum, and that large County of York as big as three
others, but four hundred ninty five pounds per annum.

And may tell us how irrational and uneven it will be for the people of
England to rank with or above the care of their souls and Religion, their
endeavors to preserve their Liberties, Customs and Privileges, some of which
are hard and severe enough, as the forfeiture of the Widows Estates for life in
their deceased Husbands Copyhold Estates of Inheritance for marrying a second
Husband, unless they shall come into the Court Baron of the Lord of the Manor
riding upon a Black Ram, and acknowledge such a fault committed: or the custom
of the Manor of Balshale in the County of Warwick, where the Lord of the Manor
was to divide the Goods and personal Estate of the deceased, with his Wife and
Children: the custom of the Manor of Brails in the same County, not to marry
their Daughters, or to make their Sons Priests without license of the Lord of
the Manor: or of the Manor of Bread in the County of Sussex, where the Widows
are not to be endowed, or have dower of any of the Lands of their first
Husband, if they shall marry again. The custom of some Manors that the
Copiholder shall not sell his Lands unto a Stranger, until he shall have first
offered it unto the next of Kin, or Neighbor ab orient solis, dwelling on the
East side of him, who giving as much as others would do for it, are to have it:
or where the Copiholder is to give his Lord a certain sum of money toward
his charges in the time of War; or to forfeit his land, if summoned unto the
Lords Court, and does wilfully make default: or that the Lord or Lady of the
Manor of Coveny in the County of Cambridge, should have for every Fornication
or Adultery committed in the Manor, a Lecherwyte, or penalty of 5 s. and 2 d.
for selling a Hog without license of the Lord of that Manor; Ad Cur. tent.
ibid. Anno 5 and 8 E. 3.
and five shillings for a License for any one of the Tenants Daughters to be
married. And yet do all they can to infringe and abolish those just, ancient,
and legal Rights and Privileges of the Kings which should protect and defend
them and theirs; and being rationabilia and legitime praescripta most
reasonably and lawfully prescribed ought to be inviolabilia, quia nec divino
juri nec legibus naturae, and Gentium, sive municipalibus contradicunt, Glos.
in verb. usque ad hoc tempus C. Servitium 18. q. 2.
inviolable when they contradict not the Laws of God, Nature, and Nations, and
the Laws of the Land, as if all that is to be found in our Laws, and reasonable
Customs should be only to protect the peoples Rights and Liberties, and the
inferior Members of the Body Politic, and to diminish and abrogate that of
the Kings, the superior more noble, and therefore the more to be respected; or
as if the power of a Prince should be the better when it is weakest; a blind or
decrepit pennyless Captain or General more useful for their Wars then a
Sampson a David, or a Solomon as full of Riches as W^sdome, and a Wooden Sword
more for that purpose then one of Iron and Steel, or that of Goliath.

How unjust as well as unreasonable it would be for the People of England, to
rack and raise the Rents and rates of their Lands and Commodities, and increase
their own Revenues and prices of victuals and household provisions, five or six
to one more then it was when the Compositions for the Pourveyance was agreed
upon in the third or fourth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and lay the
burden thereof only upon the King, make him to be as an Amorite or Stranger in
our Israel, and his own dominions, paying an enhaunced and oppressing Rate and
Interest for food and provisions for himself and his household: and to receive
his rents and other moneys due unto him after the old rate, and buy at the new,
take little more then four pence instead of a shilling in every sum which is
paid him, and pay twelve pence for every groats worth which he has occasion to
buy, and drive or enforce him by buying all by the penny, and being left to the
mercy of the Sellers to such a prejudicial necessity or custom as would
certainly undo and ruin all the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, Tradesmen,
Mechanics, and People of England, if they should but imitate him. And would
without the help of our S^^taries or Levellers, have ere now destroyed and
ruined the two famous Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, those great Lights
and Fountains of Learning in our Nation, and have brought their Towering
Colleges Halls, and glorious Buildings into their Rubbidge, or little more
then a story to talk of as Travelers sometimes do of the heretofore University
or Public School of Stamford, if the Act of Parliament in 18 Eliz, had not
better provided for them, and ordained, that a third part of the rents of the
Lands belonging unto them, should be for ever reserved and paid in Corn, Malt,
and other Provisions at their election.

Or now to deny it him, when as if he or his Father, or Royal Progenitors
could have foreseen any dislike or complaining of such an ancient and
unquestionable Right of the Crown, he or they might by a restraint of their
Bounties and Indulgencies have made themselves not only savers, but gainers by
it; or reserved more then that in their multituds of Grants and Fee-Farme Rents.

And did never as Cromwell, that dissembling and devouring Hiena or Wolf of
the Evening, dig or tear up by the roots as many of our Laws and Liberties as
he could, upon a pretense of defending and protecting them, call our Magna
Charta in the worst Latin that ever Brewer or Englishman spoke, Magna Fartae,
imprison the Lawyers that pleaded for the Peoples liberties, and was so little
sensible of their being tired or impoverished with Taxes, as he could, when he
was lieutenant General of the Army of Reforming Harpies, give some Gentlemen
of the County of Bedford, who complained of their heavy burdens, and the
poverty of that County, no better an answer or ease, then that he would never
believe they were unable to pay Taxes as long as they could whistle when they
did drive their Plows and Carts.

Nor did after the horrid Murder of his Father, and his own Exile and
sufferings by an almost twenty years Rebellion of the greatest part of his
Subjects, (grown rich with the plunder and spoil of those that adhaered unto
him; and having destroyed the Sheep, can now as if they were innocent, appear
in Sheeps clothing,) enforce those that rebelled against him and his Royal
Father to compound, as King H. 3. did his Rebellious People (all but the
unhappy Robert Ferrers Earl of Derby, the Heirs of Simon de Mountfort Earl of
Leicester, and some few others) for their pardons or redemption of their
forfeited Lands, by his Commission, or dictum de Kenelworth, according to the
nature of their several Delinquencies, so as the greatest Fines should not
exceed five years, and the lowest not be less then two years of the then true
yearly value of their Lands and Estates, Neither as the late pretended
Parliament and Oliverian Tormentors of all that were good, did in a more severe
manner, when they forfeited, and would not permit many of the Loyal Party at
all to compound, and constrained the rest to compound for a supposed fighting
against the King, when it was well known, that they did really fight, and
suffer for him; made them to pay great and excessive Fines, some according to a
third, and others a half of the full yearly value of their Lands and Estates;
and others in what arbitrary way they pleased for their personal Estates, and
moneys due unto them: And after they had proceeded so far in the ruining of
them, and granted them a slender Act of Oblivion, choked with a great many of
Provisos, did upon the loyal Attempts of some of them, to recall their King
and Liberties, Decimate, and make those also that had not therein offended
their Masterships of Sin and Rebellion, to pay and compound for a Tenth of
their Estates, as if Loyalty had been a sin, and like that of Adam, the first
Inhabitant in the world, been to be punished in all the loyal Party, and their
Generations, squeese their Estates, or require any Contributions, or Sums of
money of them more then of all the Loyal Party, toward the payment of many
hundred thousand pounds sterling in Arrear, to themselves and the Soldiers
which had been before employed to ruin him, when after his most happy
Restoration, he was contented for the quiet and welfare of the Nation to pay
it out of his own Revenues and the public and general Contributions.

Nor did in his Act of Parliament for a general Pardon and Indemnity insert
any Proviso for their good adhaering toward him and his Royal Crown and
dignity; or compel them as is usually done in cases of Pardons for Felony or
Manslaughter to find Sureties for their better behavior toward him and his
People.

But gave way unto his extraordinary mercy and compassion to a People who in
the Career of their Sins, Rebellion, and Rapine, could not find the way to pity
the sad condition of their Souls, Bodies, and Estates, and in all that
concerned the good and welfare of his People, was willing to imitate and
remember that Maxim of his blessed father the Martyr, that the Peoples
Liberties did strengthen the Kings Prerogative, and that the Kings Prerogative
is to defend the Peoples Liberties; And was lately heard to say, that he would
not, if he might, be absolute, or not restrained in many things by the Laws
which he or his Royal Progenitors had made or granted, that the Laws of
England were the b^st Laws in the world, that if the wisest men in the world
had been appointed to make Laws, they could have made no better; and that if
they had not been made, he would most willingly make the same again.

How little would be gained to the people by denying him the Pourveyance, or
Compositions for them, who has a just, most ancient, and legal right to those
their small Retributions, if he should restrain the bitings and oppression of
their Markets and Merchandise, or by his removing his Residence and Courts of
Justice from Westminster, make London and her twelve adjacent Counties, viz.
Middlesex, Kent, Surrey, Sussex, Southampton, Essex, Hertford, Bedford,
Cambridge, Huntington, Buckingham, and Northamptonshires, to loose more then
forty times as much every year by it: Although he should not abate or bring
down the rates of Rents and Provisions so low as King Edward the Sixth did
intend to do, Sir John Heywards History of King Edward the 6 th
when to satisfy some of the discontented Commons and People in Arms and
Rebellion against him, he did undertake, that there should be an Act of
Parliament in the next ensuing Parliament, to lessen and reduce the Rents of
Lands (scarce half so high and unreasonable as now they are) to what they had
been forty years before.

And how unequal it would be, that the People should by infringing of the
Laws, and by the improvement and high rack of their Lands and Commodities,
take advantage of their own doing of wrong unto others, and that the Citizens
of London, and the Inhabitants of the twelve adjacent Counties should desire
his Residence to be so near his Chamber of London, and make him by the taking
away of his Pourveyance so great a looser by it; when if like the Sun in the
Firmament, he should diffuse and carry his light and heat to all the parts of
his Kingdom, and not make London and its neighbou^ing Counties an East or
West Indies, and the rest of the Kingdom to be as a Greenland, either by
removing his Courts and Residence to Worcester or Ludlow toward Wales, or to
York, the People of London, and the neighboring Counties would as soon lament
his absence and removal, as he would find the ease and benefit of it: as his
Royal Father King Charles the Martyr did in the year 1640, when he was at
Newcastle with his Court and Army in the Borders of Scotland, where the rate or
price which he allowed at London for the Provisions of his Household, according
to the Compositions for the Pourveyance, appeared to be so much above the
Market rates, as the People brought it in so plentifully, as he was enforced by
his Proclamation to forbid the bringing in of such an overplus.

And may to their cost hereafter believe that they shall be as little gainers by
that small yearly sum of money, which they do but think they shall save by the
not paying the Compositions for the Pourveyance, or by the Kings acquitall of
it, as they have been, or may be in his release of his Tenures in Capite, and
by Knights service; when they dream of that which may be imagined to be a
benefit; but when they are waking, will never be found to be so, and will in
the yearly expense or accidents of the better and richer part of the People in
the charges of finding Offices, defraying the Fees of Escheators and Feodaries,
many Writs Process, and Suits in that which was the Court of Wards and
Liveries, and their payment of Rents and Compositions for Wardships will not be
enough to satisfy, or set against the very many great oppressions, mischiefs,
and inconveniences which since the taking away of that Court, and the Tenures
in Capite and by Knights service have fallen upon the Orphans or fatherless
Children of that part of the People and their Estates, when the Wolves shall be
made the Keepers of the Lambs, and every indigent or wastfull father in Law
shall be a Guardian to those whose Estates he makes it his business to spend
and ruin, or to transfer upon his own Children: and the charge and trouble
of Petitions at the Council Board, or more tedious Suits in Chancery to be
relieved against them; the pay of more Life-guards, or a small standing Army
(to keep the People within the bounds of their duty, and secure good Subjects
from the mischief intended by the bad) frequent Musters of the Trained Bands
more then formerly, and of an Army to be hired upon an occasion of an Invasion,
or the transferring the sedem belli, or miseries of war into an Enemies
Country, much whereof would not have needed to be, if the Tenures in Capite,
and by Knight Service, those stronger Towers and Forts of our David, those
Horsemen and Charriots of our Israel; and always ready Garrisons composed of
the best and worthiest men of our Nation; not hirelings taken out of the
Vulgus, nor unlettered, unskilful, and uncivilized, nor rude or debauched part
of the people; but of those who would fight tanquam pro aris and focis, as they
and their worthy Ancestors ever used to do, for the good and honor of their
King and Country, and the preservation of their own Families, as being obliged
unto it by the strongest ties and obligations of law and gratitude, which ever
were, or could be laid upon the fortunes Estates, Souls and Bodies of men, that
would have a care but of either of them.

Or to put in the Balance against the benefits which they had in the
preservation of their Woods, recording their discents and titles to their
Lands, and many a Deed and Evidence which would otherwise have been lost, or
not easy to be found, and the help and aid which their heirs in their
infancies have never failed of in all their Suits and Concernments.

And the seldom abuses of some naughty Pourveyors, and the complaints thereby
do not any thing near amount unto the immense gains of the people, of some
millions sterling per annum, in their vast improvements of their Lands and
Estates by the rack and rise of rents enhaunce of Servants and Laborers wages,
and all commodities in all parts of the Kingdom before and since the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, when the Compositions for the Pourveyance were made and agreed
upon, may seem but a very small yearly Retribution to the King or his Royal
Progenitors for permitting so much as shall be reasonable of it: And the People
of England might better allow him those small and legal advantages, which are,
and will be as much for public good as his own, then they do themselves in
many of their own affairs one with another in many of their particular and
private ends and advantages; wherein the will and bequests o^ the dead and
their Hospitalls, Legacies, or Gifts to charitable uses, are not, nor have been
so well managed as they ought to be.

As may be instanced in those multitudes of charitable Legacies or Gifts in
lands, originally cut out and proportioned to the maintenance of certain
numbers of poor, or for some particular uses, which by the increase and
improvement of Rents before and since the dissolution of the Abbeys, Religious
Houses, and Hospitals, did very much surmount the proportions which were at the
first allowed, or intended for them.

And with more Reason and Justice, then the City of London, and many of their
Guilds and Fraternities do now enjoy diverse Lands which were given for Lamps,
and other superstitious uses, for which they compounded by order of the
Council Board with King Edward the Sixth for twenty thousand pounds, Heylins
History of the Reformation of the Church of England.
and more then that, which that and many other Cities and Towns do take and
receive for Tolls, which being many times only granted for years; or upon some
temporary occasions are since kept and retained as rights: besides many Gifts
and Charitable Uses since the dissolution of the Abbeys and Religious Houses,
amounting to a very great yearly value, which by the improvement and rise of
Rents, beyond the proportion of the Gifts, or the intention of the Givers, have
been either conveyed by J^yntures or leases to wives or children, or much of
the overplus which came by the improvement, or concealed Charitable Uses,
converted by the Governors of many a City and Town Corporate, to the
maintenance of themselves, the Worship of the Corporation, and many a
comfortable Feast and Meeting for the pretended good of the (...) people
thereof, who are but seldom, if at all the better for it. Some of which not to
mention any of greater bulk or value, may appear in a few instances instead of
a multitude of that kind, dispe^sed in the Kingdom as two Closes of Land, or
Meadow Ground lying in the Parish of Shoreditch in the County of Middlesex,
given by Simon Burton, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, in the year 1579.
unto St. Thomas Hospital upon condition, Stows Survey of London.
that the Governors of the said Hospital should yearly give unto 30 poor
Persons of the said Parish, on the 21, 22, or 23 days of December for ever the
sum of eight pence a piece. Mr. William Hanbury, Citizen and Whitebaker of
London, did by a Surrender in the year 1595. give unto Elizabeth Spearing
certain Copihold Lands in Stebu^heath and Ratcliffe in the said County, to pay
the Parson and Churchwardens of the said Parish for ever, to the use of the
poor People there, two and fifty shillings yearly, which by consent of the
Parish, is by twelve pence every Wednesday weekly bestowed upon the Poor
abroad. And Mrs. Alice Hanbury Widow by her will did in the same year give unto
Mr. George Spearing a Tenement in the said Parish, wherein William Bridges a
Tailor then dwelled, upon condition that the said George Spearing, his Heirs
and Assigns should yearly pay to the Churchwardens of the said Parish and
their Successors, to the use of the poor and impotent People, thirteen
shillings and four pence.

And that whether the King be enough recompensed, or not at all recompensed for
his Pourveyance, it would be none of the best bargains for the Subjects of
England, or their Posterity, to exchange or take away so great and n^^^ssary a
part of his Prerogative, or support of Majesty, as the Pourveyance or
Compositions for them were, which in the Parliament in the 4 th year of the
Reign of King James, were held to be such an inseparable Adjunct of the Crown,
and Imperial dignity, as not to be aliened, and some few years after believed
by that incomparable Sir Francis Bacon, afterward Lord Chancellor of England,
to be a necessary support of the Kings Table, a good help, Sir Francis Bacons
letter to the Duke of Buckingham.
and justly due unto him: And the Learned both in Law and Politiqu^s in other
Nations as well as our own, have told us that such Sacra Sacrorum (is Baldus)
and Individua (as Cynus) terms them, which Jurisconsultorum communi quodam
decreto, Baldus in proaemio seudorum and in Consil. 274. lib. 3. Cynus in l. si
viva matre de bonis matern. Bodin de Repub. lib. 1. Besoldus dissert. politic.
Juridic. de Juribus Majestatis, ca. 9.
by an uncontraverted opinion of all Lawyers, nec cedi, nec distrahi, nec ulla
ratione ababienari a summo principe posse, cannot (as Bodni says) be granted
away, or released, no^ by any manner of way alienated or withholden from the
Sovereign Prince; nec ulla quidem temporis diuturnitate praescribi posse, nor
by any length of time prescribed against him; and are therefore by Besoldus
calcalled Imperii and Majestatis Jura and bona regno conjuncta incorporata, seu
corona unit a quae princeps alienari nequit; the Rights of Empire and Majesty,
and the goods and part of the Crown so incorporate and united unto it, as the
Prince cannot alien them; which to attempt would not be much different from the
endeavors to restrain a Prince by a Law not to receive or demand any
Subsidies, Oblations, Civilities, or Respects from his People; which like a Law
against the Word of God, or contra bonos mores. would by the opinion of our no
less Judicious and Learned Hobart, Bacon, and Hutton, be void and of none
effect, for the Presents and good will of Inferiors unto their Superiors,
(not bribes to corrupt Justice) either for favors done or to be done, is one
of the ancient and most noble Customs which mankind has ever practiced, and
began so with the beginning or youth of the world, Genesis c. 43.
as we find the Patriarch Jacob sending with his Sons to his then unknown Son
Joseph, besides the money which he gave them to buy corn in Egypt, a Present of
the best fruits of the Country, a little Balm, and a little Honey, Spices and
Myrrh, Nuts and Almonds.

Saul when he thought not of ever being a King, whilst he was busied in the
enquiring for his Fathers Asses, 1 Reg. ca. 10. v. 15. and 25.
did not think fit to go unto Samuel the man of God, who was then accounted
honorable, unless he had a Present to bring him.

Most of the People of the East brought Presents unto their Kings, as was seen
in the splendor and greatness of Solomon; and sine quibus, as Grotius says,
Grotius Annotat. ad vet. testamentum.
Reges non adire solebant, did not without presents come a near their Kings;
and was a Custom long after not forgotten by the Kings or Wisemen coming out
of the East to worship and adore our blessed Savior at his Birth.

The Persians in their Kings Progresses, did munera offerre neque vilia vel
exilia, neque nimis praetiosa and magnifica, AElianus Hist. variar. lib. 1.
Brissonius de regno Persiae lib. 1.
bring him Presents neither precious nor contemptible, from which etiam
Agricolae and opifices, Workmen, and Plowmen were not freed in bringing Wine,
Oxen, Sheep, Fruits, and Cheeses, and the first Fruits of what the earth
brought forth, quae non tributi, sed doni loco censebantur, which were not
received or given as Tributes, but as Oblations and Free gifts, which made the
poor Persian Synetas, when he met with Artaxerxes and his Trayn in the way of
his Progress, rather then fail of something to offer, hasten to the River, and
bring as much water as he could in his hands, and with a cheerful countenance,
wishes, and prayers for the health of the King present it unto him.

Nor was not so altogether appropriate unto those Eastern Countries, where God
spoke first unto his People, and the Sun of his Righteousness did arise; but
was long ago practiced in England, where the custom was, as Gervasius
Tilburi^nsis, Gervasius Tilburiensis.
who wrote in the Reign of Henry the Second, and lived in the Reign of King
Henry the First, informs us upon all Addresses to the King qua^dam in rem and
qua^dam in spem offerre, to present the King with some or other Presents,
either upon the granting of any thing, or the hopes which they had that he
would do it afterward: And so usually as there were Oblata Rolls or Memorialls
kept of it in the Reign of King John, and some other the succeeding Kings, and
the Queens, or their Royal Consorts, seldom escaped the tender of those
gratitudes of Aurum Reginae, Money or Gold presented unto them, as well as unto
their Kings, and was a Custom not infrequent in the Saxon times, as appears
by our Doomsday Book, the most exact and general Survey of all the Kingdom,
and so little afterward neglected, as it was paid upon every Pardon of Life or
Member, and so carefully collected, as it was long after in the Reign of King
Henry the Third by an Inquisition taken after the death of Gilbert de Sandford,
20 H. 3.
who was by Inheritance Chamberlain to the Queens of England, found that he had
amongst many other Fees and Profits due unto him and his Heirs, by reason of
that office six pence per diem, allowed for a Clark in the Court of Exchequer,
to collect and gather the Oblation or Duty.

Neither can there be any reason given why the Clergy, for whom God the ratio
rationum incomprehensible wisdom and greatest perfection ordained so great a
Pourveyance for them in their Tithes and Oblations, should enjoy it, and his
Vicegerent and Protector of them be without it, the Nobility, and many of the
Gentry, and Laity not want it either in kind, or some other satisfaction for
it, and all Cities, Corporations, Guilds, and Societies furnish out their
grandeur and greatness derived only by reflection from that of the Kings* and
he only be deprived of that which should maintain his hospitality, and was so
useful to all other King^ and Princes for the gaining of the affections of the
People, Et a concilier (as L^i^ de Orleans says) L' amor de (...) subject^
quil^ (...) par le bouche and d' leurs le people au (...) and les p^^ds a
lateste pour affirmir le corpse politic, Lois d' Orleans ouuertures de
Parliament ca. 8
et le l^er par* une grac^^use voire necessaire correspondence; and to procure
the love of the people, who are taken by the mouth, and to fasten them unto the
King, and the Feet unto the Head, strengthen the Body Politic, and unite all
the parts thereof by a loving and necessary compliance, when he does at the
same time yearly pay and allow some thousands of pounds for the support and
Pourveyance of his Council in the Marches of Wales, Exodus 22. v. 29.
and his Judges and Justices of the Peace, and other Officers in the Kingdom
for the administration of Justice.

Or for us to think that when God in his Government of his chosen people of
Israel, in that his most righteous Theodratie, did command them not to delay
the offerings of the First of their Ripe Fruit^ and of their Liquors, and of
their Oxen and their Sheep, and ordained, Deuteronomy. 24. v. 19, 20, 21.
that if a Sheaf were forgotten in the time of Harvest, they were not to go
again to fetch it; and when they did beat their Olive trees, they should not go
^ver it again* and gathered their grapes, they should not gle^n them, for they
should be for the ^tranger, the F^therless* and the Widow, he would now be well
pleased with such an unworthy sparing and avarice of Subjects, in withholding
their Oblations from his Deputies, and disabling them from relieving the
Strangers, the Fatherless, and the Widows.

And that the rates of his household provisions being much the same, or very
near unto those which were agreed upon by the Justices of Peace of every County
(who cannot be understood to be any Strangers to the rates and Market prices of
every County) might not be now as cheap afforded as they were then, Stows
Survey of London.
or when they were cheaper in the ^3* year of the Reign of King Henry the
Eighth, now not much above 130 years ago, when 24 great B^eves were provided
for a great and pompous Sergeants Feast at Ely house in London, where the King,
Queen, and many of the Nobility, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London were
present, (such provisions being then probably at a greater price then
ordinary,) for 26 s. 8 d. a piece from the Shambles, a Carcass of an Ox at 24
s. one hundred fat Muttons a^ ^ s. 10 d. a piece, one and fifty great Veals at
4 s. 8 d. a piece, four and thirty Porks at 3 s 8 d. a piece, ninety one Pigs
at 6 d. a piece. Capons ten dozen at 20 d. a piece, Kentish Capons nine dozen
and a half at 12 d. a piece, Capons course nineteen dozen 6 d. a piece, Cocks
of gross seven dozen and nine at 8 d. a piece, Cocks course fourteen dozen and
eight at 3 d. a piece, Pullets the best at 2 d. ob. a piece, other Pullets 2 d.
Pigeons thirty seven dozen at 10 d. a dozen, and Larks, three hundred and
forty dozen at 5 d a dozen; if the Magistrates of England, who are trusted by
the Law with the Assi^e and correction of the rates and prices of victuals and
household provisions, and the punishment of Ingrossers, Forestallers, and
Regrators, did not sleep over their duty; or too many of the Justices of Peace,
and Lords of Leets did not find it to be more for their own advantages to
improve and raise their Lands to the highest rack, rather then reduce those now
exorbitant rates and prices into that order which the Laws and Statutes of
England do intend they should be.

There being no just cause to complain of our payments to the King for his
Pourveyance, or any other of his necessary affairs, when the cry and daily
complaints of our want of money, is not so much by reason of our want of Trade,
as our want of wit, by mispending that which should regularly and orderly
maintain us and our Families; and it is not our want of Trade, but our too much
trading in pride, excess, and superfluities, which has brought the Nation into
that Hectique Fever, and almost incurable Consumption, which has now seized
upon the vitalls of it, and would be very evident, if a strict account and view
were taken of what has been needlessly and vitiously spent within these last
twenty or thirty years more then formerly in Apparel, Diet, Wine, Tobacco,
Jewels, Coaches, new Fashions; greater Portions given with Daughters, then our
Forefathers could either have given or thought fitting; increase of Servants,
Artificers and Laborers wages; gaming by women as well as men, great interest
and Brocage paid for money, and buying upon Trust to support their vanities;
and twenty millions sterling lately spent in the enterteynment of the Devil,
and a most horrid Rebellion, and seeking for a Liberty; to loose all our own
Liberties, and may give us to understand, that if we had that money again,
which was so foolishly mispended, those that could then lay it out, and now
want it, might subscribe unto this undeniable truth, that there would be
greater riches and less necessities seen in England, then in any other Nation,
and enough and more then enough to drive the Trade thereof; and that whilst the
back and belly have vyed who should be most inordinate and profuse, the
improvement of Rents, Wages, and Commodit^^s, have been to no better a purpose
then to improve our vices, and the Nationa^l as well as particular miseries and
damage, which are and will be the never ^a^ling concomitants and consequents of
it: For no reason can be given why we should not as cheerfully submit to any
thing that tends to the support of the King and the Honor (...) Nation, as
every Citizen of London and man of Trade will do to the furnishing of Pageants
or public (...) for the honor and Reputation of their City or Company, or as
the Universities sometime do in an Entertainment of the King, or their
Chancellor, though they did at the same time contribute to the Pourveyance; or
as the People of England did in the 5 th year of the Reign of King Edward the
6th, when the Queen Regent of Scotland ^n her return out of France thither,
desiring to take her Journey through England was by the City of London presented
at her first coming with Muttons, Beef, Veals, Poultry, Wine, and all other
sorts of Provisions necessary for the Entertainment of her, and her no small
Train, Heylin Ecclesia restaurata, or History of the Reformation of the Church
of England. fol. 114.
even to Bread and F^well; and when she departed to go for Scotland, was after
great and Princely Entertainments by the King at Whitchall conducted by the
Sheriffs of London, to whose care the King had committed it, as far as
Waltham, and by all the Sheriffs of all the Counties through which she passed,
until she came unto the Borders of Scotland, her Enterteynment being provided
by the Kings appointment at the charge of the Counties.

Nor can it be for the honor of the English Nation to come behind the Jews,
that stiff necked and Rebellious Race of Mankind in their kindness and returns
unto their Kings and Princes, who notwithstanding that pedagoguy and hard hand
of Government, which the Almighty in his eternal Wisdom found necessary to
put upon them in their releasing of Servants, and letting their Lands lie
untilled every seventh year, permitting their Debtors and Mortgagors or
Ven^ors in every Jubilee, or 50 year, to enjoy their Lands and Estates, and to
be at liberty: their many and many times Free Will and Thanksgiving Offerings,
Levit. ca. 1. v. 2, 3. and Levit. 2, 3. and 25 Exodus 21, 22, 23, 29
Peace Offerings, Sin Offerings, costly Sacrifices, Feasts unto the Lord, and
Journeys to Jerusalem, the Offerings which were brought and prepared for the
building of the Tabernacle in such abundance (a readiness and zeal not now to
be found amongst us, as formerly in the building of Churches, or repair of the
Cathedral of St. Paul) as God directed Moses by a Proclamation to restrain them
from bringing any more: and their Males appearing three times in every year
before the Lord not empty handed and their very large Offerings also at the
Dedication of the Temple, Deuteronomy. 15. and 16.
when Solomon their King invited them unto it, and their Corban or money, often
given to the Treasury of it, could not forget their respects and duty to their
Kings in their Presents or Pourveyance for them and their Household.

When God would not suffer the Majesty of Kings, shining as the beams and
reflections of his divine Majesty upon the face of Moses when he came down out
of the Mount from his conference with him to be abated or lessened, but showed
his care of it in the severe punishment of the gainsaying of Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram, and their saying that Moses took too much upon him; and is, and
ever has been so essential, and very necessary to the preservation of
Authority and Government, and the Subjects and People under it: 1 Samuel 15.
as Saul, when he had incurred the displeasure of God and his Prophet Samuel,
desired him not to dishonor him before the People. And David, when he heard
how shamefully his Ambassadors had been abused by the King of Ammon, ordered
them to stay at Jericho until their beards were grown out. 2 Samuel 10.


The Romans, who being at the first but Bubulci and Opiliones, a rude Company
o^ Shepherds and Herdsmen, and were looked upon as such a base and rude
Rabble, as the Sabines their Neighbors scorned to marry, or be allied with
them, did afterward in their growing greatness, (which like a torrent arising
from a small assembly of waters, did afterward overrun and subdue the greatest
part of the habitable World;) hold their Consuls in such veneration, as they
had (as Cicero says) magnum nomen, magnam speciem, magnam majestatem, as well
as magn^m potestatem, as great an outward respect and veneration as they had
authority, and were so jealous and watchful over it, as their Consul Fabius
would rather lay aside the honor due unto his Father from a Son (of which
that Nation were extraordinary obse^vers) then abate any thing of it, and
commanded his aged Father Fabius, the renowned rescuer and preserver of Rome,
in a public Assembly to alight from his Horse, and do him the honor due unto
his present Magistracy, which the good old man, though many of the people did
at the present dislike it, did so approve of, as he alighted from his horse,
and embracing his Son, Plutarch Apothegm.
said, Euge fili sapis, qui intelligis quibus imperes, and quam magnum
magistratum susceperis, my good Son, you have done wisely in understanding over
whom you command, and how great a Magistracy you have taken upon you.

And our Offa King of the Mercians in An. Dom. 760, an Ancestor of our
Sovereign, took such a care of the Honor and Rights due unto Majesty, and to
preserve it to his Posterity, as he ordained, Speed Hist. of Britain, and
Leiger Book of St. Albans.
that even in times of Peace, himself, and his Successors in the Crown, should
as they passed through any City have Trumpets sounded before them, to show that
the Person of the King (says the Leiger Book of St. Albans) should breed both
fear and honor in all, which did either see, or hear him.

Neither will it be any honor for Christians to be outdone by the Heathen in
that or other their respects and observances to their Kings, when the Romans
did not seldom at their public charge erect costly Statues, Zonaras in 2
part. Annal. Suetonius in vita August. Cassiodorus, lib. 6. Epist. 7. and
Rosinus de Antiquitat. Romans 54.
and Memorialls of their g^atitude to their Emperors, make chargeable
Sacrifices, ad aras and in aedibus honoris and virtutis, in their Temples of
Honor and Virtue, could yearly throw money into the deep Lake or Gulf of
Curtius in Rome, where they were like never to meet with it again pro voto and
salute Imperatoris, as Offerings for the health and happiness of their
Emperou^s; and all the City and Senate, Calendis Januarii velut publico suo
parenti Imperatori strenas largiebant, did give New years-gifts to the Emperor
as their public Parent, and bring them into the Capitol, though he was absent,
and make their Pensitationes, or Composition for Pourveyance for their
Emperors to be a Canon unal^erable.

Or by the Magnesians and Smirnaeans, Seldom ad Marmora Arundeliana
who upon a misfortune in War happened to Seleucus King of Syria, could make a
League with each other, and cause it to be engraven in Marble pillars, which to
our days has escaped the Iron Teeth of time, majestatem Seleuci tueri and
conservare, to preserve and defend the Honor and Majesty of Seleucus, which was
not their Sovereign or Prince, but their Friend and Ally.

Nor any thing to persuade us that our Forefathers were not well advised, Mat.
Paris 549.
when in their care to preserve the honor of their King and Country, they were
troubled and angry in the Reign of King H. 3. that at a public Feast in
Westminster Hall, the Popes Legate was placed at the Kings Table, in the place
where the King should have sat, or when the Baronage, or Commonalty of
England, did in a Parliament holden at Lincoln, in the Reign of King Edward the
First by their Letters to their then domineering demy-God the Pope, who was
averse unto it, stoutly assert their Kings superiority over the Kingdom of
Scotland, and refuse that he should send any Commissioners to Rome, to debate
the matter before the Pope in Judgment, which would tend to the disherison of
the Crown of England, the Kingly Dignity, and prejudice of the Liberties,
Walsingham Hist. Angl. 85.
Customs, and Laws of their Forefathers, to the observation and defense of
which they were ex debito prestiti juramenti astricti, bound by Oath, and would
not permit, tam insolita and praejudicialia, such unusual and prejudicial
things to be done against the King, or by him if he should consent unto it.

Or when the Pope intending to cite King Edward the Third to his Court at Rome,
in Anno 40 of his Reign, to do homage to the Sea of Rome for England and
Ireland, and to pay him the Tribute granted by King John, the whole Estates in
Parliament did by common consent declare unto the King, that if the Pope should
attempt any thing against him by process, Rot. Parl. 40 E. 3. m. 78, 9.
or other matter, the King with all his Subjects should with all their force
resist him: And in Anno 42 of King Ed. 3. advised him to refuse an offer of
peace made unto him by David le Bruise King of Scotland (though the War^es and
frequent incursions of that Nation were always sufficiently troublesome and
chargeable) so that he might enjoy to him in Fee the whole Realm of Scotland,
Rot. Parl. 42 E. 3. m. 7.
without any subjection, and declared that they could not assent unto any such
Peace, to the disherison of the King and his Crown, and the great danger of
themselves.

Or that William Walworth he gallant Mayor of London, whose fame for it will
live as long as that City shall be extant, was to be blamed, when he could not
endure the insolency of the Rebel Wat Tyler in suffering a Knight whom the King
had sent to him to stand bare before him, but made his Dagger in the midst of
his Rout and Army teach his proud heart better manners.

Or Richard Earl of Arundel and Surrey did more then was necessary, when as he
perceiving before hand the after accomplished wicked design and ambition of
John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, and titular King of Leon and Castile, Rot.
Parl. 17 R. 2.
did before the downfall of that unhappy Prince King Richard the Second,
complain in Parliament that he did sometimes go arm in arm with the King, and
make his men wear the same color of Livery that the Kings servants did.

Or that it was ill done by the Parliament in the 14 th. year of the Reign of
that King, when they petitioned him, that the Prerogative of him and his Crown
might be kept, and that all things done to the contrary might be redressed: Or
that the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament assembled in
the 16 th year of the said Kings Reign, did not well understand the good of the
Kingdom, when upon a Debate and consideration of the Popes Usurpation and
Encroachments upon the Kings Regalities, and his Holiness Provisions made for
Aliens and Strangers by the benefices of the Church of England, 16 R. 2.
they did unanimously declare, that they and all the Liege Commons of the Realm
would stand with the King and his Crown and Regality in the cases aforesaid,
and in all other cases attempted against him his Crown and Regality, in all
points to live and to dye: Or that our forefathers were not to be imitated in
their stout assertions of the Rights of their Kings and their Regalities, Coke
1. part. 5. Reports. 26
when in their zeal thereunto Humphry Duke of Gloucester, when the Pope had
wrote Letters in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth in derogation of the King
and his Regality, and the Churchmen durst not speak against them, he did throw
his Letters and Missive into the fire and burn them.

Or that it can be well done by us to withhold from him that small retribution
of Pourveyance (which is a Duty established by a fourfold obligation, composed
of a Right or Duty, a very ancient Custom backed by the Laws of God, Nature,
and Nations, the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and a contract made and
continued by the people to their Kings, built upon the best and greatest of
considerations, which the Prophet David in the 15 th Psalm, if it had not been
(as it is) beneficial to the people, but to some loss or damage, advises not
to be broken) and enforce him for want of it to give over his Housekeeping; and
deprive him of that Loadstone which might amongst many other of his daily
graces and favors, attract and draw unto him the love and affections of his
people, and the most iron and rusty hearted Clowns; or leave our Trajan no wall
for his ^erba Parietaria, sweet smelling flower to grow upon.

Or that it can be any honor for our Lords and Ladies, who received their
honor from the King and his Progenitors, M. S. Francisci Junii fill. Francisci
Junii in diatrib. de vocibus Lord and Lady.
and were in the Saxon Times called (...) and (...), Lords and Ladies from
their Hospitalities, and giving of bread, to see, and not seek or help to
remedy the greatest dishonor which in the consequence of it was ever put upon
the Fountain of honor and a King of England, in Solio, in his Throne and full
possession of his Kingdom; and so much the more and without an example,
because it is not in the Time of a Rebellion, but a happy Restoration, and in
the time of Peace, after an end or conclusion of an intestine and barbarous
War; and so notorious as it has been told in the Streets of Gath and
Askalon, and stirred up some unmannerly fancies and pictures made by some of
our envious Neighbors in reproach of it.

Or that there can be any reason that those that think it reason that the King
should recompense them for their losses and damages sustained in his service,
in doing their duty unto him, should not be as willing to give him an ease in
his losses by any agreement made with them, which proves to be prejudicial, or
a damage unto him: or that we may not give our selves in assurance, that the
Baronage of England, 20 H. 6.
who in a Parliament in the 20 th year of the Reign of King Henry the Third,
refused to consent to an Act of Parliament for the legitimation of such
children as were bot^ before marriage to Parents afterward married, and
clapping their hands upon their swords, cried una voce, with one voice, nolumus
mutare leges Angliae, we will never consent to change the laws of England,
would now, if they were living, say more, and bewail the downfall of the Honor
of their King and Country: And not only they, but all the then hospitable
Gentry and Commonalty of England.

Lament to see so good and gracious a King allied to all the greatest Houses,
and Princely Families of Christendom, by a descent far beyond the most
ancient of them, and an extraction of blood equalling, if not surpassing the
greatest of them, and as well deserving of his People, want the means to
support a Magnificence as high and illustrious as any of his Royal
Progenitors, and not to be able for want of his Pourveyance to give his
Servants Diet or Wages; and that some of the principal of them, Vide Oath of
the Treasurer and Comptroller of the Kings house.
as the Treasurer and Comptroller, being sworn by the Orders of the House, that
all things in the Kings House be guided to the Kings most worship, and that
they search the good old rule worshipful and profitable of the Kings Court
used before time, and them to keep, and better if they can; should have so much
cause as they have to weep, as the Priests did at the destruction of the Temple
of Jerusalem, and complaining that the beauty is departed from the Kings house,
his Servants are become like Hearts that find no Pasture, and they that did,
feed plentifully are desolate in the Streets.

Wonder what wild Boar out of the Forest, or Fox out of the Wood have so
destroyed and laid wast the Vineyards and the Gardens, the Beds of Spices, the
Roses of Sharon, and the Lilies of the Valleys; that some of our Temples should
be gloriously re-edified, and our Zion repaired, and yet the glory of our
Solomon and his housekeeping not restored, but his Servants ruined and their
names, as to their pay and maintenance blotted out of the Registers, Cantic. 2.
that the Winter should be past, the Rain over and gone, the Flowers appear on
the earth, the time of the singing of the Birds come, and the voice of the
Turtle heard in our Land; and the State and Magnificence of our Solomon and his
Royal housekeeping, which would have heretofore astonished a Queen of Sheba,
should be now most needlessly exchanged for a desolation, and bear all the marks
upon it of a languishing Honor.

That the Courts and Palace of our most gracious King Charles the Second, by a
mischance of quitting his Rights of Prae-emption and Pourveyance, or
Compositions for them, should as to many of its Attendants, have all the year
turned into an Ember week, and be about Noon or Dinner time, like the silence
and want of Company at Midnight; or a representation of the middle Isle of the
Cathedral of St. Paul's in London, destitute of all its Walkers or Company but
such as had nothing to buy their Dinner withal; which heretofore begot the
reproachful adage or saying usually cast upon such men of distress and
necessity, that they dined with Duke Humphrey upon a Traditional mistake, that
the Monument of Humphrey Duke of Gloucester was in the middle Isle of St. Paul's
Church in London, when it appears by the Arms engraven therein to be a
Beuchamp Earl of Warwick.

And that the King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland should be
necessitated to make a small Room in White hall, a place to eat his meat in,
and be contented with ten dishes of meat for the first and second Courses for
him, and his Royal Consort at Dinner, when most of the Nobility have as much
or more, and the richest part of the Gentry, and most of the rich Merchants and
Tradesmen of London do not think such a proportion in their ordinary way of
Diet to be more then sufficient.

And might remember that the Royal Pourveyance is, and has been as well due
to a Prince in his Palace, as in the Field or his Tents, and more deserved by a
Prince in the time of Peace, and protecting us in the blessings enjoyed by it,
then it is, or can be in the time of War, when every man is willing enough to
offer it to a marching Army, that does but hope and endeavor to defend them.
And that God was so displeased with the refusers of it, as he resolved, that an
Ammonite or Moabite should never enter into his holy and blessed Congregation,
because they met not the children of Israel with bread and water in the way
when they came forth out of Egypt. Deuteronomy. 23. v. 4.


That it was reckoned as a crime upon the People of Israel, Judges 8. v. 35.
that they showed not kindness to the house of Zerubbaal, namely Gideon,
according to all the goodness which he showed unto Israel.

That it was not only Solomon's stately Throne of Ivory over-laid with the best
Gold, 1 Reg. 10. and 2 Chronicles. ca. 9.
adorned with the Images of golden Lions, that supported it, nor the Forty
thousand stalles of horses for his Chariots, and twelve thousand Horsemen, and
the Tributes and Presents sent from many of the Nations round about him, but
his Royal Pourveyance and Provision for his Household, the meat of his Table,
sitting of his Servants, the manner of their sitting at meat; and the
attendance of his Ministers and their Apparel, which among many other necessary
Circumstances of State and Emanations of Power and Majesty, joined with the
other parts of his Regal Magnificence, raised the wonder in the Queen of
Sheba, and took away her spirits from her.

That to overburden our Head, or heap necessities upon him, may bring us within
the blame and censure of the Judicious Bodin, a man not meanly learned in
Politiques, Bodin de Repub. 6.
who decrying all unbecoming Parsimonies in a King or his Family, delivers his
opinion, that sine Majestatis ipsius contemptu fieri non potest ea res enim
peregrinos ad principem aspernandum, and subditos ad deficiendum excitare
consuevit, that to lessen the number of a Kings Servants, or Attendants cannot
be done without a contempt or diminution of Majesty it self, which may cause
Strangers to despise him, and his own Subjects to rebel against him.

That our Ancestors the Germans did well understand what a benefit the Common
people had by the Princes Honor and Reputation, when they were so zealous of
it, and ipsa plerunque fama belli profligant, many times found it to be a cause
of lessening or preventing Wars. Tacitus de moribus Germanorum, ca. 13, and
14.
And St. Hicrom was not mistaken when he concluded, that ubi honor non est, ibi
contemptus, ubi contemptus, ibi frequens injuria, and ubi indignatio, ibi quies
nulla; where there is not honor there is contempt* and where there is contempt
there are Injuries, Hieron. Epist.
and where anger and wrath are, there is no manner of quiet. That it must needs
be a Prognostic of a most certain ruin to the Nation to be so addicted to our
pride and vanities, as to take all we can from the head to bestow it upon the
more ignoble and inferior Members: Or to be so infatuated, and so far fallen
out with reason, as to believe that they can enjoy either health or safety,
when the Head has that taken from it, which should procure it.

That our Ancestors who were so great Observers of their duties in the payment
of their Tithes, as to take more then an ordinary care to give and bequeath at
their deaths a (...), In LL. Canuti 102. and Dugdales Warwickshire illustrated,
679. and 680.
or Symbolum Animae, as a Mortuary or Compensation pro substracti^ne decim^rum
person^lium* nec non oblationum, for Tithes and Offerings (the Pourveyance for
those which served at the Alta^) negligently or against their wills forgotten,
and to such a value as their dextrarium ferro coopertum, best horse carrying
the Arms (not Escutcheons) of its Lords and Master; or if the party deceasing
were no^ of so great an estate, gave meliorem bovem, his best Ox, and with
such a solemnity as those or the like Mortuaries were led or driven before the
Corpse when it was carried to be interred; or if not given in specie, were sure
to be redeemed with money; of which Thomas de Bello Campo Earl of Warwick, in
anno 43 of the Reign of King Edward the Third was so mindful, as he did by his
last Will and Testament, Dugdales Warwickshire illustrated, 317.
give to every Church within his multitude of Manours his best Beast which
should then be found, in satisfaction of his Tithes forgotten to be paid, would
ever have made it their business to withdraw or hinder their Oblations and Duty
of Pourveyance to God Almighties Vicegerent, the Keeper of both Tables, and the
Protector of them; or rejoice in the Bargain which has been made for the Kings
acquittal of it; or by plowing over the roots or by the filthy smoke and
vapors of some particular private ugly Interests, have rejoiced in blasting
and destroying that Royal Oak of Hospitality, which like the mighty Tree in
Nebuchadnezars Vision reached unto Heaven, Dant. 4.
and the sight thereof to the ends of all the Earth, had fair leaves and much
fruit, yielding meat for many; under which the Beasts of the field dwelt, and
upon whose branches the F^wls of heaven had their habitation, to the end they
might make their own fi^es, and wa^me themselves by the withered and dead
boughs and branches thereof.

Or that the People of England, who were wont so much to reverence and love
their Kings, and to remember benefits and favors received from them, as to
give Lands and other Hereditaments in pe^petuity to pray for the health of
their Kings, Ex veteri libro M. S. Prioris de Spalding in Comitat. Lincoln* in
Bibliotheca Antonii Oldfeild Baronetti.
as amongst many others which may be instanced, Ivo Tallebois post decessum
Gulielmi Anglorum Regis donavit Deo and sancto N^cholao pro animabus ipsius
Regis ac Regine Matildae uxoris ejus ad augmentum victus Monachorum sanctae
Mariae de Spalding decimam Thelonei and Salinarum de Spalding, gave the Tenth
of his Tolls and Salt-pi^s to pray for the souls of William the Conqueror and
Queen Matilda his Wife.

Mauserus Biset, Sewer to King Henry the First, gave likewise in perpetual
Alms 22 Acres of Land, Spelman glossar. 405. in voce Marletum. Dugdales
Warwickshire illustrated. Pat. 27. and 30. H. 6.
and half of a Mar^e-pit, to pray for the souls of his Lord King Henry, and of
him, and his Wife.

And as Geffrey de Clinto^ did in the Reign of King Henry the Third, and
William de Whaplode in or about the 27 th year of the Reign of King Henry the
Sixth, should be so willing to un-English themselves, and by a loathsome and
ugly ingratitude, and for the saving and sparing of so inconsiderable an yearly
charge, as their Oblations in the Royal Pourveyance, or Compositions for them
amounted unto, make us to be every day more and more a byword, reproach, and
scorn to the Nations round about us, and entail upon us those dishonors,
mischiefs, inconveniences damages and accumulations of evils, which may sooner
be foreseen and prevented then remedied.

And to fasten it on, and be very sure not to fail of it, will be content so as
with the rich man in the Gospel, they may fare diliciously, live wantonly, and
give entertainment to all their excesses of pride and vanity, to make
themselves slaves to sin, and fool away their happiness: and if Lazarus be
after his death carried with Angels into Abraham's bosom, it shall never
trouble them until death, and the fate of mortality shall bring them to be at
leisure to think better of it.

Can without any remorse of conscience, fear of Hell, honor and welfare of
their Nation, care of Heaven after ages or posterity, see the piety good old
virtues Customs and Manners of England murdered, and do all that they can to
extirp and destroy them root and branch.

And whilst too many of our Gentry can leave the Jack-daws to be Stewards of
their formerly better employed stately well built houses in the Country, bring
their Wives and Children to London, and make some little Lodgings, or hou^es
there to be their residence to learn what vices are most in fashion; spend
fifty or one hundred pounds at a time in a Treatment or Tavern at London, and
be cheated and cozened an half or a third part in the reckoning, make a Feast
at their Lodgings or Houses enough to puzle Lucullus, or Vitellius, Cooks or
Professors in the Art of Gluttony at three or five hundred pounds charges. have
their Oleo's Haut gousts Ambiges, costly Gallimauphries, or Hotch potches laid
altogether in a dish, and that dish so big as the door must needs be taken off
the hinges to make a stately passage to bring it in; and after some hours spent
in heightning and pleasing their appetites, and adoring Bacchus their drunken
Diety, can let some of their Mortgaged Manors and Lands run about the streets
by day and night, in Coaches with doors and glass Windows, and be at the yearly
charges of maintaining a couple or more of Coach-horses, as much fatted and
pampered more then needs to be, as would provide more then a yoke or two of fat
Oxen to kill at Christmas, when they shall be so good as to observe such
Christian Festivals; and instead of four or six proper serving men, as their
old hospitable Grand^ires had in constant pay or salary to attend, or fight for
them, upon no Tavern or Alehouse ^ray, or Quarrels, but just occasions, have
only one or two Foot-boyes dressed up like some ridiculous Antiques to wait
upon the Coach, by getting up before or behind it.

Can see virtue and honestly only laid up in Books and Speculations, and be
read as Romances and things impracticable; truth reason, and conscience greatly
talked of and a part of almost every man's daily pretenses, but used as
vagabonds incertilaris without any habitations, and very little to be seen, but
the names of them made use of (as the Gibeonites did their moldy bread, old
shoes and garments) only for the people to cozen and cheat one another. Trade,
the great Diana of our Ephesus, by a strange abuse of it, come to be the
greatest cheat, oppression and tyranny of the Nation; and Gods providence
vouched for their thriving by it; the numbers of the poor and oppressed daily
multiplied, pri^e, knavery, cheating and complement, those termini
convertibiles (not mercy and truth) kissing each other, and making a League to
cozen and deceive all such as are not of their trim society.

Amos 1. v. 6.
And whilst they are chanting to the sound of the viols, drinking wine in Boules
and stretching themselves upon their Couches, can without any brotherly
kindness or compassion behold the sighing of the poor and needy, the widows and
the fatherless, the misery of multitudes and those that have none to help them,
will not deal their bread to the hungry* nor bring the poor which are cast out
into their houses, Isaiah 58. v. 6, 7.
will not cover the naked, but hide themselves from their own flesh; will not
undo the heavy burdens, nor let the oppressed go free.

But do all that they can, not only to banish the Kings hospitality, and his
accustomed Royalties and magnificence from his Court and Palaces; and as if he
and his Servants were in a continual ^it of a fever, enforce them by
withholding his Pourveyance or Compositions for them (whilst they themselves do
feast and revel in their own houses) to a thin and sparing diet; and as to
many of them, none at all, but to destroy the greatest and best part of the
Hospitality of the Nation, which was wont to make those su^ves and potentes
benificentiae nexus quibus seu compedibus animi illig^ntur, those grateful (as
Marsellaer very well observes) impressions of benefits, Marsellaer de legatis.
which do as it were charm and oblige the minds and affections of mankind: A
custom so ancient, as it was no stranger^ to Abraham, the friend of God, when
he sitting in his Tent door in the Plains of Mamre, invited the three then
unknown Angels, and feasted them; nor to the Father of the Excellent meek and
humble Rebecca, when as Abraham's Servant or Ambassador was so well as he was
enterteyned before it, was known from whence he came, and what his message was,
and which the Jews ever after were so unwilling to part with as the good
Nehemiah many ages after could in his then no great plenty or felicity, keep a
great house, hospitality, Nehemiah 5.17.
and many tables, as well for the Heathen, as 150 of the Jews and Rulers, and
has been justly accounted to be such a religious duty, as St. Paul allowed of
the Agapes love or neighbourly Feasts, and exhorted the Hebrews to let
bro^therly love continue, Hebrews 13. v. 1. and 2.
and not to be forgetful to entertain strangers; for thereby some (meaning
their old father Abraham) have unawares entertained Angels.

And being the love and delight of the Almighty that gave us all good things
which we possess, was also the Treasury and keeper of the peoples love; and as
much as concerned peace, and good will unto men, a part of the blessed song of
the Angels at the Birth of our Redeemer; and in our Ancestors days was best of
all supported by a generous and well ordered frugality, and by the old Romans
held to be so Essential to government, as they spared no cost in their Epulis,
or Caresses of the people; and was for many Ages past congeniall and connatural
to the English Nation, who are abundantly taken with it, and justly accounted
to be such an handmaid to Piety, as Geffery Earl of Essex, and Eustace his Wife
did in the Reign of King Henry the second grant to the Nunnery of Clarkenwell
totam decimam totius victus and procurationis (provisions says the Learned Sir
Henry Spelman) illorum and domus suae and familiae suae, Seldom hist. of
Tithes, 319, 320.
Spelman glossar. in voce procuratio.
the Tithe or Tenths of all the victuals and provisions of their house and
family.

And Maud of Mandevill Countess of Essex and Hertford, Seldom hist. of Tithes,
320.
in the beginning of the Reign of King H. 3. confirming the said Grant, does it
in more express words, viz. ubicunque fuerimus de panibus and potibus, and
carnibus and etiam de piscibus, wheresoever they should be of bread, drink,
flesh, and fish: And was such an effect of the magnificence and grandeur of the
minds of the English Nobility, as Roger Earl of Warwick in the 23. year of the
Reign of King Henry the first did grant unto Richard the Son of Jvo his Cook,
afterward taking the Surname of Woodlow from their residence at Woodlow in the
County of Warwick (besides the Manor of Woodlow with diverse Lands and
Privileges thereunto belonging; and a Yard land in Cotes in the County
aforesaid, given by the said Earl to him and his heirs) the Office of Master
Cook in his Kitchen to him and his Heirs, Dugdales Warwickshire illustr^ted
373. and ex ipso autograph.
which his Father theretofore held with all Fees of his Kitchen belonging to
the Master Cook both in Liveries and Horses, as the Esquires of his Household
then had, of which Alan the Son of that Richard being also in the said Office
in the house of William Earl of Warwick Son of the said Earl Roger, who it
seems could produce no Charter in writing thereof, obtained a grant and
confirmation of the said William Earl of Warwick of the said Manor, Lands, and
Office, for which the said Alan gave unto the Earl ten shillings in money,
twelve Ge^se, and a Fikin of Wine; And a late experience, (if antiquity had
been altogether silent) of the benefits which do come by it, has sufficiently
declared unto us the no dull operation or impulse of it, in that since the
happy Restoration of King Charles the second, and the Kingly Government, a
Gentleman high born, and of a great ^xtraction retiring into a Country where
some part of his Estate does lie, about one hundred miles from London, did by
an Housekeeping and Hospitality becoming him, and his great Ancestors so win
the hearts and love of the people, though they were of a different Judgment
and profession of Religion, which usually bege^s more animosities and ill will
then it should do, as he became their darling whilst he was with them, and
their sorrow and cause of tolling their Bells backwards, as a sign of some
disaster, when he had occasion for a little while to leave them.

And a Gentleman, or Faber fortun^ suae, one that but lately had made his
fortunes, in as remote a Country from London, and of some new fangled opinions
in Religion distasteful enough to many in his Neighborhood, did only by a
charity of giving unto some numbers of poor people of the place wherein he
lived, Beef and Pottage at his door twice or thrice every week in the year, so
gain the love of the people, as they that would not otherwise have showed him
any love or favor, did not deny him either of them.

When as too many can lay aside and neglect the care of obliging and gaining
the hearts and affections of their Neighbors and Tenants, and making any shift
to furnish and provide the excess and sinful superfluities both of the belly
and the back, will not let the belly want it, nor the back be without it.

And those that have no mind or will to pay or make the King any recompense for
his Pourveyance or Compositions, can without any grudging see the Pourveyance
of the City of London, that Queen that sits like the afterward unhappy City
of Tire upon many waters covers all our Island, and her Citizens by seeking
to buy as cheap as they can, and to adulterate as much as they can, and sell as
dear as they do, all their wares and commodities, can make a costly enhance of
all manner of household provisions, and extending their desires and attempts for
that purpose to the remotest parts of the Kingdom, do by ingrossings,
combinations, and other unlawful Artifices of Trade, bring the fatness of the
Flock, and the delicacies of Sea and Land to feed and furnish out the Luxuries
of her own Inhabitants, and such as have a will to be infected with it, and
make the whole Island to be too little to maintain her vice and avarice,
insomuch as Salmons, which at Monmouth, being above 100 miles distant from
London, were wont to be sold there for ten groats a piece, are now before hand
bespoke and bought up by some Londoners, or their Agents for ten shillings a
piece, and the Townsmen that did before e^joy a privilege that all the
Salmons brought to that Market should be first brought to the Kings Board, and
no Forreigner suffered to buy any until the Town were first served, can now
see themselves bereaved of their Prae-emption as well as the King is, whose
Progenitors did at the first bestow it upon them.

In Lincolnshire, above 70 or 80 miles from London, do so ingross and
precontract for all wild fowl, Ducks and Mallards, as the Gentry of that
Country where they are bred, and should have some cheapness and plenty of them,
are resolving to be Petitioners to the Justices of Peace at the next
Quarter Sessions, that the Heglers and men of London may not be suffered to
raise the p^ices of their Wild-fowl, nor carry them out of the Count^y until
it be first served.

And as if all were not enough to enrich themselves, and undo others, can upon
any accident or occasion, or but a supposi^^on of things which may happen, make
and dress up their pretenses and supposed causes of p^ices to be ra^sed and
e^hanced, to the great oppression and burden of all that are to buy of them,
and but upon a late likelihood of Wars betwixt us and the Netherland united
Belgic Provinces, whilst we are Masters of the Seas, and not under any
probability of having our Seas disquieted, or Trade interrupted, have so
greatly before hand raised the rates and prices of Sea-coal, Sprats, Salt, and
the most part of transmarine Commodities, as they that shall believe that those
and many more of their exactions which they will put and enforce upon the
people by reason of a probability of that War, will without any just cause or
reason for it in a short time amount unto more then six hundred thousand
pounds, may well be understood neither to prejudice the truth, or their
judgments in it.

And if that, and such lately or more then ever practiced courses shall not be
enough to raise and swell the rates and prices of all sorts of Provisions and
Commodities in London, and the Counties within 100 miles or more of the
circumference of it, the unreasonable and extorting reckonings and Items of the
Cooks and Vintne^s in London and Westminster, and their Suburbs, to their
prodigal and unthriving Guests who (in a custom near of kin to madness or the
biggest sorts of follies which other Nations do never or so little use as they
wonder at it) do first eat their meat and delicacies, and leaving themselves
afterward to the courtesies, and as little conscience of the Cooks and
Vintners, what they shall pay for it, will be sure to be a means to raise the
rates and prices of victuals, and by their example impose it upon others, as
high as the sharking of those that ask it, and the e^siness and carelessness of
those that yield un^o it can lift it.

And whilst they can pay their duties and rents of Blackmail and Cornage in
many of the Northern Counties, which were at the first only yearly paid unto
their Landlords for their protection against the Scottish Incursions now not at
all either feared or endured; Spelman glossar in voce Mails.
and there and in other places pay Tithes though many times more in valuation
then they were one hundred years ago, three shillings four pence per annum for
respits of Suit of Court, when there are not any Courts kept for many years
together, or not all; and Toll in many Cities and Corporations, which being
granted for some few years for Murage, or the repairing or building of the
walls of some Cities or Towns, is, as is to be feared, yet continued and taken,
though the walls being almost ruined, and in their rubbidge, do now only serve
to build houses upon, can willingly take the benefit of their small Quit-rents
for Mannopera and Carropera Precaria, and Harvest work to some Landlords who
for many years have neither had Corn nor Hay to cut or carry; and for other
services anciently due unto the Lords of Leets and Manors, which may now be
believed to have been compounded for at easy and small rates, when as some of
the Tenants of the Church Revenue of Canterbury, did pay but a penny per annum
for that which was a rent of Twenty Eggs, Lambard Itinerar. 212
now sold in London for a penny an Egg; and for Hens and Benerth, which was a
service of the Cart and Plough but sixteen pence per annum; and do yet
notwithstanding as many services perhaps as were bought or compounded for by
their Quit-rents, though at the same time their Lords, if they would truly
execute the power entrusted unto them by the King and his Laws, might in their
Court Leets hinder and restrain their unreasonable and excessive rates and
prices in the sale of victuals and household provisions; pay the hundred penny,
Spelman glossar. in voce Scot.
which is a penny given to the support of the Bailiffs and Officers of Hundr^ds,
though in many of them no Hundred Courts at all a^e kept, a Scot or Tax toward
the maintenance of the Sheriff and his Officers, who by their many illegal
courses and exactions, are not to seek the way to provide for themselves,
Ward-peny and Brigbote for watching and warding, and amending of Bridges, Idem
glossar in vocibus Ward-peny and Brigbote. Spelman glossar. in voce Romescot.
although they be yearly assessed in their Parishes for the same things; much
of the Romescot, or Popish Chimney-money, after the rate of a penny for every
Chimney, which when it was ancienly paid in England, notwithstanding some
opinions that it amounted unto a far greater sum, was but 300 Marks) though
by the Statute of 1 Eliz. it be forbidden. And for Rode Knights, Idem glossar.
in voce ^ Rode-knight
or the service of being retained and and tied by their service or customs to
attend their Lord or his Lady, or Wife in their journeys, or to Church, though
many of them will notwithstanding for good will, and in hope of favors or
benefits from their Landlords, if they be Justices of Peace, Deputy Lieutenants
of the County, or of such eminence and power as to be able to do them good or
harm, be offering those, or many other services, and glad when they are
accepted.

The Merchants in London can pay Scavage or Shewage, Spelman glossar. in vo^
Scavage.
which amounts unto some hundred pounds per annum profit to the City of
London, for leave to show or expose their Wares or Merchand^zes to sale, though
they do privately sell their Wares and Commodities in their Dwelling-houses or
Warehouses, and every petty Tradesman and Retailer has, as a Freeman of the
City, as much liberty at all times to expose to sale in his Shop, or in his
House any Commodities or Wares belonging to his Trade.

The people of most Parishes can pay ten times more to the Poor then they did
but forty years ago, and willingly contribute; (and it is very well done to
ease their Ministers, who is but seldom troubled with a great Benefice) to the
providing of Surplices, Church-Bibles, and Service-books, though the Parsons or
Impropriators have the Tithes and Glebes, and can every where without any
complaint or murmuring, allow and rest contented with the Pigeon-houses of the
Lords of Manors, and of other private men, though they do yearly eat and
devour as much Wheat, Barley, Beans, Peace and Oat^ of the Neighborhood, as
the Pourveyance or Comp^sitions for it for the Kings House, and Provender for
his horses, do yearly change the people.

And whilst they can endure to pay more for their victuals, apparel, and
necessaries, Servants and Artificers wages, and all that they have occasion to
use through all the affai^s of humane life and occasions, only because they
that demand it, will not, or say they cannot afford it cheaper, and be cheated
and cozened yearly as much as will amount unto some hundred thousands of pounds
sterling by false measures and weights, by the sleepiness and fellow feeling of
the Guilds or Fraternities of Companies of Trades, and the carelessness and
connivances of the Clerks of the Markets, will notwithstanding murmur and
repine at every little Oblation, Payments, and Duties to their King, be as
unwilling as they can to be satisfied of the reason of it, but make Hue and Cry
after them: And when as a lea^ned Gentleman has well observed, that the
greatest care of good Subjects and Christians should be to fear God, and honor
the King, do make it their business and best of their gains to cozen the King
and the Church, and when shame has not yet so left the world, as to leave it
without some little startling or blushing at the being known, or discovered to
have cozened any body, will never at all be ashamed to have cozened the King
all they can.

Which kind of publ^que villainy the Civil^ Law so detested, and desired to
punish, as they reckoned but a debtor to the Exchequer or Emperors Treasury,
being far more innocent then those that cozen or defraud it amongst the
number of the most heinous offenders tanquam minxerit in patrios ^ineres,
Vzzonius de mandatis principum, cap. 7.. 1.
as one who had pisssed upon his Fathers (or Countries) Ashes; and as Murderers
or Adulterers, denied them the Sanctuary if they sought it of the Church.

And when the Kings Royal Progenitors have taken so much care to prevent the
decay of Tillage, as by the Statute of 25 H. 8. cap. 13. to ordain that no man
should keep more then two hundred sheep upon any land taken to farm* and for
the increase of Tillage plenty, and cheapness of Corn, did by the Statute of 2
Ed. 6. cap. 13. ordain that no Tithes should be paid for wast or Heath ground
improved unto Tillage, until seven years after the improvement, by the
Statute of 4* Jac. cap. 11. made a Provision for Meadow and Pasture, and the
necessary maintenance of husbandry* and tillage in the Manors, Lordships, and
Parishes of Merden, alias Mawerden, Boddenham, Wellington, Sutton St. Michael,
Sutton St. Nicholas, Marton upon Lugg, and the Parish of Pipe in the County of
Hereford by the Statute of 7 Jac. cap. 11. That none should spoil corn and
grain by untimely Hawking: and by another Statute in the same Parliament, That
Se^-sands might in Devonshire and Cornwall be fetched from the sea to manure
Lands, paying reasonable duties for the passage through, or by other men's Lands
with Boats and Barges. And the Assize of Bread throughout the whole Kingdom is
by the Statute and Ordinance of 51 H. 8. to be yearly made and regulated by the
Baker of the Kings house, do take all the care they can, that the Bread for his
Household, and Oats and Provender for his horses may be at the dearest rates,
and a great deal more then any of his Subjects do pay.

And although he and his Royal Progenitors and Predecessors have made the best
provisions they could for the breed of Cattle, and cheapness of meat by the
Statute of 24 H. 8. cap. 9. forbidding the killing of weanling Calves under the
age of two years; That a milch Cow by the Statute of 2 and 3 Philip and Mary
should be kept for every sixty Sheep, and a Calf reared for every 120 Sheep. By
an Act of Parliament in 8 Eliz. cap. 3. That no Sheep should be transported:
and by several Acts of Parliament, and otherwise, encouraged the drayning of
huge quantities of Fenne Lands, and the imbanking of Marshes and Lands gained
from the Sea, and his now Majesty has of late to help the breeders and sellers
of Cattle in their reasonable prices thereof, prohibited by an Act of
Parliament the bringing in of any Cattle which were heretofore usually and
yearly brought into England in great herds out of Scotland and Ireland, and
does yearly by his Royal Edicts and Proclamations, as many of his noble
Progenitors, Kings and Queens of England, have usually done, enjoined the
strict observation of the Lent, will notwithstanding for want of his
Pourveyance, or much of his household Provisions, as they ought to be served in
kind, constrain him to pay in ready money intolerable dear rates and prices,
for that which his Officers have occasion to buy for the Provision of his
Household.

Who speed no better when they buy or provide his Fish of those who might have
had so much duty and honesty as to afford it cheaper, when his Royal
Predecessors by the Statutes of 13 E. 1. cap. 47. and 13 R. 2. cap. 19.
ordained severe penalties upon those that do take and destroy Salmons,
Lampries, or any other Fish at unseasonable times, or destroy the spawn of Fish.

By the Statute of 22 Ed. 4. cap. 2. That Salmons, Herrings and E^les be duly
packed.

By the Statute of 11 H. 7. cap. 23. That Englishmen may import and bring into
England Fish taken by Foreigners.

By the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. cap. 6. that no Officer of the Admiral^y should
exact any thing of them which travailed for Fish.

By the Statute of 5 Ellz. cap. 6. Fishermen and Mariners shall not be
compelled to serve as Soldiers upon the Land, or upon the Sea, but as
Mariners, except in case of Enemies, or to subdue Rebellions.

By the Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 10. allowed Seafish and Herring to be
transported in English Ships with cross sails without payment of Customs.

By the Statute of 39 Eliz. cap. 10. ordained Aliens to pay for salted Fish,
and salted Herrings to be brought by them into England, such Customs as shall
be imposed in foreign parts upon the salted Fish and Herrings brought thither
by Englishmen.

And our now gracious Sovereign mainteyns a great Navy to assert and defend his
Dominion and his Subjects sole right of Fishing in the British Seas, and has
of late in the midst of his own wants for the better encouragement of his
People to seek their own good, and that which our British Seas will plentifully
afford them, given all his Customs inward and outward for any the retorns to
be made by the sale of Fish in France, Denmark, and the Baltic Seas for seven
years from the first entrance into the intended Trade of Fishing.

And when the Mayor of Kingstone upon Hull, or his Officers can at the same
time obteyn of them better penyworths, and according to the directions of the
Statute of 33 H. 8. cap. 33. have so good a Pourveyance allowed them, as they
can take of all Fishermen privileged for every last of Herring xxd. for every
hundred of salt Fish iiii d. for every Last of Sprats viii d. of every person
not privileged, for every Last of Herring i^ s. iiii. d. for every hundred of
Salt-fish iiii d. and for every Last of Sprats viii d. as they did before the
making of the said Statute.

And when our Laws which have their life and being from the King and his Royal
Progenitors, have by the Statutes of 3 and 4 Ed. 6. cap. 22. and 2 and 3 Philip
and Mary, cap. 5. provided, that the prices of Butter and Cheese be not
enhaunced, nor any transported without license. That the prices of Ale and Beer
shall b^ ^he Statute of 23 H. 8. be assessed at reasonable rates, and the
Barrels and Kilderkins gauged. That Spices and Grocery Ware shall by the
Statute of 1 Jac. cap. 19. be garbled, and not mingled. That Woods by the
Statute of 35 H, cap. 17. and 13 Eliz. cap. 5. shall not be converted into
Tillage or Pasture: And by the Statutes of 7 Ed. 6. cap. 7. and 47. cap. 14.
that an Assize shall be kept as to the measures only of Coal, Tallwood,
Bille^s, and Faggots.

And some of our Princes have given by their Charters many and great Liberties
and Immunities to the Companies of Brewers and Woodmongers. And King James did
in or about the 11 th year of h^s R^ign upon his granting of some privileges
to the Town and Colleries of N^wcastle upon Tyne, cause the Host-men, or
Oast-men of Newcastle to covenant to and with the King (which they have seldom
or never at all observed) yearly to serve the City of London, and places
adjacent with Sea-coals Winter and Summer, at less then 20 shi^lings a
Chaldron, and it was by the Statute of 32 H. 8 cap. 8. ordained, That none do
sell Phesants or Partriches unto any but unto the Officers of the King* Queen,
or Princes Houses, upon the forfeiture of 6 s. 8 d. for every Phesant, and 4 s.
4 d. for every Partrich; and did by their Charters, or allowances of
Prescription grant Free Warren, and diverse other Franchises unto diverse Lords
of Manors; yet matters must be so ordered, as the King, though he buy with
ready money, must be sure to pay dearer for his Butter, Cheese, Coals, Beer,
Ale, Billet, Tallwood, Faggots, Grocery-ware, Rabbets, Phesants and Partriches,
then any of his Subjects.

Took away by the Statute of 5 Eliz. the severity of the Statute of 25 Ed. 3.
enjoining small wages to Laborers and Artificers, and ordained, That the
Justices in every County should by their discretion, according to the dearth or
plenty of victuals, yearly at the Sessions held at Easte^, assesse how much
every Mason, Carpenter, Tyler, and other Crafts men, Workmen, and Laborers,
should have by the day or year, and limit proportions of Wages, according to
plenty or scarcity: and by an Act of Parliament made in the first year of the
Reign of King James, did amongst other things give a further power to the
Justices of every County to limit and regulate the wages and hire of Laborers
and Artificers, according to plenty and scarcity, that Act of Parliament being
since expired for want of continuance, yet the King in all his occasions and
affairs for Workmen and Artificers shall be sure to pay them rates and wages at
the highest.

Did by the Statute of 23 Ed. 3. cap. 6. provide, That Butchers, Fishmongers,
Brewers, Bakers, Poulterers, and other Sellers of Victuals, should sell them at
reasonable prices, and be content with moderate gains. And by the Statute of 13
R. 2. ca. 8. That all Majors, Bailiffs, Stewards of Franchises, and all others
that have the order and survey of victuals in Cities, Boroughs, and Market
Towns, where victuals shall be sold in the Realm, should enquire of the same.
And if any sell any victuals in other manner, he should pay the treble of the
value which he so received to the party damnified, or in default thereof to any
other that will pursue for the same.

By the Statute of 25 Hen. 8. cap. 2. when but a year before Beef and Pork was
by Act of Parliament ordained to be sold at an half penny the pound, and Mutton
and Veal at an half penny farthing the pound, and less in Counties and places
that may sell it cheaper, and complaint was made in Parliament that the prices
of victuals were many times enhaunced and raised by the greedy avarice of the
owners of such victuals, or by occasion of engrossing and regrating the same
more then upon any reasonable or just ground or cause, ordained that the prices
of Butter, Cheese, Capons, Hens, Chickens, and other victual^ necessary for
man's sustenance, should from time to time, as the case should require^, be set
and taxed at reasonable prices how they should be sold in gross, or by retail,
by the Lord Chancellor of England, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings
most honorable Privy Council, Lord Privy Seal, Lord Steward, the Chamberlain,
and all other the Lords of the Kings Council, Treasurer and Comptroller of the
Kings most honorable House, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, the Kings
Justices of either Bench, the Chancellor, Chamberlains, under Treasurer, and
Barons of the Exchequer, or any seven of them, whereof the Lord Chancellor,
Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings Council, or the Lord Privy Seal to
be one, and commanded the Justices of Peace, and Lords of Leets to take a care
that the prices and rates of victuals be reasonable: Yet the King must not have
so much favor and kindness as the Tinientes or Magistrates in the Canar^es, or
other parts of the Spanish Dominions, who by reason of their power and
authority in the correction and rating of the prices of victuals, can have
their provisions freely, and of gift presented unto them, or at small and
reasonable rates and prices: or as the Lords of Leets, the Justices of Assise,
Justices of Peace, Mayors, Magistrates of Cities and Corporations might have
theirs, if they would but put in execution the Laws which are entrusted to
their care and charges.

Nor can have any thing at reasonable rates, but is enforced to pay dearer for
the provisions of his house then any of his Subjects; when as they that could
receive his Majesty's very large and unexampled Act of Oblivion, can only
afford him in their Market rates, an Act of Oblivion for his protection and
care of them, and for his many favors and helps in all their occasions and
necessities, and for forgiving them many Millions of moneys sterling, or the
value thereof; and as unto too many of them are willing that our King and Head
should in the rates of his victuals and household provisions bear the burden of
their follies and irregularities.

Of which the plenty or scarcity of money cannot be any principal or efficient
cause, as may be verified by an instance or example lately happened in Spain,
where the calling down of money to the half value, to aswage the afflictions of
a Famine, was so far* from the hoped for effect of abating the prices of
victuals, and household Provisions, as they are now well assured, that the
covetousness of the Sellers and tricks of Trade have added more to the
heightning of those rates and prices then any want or abundance of money.

And it would therefore well become that part of the People of England, who by
their intemperance and carelessness, Jeremy 49. v. 31.
as i^ they were that Nation which dwelt without care, against whom the Prophet
Jeremy denounced Gods heavy wrath and judgments, have brought and reduced
themselves and their Estates into a languishing and perishing condition, and
turned their backs upon the honor of Hospitality, to take into their more then
ordinary consideration, David Lloid in vita Antonii Brown militis.
that Sir Anthony Brown, a Privy Councellor ^^to King Henry Eighth* did not
deviate either from truth or prudence* when he said that others apprehension of
the Kings greatness* did contribute as much to our welfare, Idem in vita
Johannis Russel militis
as our welfare it self* or Sir John Russel, a v^ry valiant as well as wise
Statesman, Comptroler of the Household of King Henry the Eighth, and afterward
Earl of Bedford, when he declared that the Courts of Princes, being those
Epitomes through which ^trangers look into Kingdoms, should be royally set out
with utensils, and with attendance, who might possess all comers with reverence
there, and fear elsewhere.

Or that the learned and reverend Sir James Dier, Idem in vita Jacobi Dier
militis.
Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas in the 25 th year of the reign
of Queen Elizabeth committed an error, when in the sage and discreet rules left
behind him in a Manuscript for the preservation of the Commonwealth, he
advised that the Prince should often appear unto his People in Majesty, and
that the Courtiers should keep good houses. And if they will do no more, to do
but as much as the Beasts and Birds being irrational creatures, do by their
bodies natural, make it their greatest care to protect and preserve the Head of
our Body Politic, and the honor and dignity of it, and keep it above water.

And now that by his gracious Government, and return to us like the Sun to
dispel the cold and uncomfortableness which the Winter of his absence had
almost for ever fastened upon us. -- Cum fixa manet reverentia patrum. Claudian
a^ quarto Consulat. honor*

Firmatur se^ium juris priscamque resumunt
Canitiem leges. --
when our Parliaments, and our just and ancient Laws are again restored. --
Claustrisque solutis.
Tristibus exsangu^s andent procedere leges.
and released from their former affrights and terrors.

Not endeavor to abridge or endanger the hopes of our future happiness, by
being to sparing unto him that was not so unto us. -- Jam captae vindex patriae
Claudian de Bello Getico^

Ut sese pariter diffudit in omnia regni
Membra vigor vivusque redit color urbibus aegris.
and redeemed our happiness from its Captivity.

But rather imitate the Clergy of the Bishoprics of Gloucester, Heylin hist.
Ecclesiae Anglicanae reformatae.
Chester, Oxford, Peterborough, and Bristol, who in the fourth year of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, finding those Bishoprics to be much impoverished by
the Earl of Leicester, and some other, who in their vacancies had gotten away a
great part of the Revenues thereof, did by their Benevolences for some years
after enable the Bishops thereof in some tolerable degree to maintain their
Hospitalities.

Speed hist. of England.
And our long ago departed Ancestors, who took it ill in the Reign of King John,
(with whom they had so much and more then they should contended for their
Liberties) that Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury should keep a better House and
Feast at Easter then the King.

And that Cardinal Woolsey in the Reign of King Henry the Eight should keep as
great a state at Court as the King, exercise as great an Authority in the
Country for Pourveyance as the King, and forbid Pourveyance to be made in his
own Jurisdictions, which made an addition to the Articles of High Treason, or
great Misdemeanors charged upon him by the Commons in Parliament brought up to
the House of Peers by Sir Anthony Fitz-Herbert, afterward a learned Judge of
the Court of Common pleas.

So that our King may not for want of his ancient rights of Pourveyance, or an
Allowance or Compositions for them, the later of which as a means to make so
unquestionable a right and privilege of the Crown of England to be always
grateful and welcome to them, was first designed, David Lloid in vita Davidis
Brook, militis.
set on foot and contrived by Sir David Brook Sergeant at Law unto King Henry
the Eighth, and Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer in the Reign of Queen Mary,
and happily effected or brought to perfection in or about the 4 th year of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, be necessitated to retrench or lay down his Royal
Housekeeping and Hospitalities, or deprived of his means of Charity and
Magnificence, which Jacob Almansor the learned Arabian King, who lived in Anno
654. and conquered Spain, In the life of Almansor, translated out of the
Arabic by Robert Ashley. J. C.
was in his swarthy Dominions so careful to preserve, as after that he had
given audience unto Suitors, which were some days in every week, he usually
caused a public cry to be made, that all of them, as well rich as poor,
should stay and take their refections; and to that end furnished Tables for
them with such abundance of provisions, as became the house of so mighty a King.

And that if any foreign King or Prince should as Cecily Sister to the King of
Sweden, and Wife to the Marquess of Baden, did by a far and a long Voyage come
from the North into England to visit our Queen Elizabeth, Heylin hist.
Ecclesiae Anglicanae reformatae*
and see the splendor of her Court (which as to her Charity, splendor, and
Hospitality, though so oversparing in other things, and so unwilling to draw
monyes out of her Subjects purses, as she lost the fair hopes and opportunity
of regaining Calais, which was so much desired by her) was very plentifully and
magnificent, and with the allowance of many more Tables then have been in the
times of her Successors) they may return into their Country, as that Princess
did with a wonder at it, and not be constrained to say as was once said of the
glory of the Temple of Jerusalem, Who is left amongst you that saw this house
in her first glory, Haggai ^*
and how do you see it now; and that returning into the former good ways,
manners, and custom of England, we may not be damnati fat^ populi, but,
virtute renati.

And that to that end we shall do well to leave ou^ new and untrodded By-ways
of Error, made by the Raiser of Taxes, Dan. 11. v. 20.
and the Filchers of the Peoples Liberties in the Glory of another Kingdom,
now we have so woefully seen, felt, heard, and understood so very many mischiefs
and inconveniences already happened, and if not speedily prevented, are like to
be a great deal more, and hearken unto the voice and dictates of the Laws of
God and Nature, the Laws of the Land and Nations, Reason and Gratitude, and let
our Posterity know that the honor of our King and Country is dear unto us, and
that whatever becomes of our own Hospitalities, we shall never be willing to
let the Vesta^ Fire of the British and English Hospitalities, although most of
our own are either extinguished or sunk into the Embers, go out, or be extinct
in our King Palaces, or to abjure or turn out of its course so great part of
the Genius of the Nation, but that we shall continue the duties of Praeemption
and Pourveyance, which are as old as the first Generations of Mankind, and as
ancient as the duty of reverence of Children to their Parents.

Dent Fata Recessum.
FINIS.

