A Brief Historical discourse OF THE Original and Growth OF HERALDRY,
Demonstrating upon what rational Foundations, that Noble and Heroic Science is
established.

By Thomas Philipot, Master of Art; and formerly of Clare-Hall in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by E. Tyler and R. Holt, and are to be sold by Tho. Passinger,
at the three Bibles on London Bridge. 1672.

TO THE Right Honorable JOHN Earl of ^RIDGWATER, ^^count Brackly, Baron of
Ellesmere, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Buckingham, and one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.
MILORD,
He main Drift and Scope of this Treatise is to redeem rescue Heraldry, from
the cheap and contemptible Cha^^cter of more Mysterious canting an Attribute
dropped upon it by some of the Learned, who never read it; and the Ignorant,
wh^ never understood it.

Yet am I not so confident and magisterial to persuade my sel^ that the
foundation on which ^ have established this discourse, i^ so even and Artfully
laid, bu^ that future Ages and succeeding Labors may by new supplement both
enlarge and strengthen it, and that there may be some more Elegant and Eminent
super structures erected upon it by Pen^ more Ingenious, and Hands more
Dextrous than mine own. In the Interim let it be what it will in the the whole
Fabric and contexture of it, it is become the object both of your Lordships
Justice and Mercy: and when your Justice has scanned and winnowed every
particular of it, it will entitle it self to a great Felicity (whether it stand
or fall) that it has undergone the Test and Scrutiny of so judicious a Censure.

And if after a serious surveying and sifting of every ingredient, that
composes the Frame and Compact of it, the former obliges you to condemn, it is
my Hope your Mercy will step in, and at the same instant, likewise engage you
to forgive

My LORD, Your most humble and affectionate servant, Tho. Philipot.

AN ADVERTISEMENT to the Reader.
THere are in this Treatise some defects that may be chastised, and some
omissions that may be supplied, both which I resign up to thine Art and Candor,
that at once you may censure, and forgive: As namely page 1. lin. ult. for the
Mythology of the Jews, read the Symbolical Rituals of the Jews; for although
the Greek Word (...) generally does import any thing that is abstruse hidden or
mysterious, yet sometimes it likewise signifies any thing that is fabulous;
therefore this rather should be inserted.

Page 7. lin. ult. for circumbient read circumambient. page 16. after line 20:
add this, A Lion couchant was the Hieroglyphick of Policy, Craft and Subtilty.
A Frog was the Hieroglyphick of an Embryo, for this opening its Veil of Mud,
and wanting a proportionate heat to digest and fashion it into just shape and
feature, shrinks back into its bed of slime, and there remains the imperfect
moiety of a Creature. page 29. for Calceus read Calcar.

It is possible there may be other mistakes of less importance, which when thy
scrutiny has discovered, I hope thy charity will pardon and entomb. Vale.

A brief Discourse of the Original and Growth of Heraldry, showing upon what
rational Foundations that Noble and Heroic Science is established.
THe Egyptians folded up their Learning in the dark contexture of
Hieroglyphics, the Greeks wrapped up theirs in the gloomy Vesture of Emblems,
and the Romans lodged it behind the cloudy Traverse of Allegorical Allusions,
pourtrai'd in those mysterious Signatures that adorned the Reverse of their
Coin, either Consular or Imperial: If we shall pluck off its exotic and
antique dress with which this Learning was attired, we shall find that the Body
of our Modern Heraldry was apparelled with this Mythological Habit.

But before I wade farther in this Discourse, I shall unvail the Mythology of
the Jews, and that of the ancient Germans and Saxons, and before I enter into
the Temple, I shall stop and take a survey of the Jewish Priests, and disrobe
those Mysteries that were wrapped up either in their Institution or Habit: And
first, if we reflect upon their Institution and Designment we shall discover
that they were to be perfect for Generation, by which is signified that the
Faculties of their Souls should be fitted and adapted for spiritual
procreations, that Religion might be improved and the Church multiplied by
those supernatural productions: Secondly, they were not to be blind or
imperfect in their eyes, by which was denoted, that they should not obscure or
blind the Light of Reason with those Fogs that ascend from a corrupted
Understanding, the Clouds of Prejudice or Prepossession which are the Mists of
the Soul, nor make dim or blemish its spiritual Beams with the Fumes of secular
Interest. Thirdly, they were not to be crooked, rumpel'd, or bunched backed,
that is, they were to secure their lives from all visible and scandalous
Crimes, and external pollutions, which are as so many spiritual Excrescencies
and Gibbosities, so that the regularity of their souls should be adaequate and
correspondent to the Uniformity of their bodies. Fourthly, they were not to be
infested with the Itch, or Scabs, or buried in a crust of Leprosy, by which
was intimated that they should not itch after novel Opinions, which when they
are entertained and assented to and incorporated into the belief, appear like
scabs upon the body Ecclesiastic; nor should they suffer themselves to be
invaded with the Leprosy either of Sin or Heresy. Fifthly, they were to have
no lameness in their hands or feet, by which was suggested that they should
have Vrim and Thummim, soundness of Doctrine and integrity of Life, that they
should not only preach Sermons, but live Sermons, and build up by Example, as
well as erect or establish by Precept. Indeed the Will and practical
Understanding are the Hands and Feet of the Soul, which should not take up any
Heterodox Doctrines, or wander into the irregular bypath of Error or Schism:
For Liberty of Will may be styled the Hand and Fingers of the Soul, by which it
picks and chooses, and if it gathers Flowers, it weaves to it self a Garland of
Immortality. Sixthly, they were not to be flat nosed, that signature being not
only amongst the ancient Gentiles, but the Jews likewise, the symbol of folly,
imprudence, stupidity, or dullness of spirit, and flatness of parts Seventhly,
the Priests under the Law were not to be broken either in their feet or hands,
to insinuate that they were obliged neither to walk or work by halves, or halt
between two Opinions, that is between God and Baal.

The High Priest's girdle in general denoted Truth, the white in it signified
Innocence, the blew typified Heavenliness, the scarlet Persecution, the purple
a holy Majesty of spirit, as that was an Imperial color. A Girdle demonstrates
activity and promptness in business, and so is a Type of strength. It is
likewise an Emblem of Constancy and Perseverance; And because it rescues the
Garments from looseness, it is a symbol of warmth, of zeal, and of stability in
Piety; For Sin and Error by laying men open, and making them naked, exposes
them to cheapness and contempt. And lastly, it is a representation of Ornament
and Beauty. The High Priest when he went into the Holy of Holies disrobed
himself of all his gorgeous: Equipage and pompous Habiliments, and reinvested
himself with them when he came out, to discover that Humility is the best Basis
whereon to erect and establish the superstructure of a future Glory.

Having taken a summary view of the Jewish Priests, I shall now make some
concise remarks on the Jewish Temple, and its interior Utensils, and the
Mythology that may be spun out from them both, and so proceed: The Porch of the
Temple was open to intimate the free Access of our Addresses and Applications
to Heaven. Its Elevation being 120 Cubits denoted the sublimity of Divine
Contemplation: Its steps the growth of Piety in its several Gradations and
Improvements: The Western Gate of the Temple anciently lead to Solomon's
Palace, to insinuate that Magistracy and Ministry are so complicated and
wound up together, that like Hippocrates Twins they laugh and mourn, and live
and die together. Villalpandus makes the Jewish Temple a Typical similitude of
Christ's Body upon the Cross, with his Arms stretched out, and his Legs
conjoined in such a manner together, as that his Head should possess the
Sanctuary, his Breast the Altar, his Feet the Eastern Gate, his two Hands the
North and South sides of the Temple; so that as the passage or way to the
Sanctuary or Altar, lay open through those three principal Gates; In like
manner should the path to the true Sanctuary be made plain and easy thorough
the Holes and Wounds of his Feet and Hands.

The Brazen Altar in the Jewish Temple, was the emblem of a broken and a
contrite heart, the Fire typified holy Zeal, the Sacrificing Instrument the two
edged sword of the Spirit, the Beasts to be slain are our various Lusts, which
we are to drag before the Altar by holy Confession, to mortify by a constant
Hatred, and then to offer them up in a renewed Conversation. The Goat to be
slain, and the Escape Goat some affirm represented Christ's Humanity and
Divinity, others assert they typified his Passion and Resurrection.

The Jewish Priest's lot or proportion in the Offering or Sacrifice was the
Cheek, to intimate that his Lips should preserve Knowledge, and that he ought
to be eloquent and learned in the Laws of God: Secondly, the right shoulder, to
denote that he should perform good works with dexterity, strength and
expedition: Thirdly, the Breast, by which he was admonished to lodge no other
Inmates in his Bosom, but pure Thoughts, Knowledge of the Law, and Truth in his
Assertions; And lastly, the Maw, to suggest his abstinence from Luxury, and
all manner of Excess and Intemperance.

The Doors of the Sanctuary were composed of Fur and Olive, that of the
Oracle only of Olive, to discover that our Peace on Earth is mixed with
Imperfections; but is only made complete when we enter into Glory; which Door
had two Leaves, which might be the Symbols of Faith and Hope.

The procerity and tall stature of the Cedar and Fir Tree that were employed in
framing the Sanctuary did typifie the successive growth of Piety and
Christianity, until they shoot up into Glory. The Floor of the Sanctuary which
was laid with planks of Fir, overlaid with boards of Cedar, and plated with
Gold, did signify the eminency, excellency, and splendour of that Metal was
still annexed to Humility. Gold being a principal Ingredient in the Composition
of the Sanctuary, did mystically demonstrate the preciousness, the purity, the
luster, and the tried and experienced excellency of the Graces of Religion. The
precious stones which adorned the Sanctuary, were the impenetrable Diamond,
which represented the courage and constancy of pious men; the Saphyre their
celestial Love, the Ruby their Persecution, the flaming Carbuncle their ardent
Zeal, the Crystal their unspotted Innocence, the prominency or bunching out of
these refulgent Jems did declare the visibility, the exemplariness and radiancy
of their Virtues.

The Vrim inserted into the high Priest's pectoral signified Light, and the
Thummim denoted Truth. A late learned man has asserted that the Vrim ingrafted
into the high Priest's Rationale was an Icuncula or little Image representing
some Angel or Cherubin, from whose mouth after a precedent irradiation of the
circumbient Jems God delivered those infallible Dictates, by which the Jews
were to conduct and steer themselves in affairs of the most difficult and
perplexed emergency.

Proportionate to this were the Teraphim amongst the ancient Jews, which were
little Images either devoted and dedicated to the Honor of Angels, or else
molded and cast into the Figure and Form of the Angels themselves (as the
learned Ludovicus de Dieu asserts;) from whose Oraculous Responses upon their
Application to those Angelical Pourtraictures they managed those important
concernments that had an Aspect either on Peace or War. But I have too much
digrest, I now return.

The Windows of the Sanctuary did typifie Divine Illumination, which must not
be darkened with the impurer Mire of terrestial Cares, the Dust of Vain Glory,
the Mists or Umbrages of Sorrow, nor with the smoaky Exhalations of Anger.

The Golden Candlesticks in the Jewish Temple did intimate the infused Habits
of divine Knowledge residing in the Soul; The Golden Snuffers did denote
Afflictions, which as they do induce a Chastisement, so they superinduce a
subsequent Eminency and Splendor.

The Palm Trees and Cherubins which were insculped on the Door of the Holy of
Holies, did suggest that pious men that supported their Afflictions with
Patience (of which the Palm was an Emblem) should after their depression, have
an emergency out of all their Troubles, and dwell in the Mansions of Cherubins.

The two Angels that stood by the Ark had their Wings stretched out, and their
Faces looking downwards on it, to declare their readiness and posture to be
employed in divine Ministrations; The Cherubins on the Ark looked toward one
another, to intimate their mutual Love, intuitive Knowledge, Concord and
Harmony.

The imputrible Wood of Shittim of which the Ark was composed, signified
Christ's Humanity; the Gold with which it was covered, typified his Divinity;
as likewise did the Manna which was imputrible, Globulous or Circular, to
denote his eternal Divinity; or if you please, the Manna within the Vail was
the Type of Christ Essential, as the Shewbread without the Vail was the Symbol
of Christ Doctrinal. The Incense that was on the top of the Cakes of
Shewbread, was to be burned on the Sabbath, to signify that Prayer should be
still combined, or united with the Word.

The Rod of Aaron was abstracted from an Almond-tree, that soonest blossoms, to
insinuate to us the early Fertility of Religion under pious Discipline: Now a
Rod amongst the Ancients, was the Symbol of Ease, of Government, of Defense, of
Doctrine and Instruction, and of Discipline and Correction: The Blossoms of
Aaron's Rod had a whiteness tinctured with red, to intimate that Purity and
Zeal were the best Characters and Evidences of Piety and Religion.

Of the Mythology of the Ancient Germans and Saxons.
THey represented the Sun under many Mystical Signatures and other Mythological
Descriptions; they pourtraied him like an old man standing on a Fish, wearing a
Coat girt about his Body with a linen Girdle, but having his Head and Feet
naked, sustaining a Wheel and a Basket full of Corn, Fruit and Roses: By his
old Age and Coat girt to him was signified Winter, by his bare Head and Feet
Summer, by the Corn Harvest, by the Fruit Autumn, and by Roses was intimated
the Spring; his standing on a Fish, which is silent but yet slippery and swift
in its motion, denoted the slipperiness, silence and swiftness of Time, who
never forgot his pace, though we his Footsteps numbered not. The Wheel suggests
the roundness of the Sun, and the Revolution of the Year, and the linen Girdle
might import the Zodiac or Ecliptic Line, within which the Sun contains and
fetters himself: When they did express the Sun to be King of the Planets, and
principal Arbiter of the World, they decyphered him placed on a Throne,
supporting a Scepter in his left Hand, and sustaining a Sword in his right; out
of the right side of his Mouth broke Thunder, out of his left issued Lightning;
on his Head sat an Eagle, and his Feet rested on a Dragon, and round about him
sat twelve Deities; the Throne, Scepter, and Sword, did insinuate the Majesty,
Power, and Influence of the Sun, who by his Heat is the Parent of Thunder and
Lightning; the Eagle intimates the swiftness of his motion, and his piercing
Eye that unvails all things by his Light; his treading on a Dragon imports that
by his Heat, he subdues the most poisonous, noxious and destructive Vapors;
the twelve Gods may either denote the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, or else the
twelve Months of the Year: When they did describe the Heat, Light, and Motion
of the Sun, they painted him like a Man, holding with both his Hands a flaming
Wheel; and when they did pourtray the courage and military Heat of Martial men,
excited as they conjectured by the Sun, they represented him under the
signature of an armed man, holding in one Hand a Banner with a Rose on it, and
in the other a pair of Scales; on his Breast was the Picture of a Bear, on his
Target the Pourtraicture of a Lion; the Field about him was embroidered with
Flowers, by which they designed Valor complicated with Eloquence, both in
their Vogue essential to a Commander; the Arms, Bear, and Lion did intimate the
fierceness, courage, and defense, that should be resident in Martial men; the
Rose and Field enameled with Flowers, did represent the sweetness and
obligingness of Eloquence; the Scales were to suggest how words should be
weighed in the Balance of Discretion, before they are divulged; when they
discovered how the Sun by his Heat and Influence excited venereal Love in
Creatures subservient to his Dominion, they then varied his Sex, and painted
him like a Woman, because in them that Passion is most impotent, and yet
impetuous; on her Head they placed a Myrtle Crown or Garland to denote her
Dominion, and that Love should be always verdant as the Myrtle; in one hand
she supported the World, and in the other three golden Apples, to represent
that the World and its wealth are both sustained by Love; the three Golden
Apples signified the threefold Beauty of the Sun, exemplified in the Morning,
Meridian, and Evening; on her Breast was lodged a Burning Torch, to insinuate
to us the violence of the flame of Love which scorches humane Hearts. When they
would express the Sun's operation upon the Moon, they delineated him like a man
with long Ears, holding the Moon in his Hand, to suggest to us that she
entitles her Light and Power to his Beams and Influence; his long Ears did
signify his promptness to receive the Supplications of all Persons, though
divided from him by never so remote and considerable a Distance. He that would
see this Subject more amply discoursed on, may peruse Schedius de Diis
Germanis, where he shall receive more copious and plenary satisfaction, and to
him I refer the Reader.

I should now unravel the Mythology of the Ancient Greeks and Romans; but this
I shall annex to the Conclusion of this Treatise, and proceed to represent a
brief Discourse or Description of the Egyptian Hieroglyphics.

I shall now descend to unvail that Mythological Learning, which lay wrapped up
in the dark and cloudy complications of Hieroglyphics, which indeed may seem
to be the Basis on which all Heraldry is established.

In the Hieroglyphical Tables of Cardinal Bembus, so often mentioned by
Athanasius, Kircherus in his Oedipus Copticus, there is set down the Figure of
the Scarabaeus or Beetle for the Trunk, but with the Head and Face of a man,
supporting a little Table with this Inscription (...). About the Neck a number
of Concentrick Circles to express the Orbs and Motions of the Heavens; upon
the top of the Head a Face of the increasing Moon, to intimate her Monthly
Revolution; within that a cross mark, for the four Elements weaving together
all things above a winged Globe, and wreathed about with two Serpents.

The meaning of this last, is told you by Barachias Albenephi in his Book of
the Ancient Egyptian Learning, and in that part of it where he treats of
Pharaoh's Obelisques. He affirms the winged Sphere wreathed about with Serpents
to be the Hieroglyphick of the Soul and Spirit of the Universe. The Humane Face
is understood of the Sun and his Courses. For the Holy Beetle (which an old
Egyptian durst not tread on) Horus Apollo asserts, it signifies the Figure of
the World, and he subjoyns this reason and secret for it.

The Beetle (says he) when it has a mind to bring forth, takes the Excrement
of an Ox, which having wrought into small pellets round as the World, it turns
them about from East to West, it self in the mean time (as if she intended to
summon great Nature to these Travels) turning to the East.

The Egyptian Word (...) held out in the Table, is the same with the Greek Word
(...), to intimate that the whole Frame of the World hangs together by a true
magnetic Love, that invisible Harmony that cements and solders together the
Discord of its divided and estranged Parts.

The Egyptians when they would represent the Hieroglyphick of Nature, pictured
the Figure of a Boy involved and inveloped with a Net; by the first they would
insinuate to us her constant and uninterrupted vigor, rescued from Decay, and
the increasing Imperfections and Infirmities of Age; and by the second the
variety of Causes and multiplicity of Effects, the weavings of whose
complicated Contexture made up the Net with which the Boy appeared to be
covered.

The Fig Tree was the Hieroglyphick of mutual vicissitude, for here the old
Figs never fall off until the new ones appear, which asserts the Justice of our
Savior's curse inflicted on the Fig Tree in the Gospel, and which has so
distorted and perplexed Commentators to abett; for if the Time of Figs was not
yet come, as the Pages of Holy Writ in that Story do aver, there was then a
greater Reason that Figs should appear, and if the Time of Figs was come, yet
still the old ones did remain for some interval of Time, after the new ones had
given Evidence of their Appearance and Being.

And it is observable that Julian the Apostate, that like an industrious
Spider, did with a curious and diligent Malice spin out any thing out of
Scripture with which he might weave together the least Pretense of Absurdity or
Impossibility, did from his Inspection into natural Causes never quarrel the
truth of what is above asserted.

A Lion Rampant amongst the Egyptians was the Hieroglyphick of Magnanimity;
Regardant of Circumspection and Caution; Salient of Expedition or celerity;
Sejant of Counsel; Passant of Prudence; Gardant of Defense.

A Be making Honey was the Hieroglyphick of a Prince, managing the
Administration and Conduct of his Kingdom and Public Affairs.

An Elephant amongst the elder Persians, Egyptians, and Indians was the Symbol
of Fidelity, Justice and Piety; and amongst the Modern Arabs, Siamites and
Sumatrans, is the Emblem of Magnanimity, Memory and Providence.

A Griffin being a complicated mixture, of Eagle and Lion, was the
Hieroglyphick of perspicacity and courage; its Wings denoted its celerity, its
Beak its tenacity, and its Tallons its fury and rapacity.

A Boar and Lion yoked together were the Hieroglyphick of strength and
magnanimity.

A Dogs Head was the Hieroglyphick of sagacity, and a Dogs tongue did
mythologically represent both Physic and Physicians.

The Hieroglyphick of an abominable thing was a Fish, because custom and
prescription interdicted the use of it in the Egyptian Sacrifices.

An Infant was the Hieroglyphick of those who enter into the World, as an old
Man was of those who go out. A Seahorse amongst the Egyptians was made the
Hierogliphick of Murder, Impudence, Violence, and Injustice, because they
asserted, that he destroyed his Sire and ravished his Damme. A Falcon from his
perspicacity, and sublimity in his flight toward Heaven, was affirmed to be
the Hieroglyphick of God: All which being compacted together import thus much;
All you that enter into the world, and you that go out, God hates Injustice.

As the Hawke was by the Egyptians represented to be the Hieroglyphick of the
Sun, because of his excellent sight and quick motion: So the Moon was
portrayed under the Figure of a white skinned Man with a Hawks head; for her
whiteness, that is her light, does not result from her self, but from her Hawks
head the Sun. Apuleius shows that the Egyptians worshipped Mercury, under the
denomination of Anubis portrayed with a Dogs head, supporting his Caduceus in
one hand, and a Palm in the other; by which is conjectured they might insinuate
that a Princes Ambassador should not only be eloquent, but likewise vigilant,
faithful and sagacious, which three qualities are resident in the Dog; prudent
also, as the Serpents wreathed about his Caduceus may suggest; and justly
inexpugnable as the Palm, which sinks not under the pressure of any burden.
Indeed Eusebius affirms, that not only those Captains were honored and
adorned, who had enhauns'd and aggrandiz'd their Fame by subduing the Enemies
of their Country, but likewise those Beasts whose pourtraictures did embellish
their Helmets, or Targets, as being great improvements to their Victories, by
infusing terrors and Panick astonishments into the breasts of their
Adversaries.

A Palm Tree amongst the Egyptians was made the Hieroglyphick of a month,
because, as their sentiments engaged them to believe, that monthly shoots
forth fresh leaves.

For Eternity, the Egyptians painted the Sun and Moon, as entitling themselves
(in their vogue and estimate) neither to beginning nor end.

Fire and Water were made the Hieroglyphics of Integrity.

A Snake with his tail lodged in his mouth, did amongst the Egyptians
represent the year.

The Peach Tree was the Hieroglyphick of silence, whose leaf did represent the
tongue in form, and the fruit the heart; to intimate, the heart and tongue
should be of one piece, and never to speak without premeditation; therefore
this Tree was dedicated to Harpocrates, God of Silence, who was painted with
the Leaves and Fruit of the Peach Tree in one hand, and the other pressing his
lip. The Wolf did likewise signify Silence, because the assertion of the
Egyptians was, that a Wolf did super-induce Silence through terror and
amazement in the man that saw him; and therefore Harpocrates abovesaid was
pictured in a Wolf's skin, beset with eyes and ears, to intimate that we should
hear and see much but speak little.

A Scepter with an eye insculp'd upon it, was by the Egyptians made the
Hieroglyphick of God, to suggest to us his Knowledge, Power and Providence, by
which the World is managed and supported.

The Swan and Grass-hopper were the Hieroglyphics of Music, and therefore
dedicated to Apollo, who was Patron and Protector of it.

Three Heads conjoined were the Hieroglyphick of the combination of Counsels.
Three Hearts concentered of confederacy of Courage. Three Legs embraced of
Union in Expedition; and Three Arms conjoined, was the Hieroglyphick of
concourse or consent in Action.

An Husbandman with a measuring Rod in his hand, and a Bushel on his head, was
the Hieroglyphick of Joseph, called corruptly by the Egyptians Osiris, Mnevis,
Apis, and Serapis, and used as a Monument to preserve his Remembrance, who when
Egypt suffered under a public Dearth, had rescued the People from the onsets
and ravage of that common Calamity, and therefore they adored him likewise
under the pourtracture of an Ox, the ancient Hieroglyphick of an Husbandman

Others again Assert, that by Osiris, the Egyptians understood the Nile, and
by Isis the Genius or Soil of Egypt; For Isis as Vives asserts in his Notes
upon Augustine de Civ. Dei. Lib. 15. c. 3. signifies the Earth; and therefore
the ancient Egyptians pictured Her moving a Sistrum or Timbrell with Her right
hand, to intimate the return of the Inundation of Nile, and Her left supporting
a Bucket, to signify the Repletion of all the Channels; and by Typhon the Sea,
and therefore they brought in Isis deploring the ruin of Osiris torn to pieces
by Typhon, that is, swallowed up by the Sea; but afterward they represented
Her collecting his torn and scattered limbs, that is, the new and reiterated
Inundation of the River Nile; only his Genitals she could not retrive, which
were swallowed and devoured by Fish, to intimate that that Fertility which was
caused by Nile on the Earth, was yet more visibly and eminently manifest in the
water, and exemplified in the pregnant and fertile spawn, and numerous
productions of fishes.

Lastly, Others affirm, that by Osiris the Egyptians meant the Sun, because
they usually painted him with an Hawks Head, and by Isis the Moon, whom they
sometimes clothed in White, sometimes in Red, and sometimes in a Black
Garment, by which they did suggest, that the Moon put on a White Aspect in
clear weather, and a Red Complexion against windy, her Black Garment was to
represent her Duskie color after her Change and in Eclipses, and by Typhon
they signified the Earth, for they gave him a vast Body, stretching forth his
hands from East to West, and his head as high as the tallest hills, by which
they intimated the Longitude, Latitude and Height of the Earth: his upper part
had the signature of a man covered with feathers, whilst the lower part was
armed or clothed with scales, and wound about with Serpents; to declare, that
Men, Birds and Beasts inhabited the upper part of the Earth, and Serpents and
Fishes the lower: his belching out of smoke, and spitting of fire, signifies,
those vapors, exhalations, and fiery eruptions out of many parts of the Earth,
make the Gods obscure themselves, that is, darken the Sun, Moon and Stars; but
Osiris or Horus (for under those two Appellations they represented the Sun)^
subdued this Monster, that is, by dissolving and dissipating those vapors
which skreen'd his beams from the World, which was expressed tacitly and
gloomily by the Hawk's flying violently upon, and beating the Hippopotamos or
Seahorse. The seeking or lamenting of Osiris or Orus by Isis, was to intimate
the frequent sadness incumbent upon the Moon resulting from those Eclipses
which are occasioned by the interposition of the shadow of the Earth; the
bushel on the Head of Osiris or Orus may import that the Sun is the cause of
fertility; and the streaker or measuring Rod in one hand, may intimate, that
the Sun measures all things by his progressive motion; the Wolves, the Dogs,
the Lions* and Serpents heads grasped in the other hand, may represent the four
parts of the year: The Winter is the rapacious Wolf, the Spring is the fawning
or flattering Dog, the Summer the flaming angry Lion, the Autumn is the Serpent
distilling into the bodies of men, the venom of destructive diseases. The
Egyptians, farther to improve this Hieroglyphick, painted Osiris or Orus
winged with a Scepter in his hand, and a round Discus by him, to represent the
swiftness of the Suns motion, his Dominion over the World, and his round body,
as also his circular progress or perambulation.

The Goose and Dog were the Hieroglyphics of Vigilance, and therefore by the
Egyptians devoted to the Moon, as Protectress of the Night, which was by their
Alarums secured from danger and prejudice.

Proteus was both a Prophet and King of Egypt, whom that people
Hieroglyphically represented under the several resemblances of Bull, Serpent,
Boar, Tiger, Lion and Dragon, which occasioned the fiction of his winding and
transforming himself into various shapes, when indeed if we shall disrobe these
mysterious signatures of their cloudy vesture, we shall discover, that he was a
Prince who managed the interest of his people with that dexterity, that he
could proportion his Government to every Genius, having the strength of the
Bull, the prudence of the Serpent, the courage of the Boar, the fierceness of
the Tiger, the magnanimity of the Lion, and the celerity and vigilance of the
Dragon. Or secondly, because he was accustomed to use or bear the several
portractures of these Creatures in his Banners or Ensigns when he was alive,
the Egyptians to enforce and perpetuate the Remembrance of so excellent a
Prince, pourtrai'd him under the resemblances of those Creatures when he was
dead.

The Pelican was by the Egyptians made the Hieroglyphick of maternal
Affection, for she, when her young ones have been bitten by Serpents that
secretly invade their Nest, lances her bosom, and with the purple balsome
that streams from that opened sluice, not only expells the infused venom, but
likewise cements and cures the wounds inflicted by those noxious adversaries.

The Bird Ibis or Ichneumon, or the Egyptian Rat, were by that people
represented as the Hieroglyphics of Safety and Preservation; for the first by
pricking with her sharp feathers those various Serpents, which are the progeny
or product of the mud of Nile, causes them to expire and die, and the last, by
rolling himself in sand, and gliding into the belly of the Crocodile, whilst he
is engaged in sleep, and his jaws are open, corrodes and gnaws out his
entrails, and becomes to that Amphibious Monster both punishment and
executioner.

Indeed Heresies are the Serpents of the Church, which are engendered by the
Mud of noisome and unsavory Opinions, which being pricked by the Pens of
Orthodox Writers languish away, and find their fate in an early Sepulcher.

A Tortoise was the Hieroglyphick of an industrious Hou-sewife, who is always
employing her self within her house, in managing those affairs that are
subservient to the interest of the family, as that is always resident in its
shell.

Indeed there were no Nations ever so remote or barbarous, but in times either
of ancient or a more modern inscription, muffel'd up their knowledge in the
cloudy garment of Hieroglyphics. The Coronation of the King of Pegu (if we may
credit Vincent le Blanc as He relates it in his Travels) is wholly
Hieroglyphical; for he is invested or inaugurated with a Diadem of Lead, to
signify that all things should be performed in weight and measure, and an Axe
is put into his hand, to denote that he should administer Justice; he takes his
Oath upon a small vessel of Emerald, in which some of the ashes of the first
Kings of Pegu lie enshrined, to put into him a remembrance of Humane Frailty;
he is attired or adorned with a Turkish Robe, lined or furred with the skins of
white hairs, to intimate his subsequent innocence.

The Chinese, a people thrust into the remotest angle of the World, at this day
roll up all their learning in Hieroglyphical signatures, and other
Emblematical Allusions, which they extract, first from Dragons and Serpents,
and their various complications; secondly, from things relating to Husbandry;
thirdly, from the wings of Birds, according to the position of their feathers;
fourthly, from shellfish and worms; fifthly, from the roots of herbs; sixthly,
from the prints of the feet of beasts; seventhly, from Tortoises; eighthly, from
the bodies of birds; ninthly, from Stars; tenthly, from fishes; eleventhly,
from herbs and water-flags; and lastly, from ropes, threads and lines, either
olique or straight: for example, the straight line marked with A signifies One,
crossed with another line, as at B, expresses Ten, made with another at the
bottom, as at C, it denotes the Earth, and with another at the top, as at D,
stands for a King; by adding a touch on the left side between the two first
strokes, as at E, it is taken for a Pearl; but that which is marked with F,
signifies Creation or Life; and lastly, by the Character under G is intended
Sir.

ABCDEFG (...)

Having taken a brief prospect of that knowledge that lay treasured up in the
dark Exchequers of Hieroglyphics, I shall as compendiously as may be unravel
the principal of those Emblems, behind whose traverse the Graecians laid up
that learning they desired to skreen from vulgar inspection, which I have
gleaned out of Causin's Christian Hieroglyphics; and consequently make some
short reflections on the Reverses of the ancient Coins, so far as they may have
an aspect upon Heraldry; a Catalogue of the first out of (...) here ensues as
it is by him recorded in Latin, and which in another Column I have indu^^^ to
speak English.

Arae. Altars. Dei Sapientia, Pietas,profugium, miseratio. The wisdom of
God,piety, a refuge or asylum, commiseration. Ardea. An Heron. Tempestas. A
Tempest. Apis. A Be. Rex, populus Regi obsequens, Artificium. A Monarch,
people obedient to their Prince, Artificial contextures. Bos. An Ox. Bonorum
obsequium, modestia, petulantiae fraenum, auditus promptus. of the good,
modesty, the bridle of petulant sawciness, promptness to hear. Carduus. A
Thistle. Morbi. Diseases. Catena. A Chain. Aperta vis, vitia, conjugium,
servitus, leges. Open violence, vices, wedlock, servitude, the laws. Camelus. A
Camel. Zelotypia, reverentia in matres, cibi potusque abstinentia. Jealousy,
reverence to mothers, an abstinencein eating and drinking. Cardo. An Hinge.
Authoritas. Authority. Calceus. A Spur. Rerum progressus. The procedure of
things. Canis. A Dog. Custodia, Dii Lares, gratus animus, memoria, fides,
amicitia. Custody, the Lares, a grateful mind, remembrace, fidelity,
friendship. Cervus. An Heart. Praecipitantia, fugacitas. Precipitancy,
swiftness. Ciconia. A Storke. Pietas erga parents, gratitudo. Piety toward
parents, gratitude. Colus and fusus. The distaf and spindle. Fatum seu mors,
nuptiae. Fate or death, marriage. Columna. A Pillar. Terminus, Gloriae
sublimitas. A boundary, eminency or sublimity of glory. Cucurbitae. Gourds or
Pompions. Spes inanes. Vain and empty hopes. Elephas. An Elephant. Pietas,
mansuetudo, ira lacessita. Piety, tameness or gentleness, anger excited or
provoked. Equus. An Horse. Pugnacitas, celeritas, fama, humanae vitae
lubricitas, fraenata ferocitas, profugus, Imperium, virtus. Promptness to
combat, celerity, fame, the slipperiness of humane life, barbarity or wildness
tamed, a fugitive, Empire, virtue. Erithacus. A Robin red breast. Solitudo.
Solitude. Fistula. A Pipe. Adulatio. Flattery. Faces. Torches. Amor mutuus,
nuptiae. Mutual love, marriage. Ficus. A Fig. Adulatoribus deditus, dulcedo,
suavitas. One devoted to sycophants, sweetness. Fungus. A Toadstoole. Fatuitas.
Folly or stupidity. Hedera. Ivy. Tenacitas, vetustas. Tenacity, antiquity.
Laqueus. An Halter. Amor, venus, fortitudo and temperantia, doli occulti,
nequitia. Lapis and Cubus. Perpetuitas, stabilitas, firma prosperitas. Love,
venery, fortitude and temperance, the ambushes of secret fraud, impiety. A
Stone and a Cube. Perpetuity, stability, firm or fixed prosperity. Lepus. An
Hare. Foecunditas, vigilantia. Fertility, vigilance. Lolium. Cockel or Darnel.
Pravi mores. Evil manners. Meta. A Butt. Finis. The end of any thing. Modius. A
Bushel. Vbertas, sapientia, liberalitas. Plenty, wisdom, liberality. Musca. A
Fly. Impudentia ac pertinacia, indocilitas, importuna. Impudence and
obstinacy, an inexpugnable indocility. Milvus. A Kite. Navigatio. Navigation.
Malum Punicum. A Pomgranate. Populositas, multarum gentium societas, amicitia.
Populousness, the society of many nations, friendship. Mola. Meal. Humanae
vitae commercium. The commerce of humane life. Navis. A Ship. Adventus seu
migratio. Importation and exportation. Olea. The Olive Tree. Pax, durities
emollita, agricultura, foelicitas, spes. Peace, hardness made limber and
ductile, agriculture, felicity, hope. Quercus* The Oak. Virtus, fortitudo
principatus. Virtue, fortitude, dominion or principality. Rosa. The Rose.
Juventus, modestia, bonum malo circumseptum. Youth, modesty, good hedged in, or
circumscribed with ill. Salix. A Willow. Vinculum, castitas, sterilitas,
humanitas, otium. Bonds, chastity, barrenness, humility, ease or vacancy of
business. Salamandra. A Salamander Constantia. Constancy. Serra. A Saw.
Maledicentia. Malevolent language. Sepia. An Onion. Simulatio in volueris
obtecta. Dissimulation involved or folded up in many coverings. Sistrum. A
Timbrell. Rerum vicissitudo. Vicissitude of affairs. Sus. An Hog. Profanus,
indocilitas, deliciae luxuriosae, ganeo. A profane person, an incapacity to be
instructed, luxurious caresses, a babbler. Tuba. A Trumpet. Celebritas.
Notoreity of fame. Vespa. A Waspe. Perturbator. A common barator or disturber.
Vipera. A Viper. Parricidium, prudentia, astutia. Parricide, prudence,
subtilty.

I shall now advance to make some reflections on Coins of a very high and
ancient ascent: but before I treat of those, by common acceptance styled
Consular, or those that fell under the denomination of Imperial, I shall
discourse of those that related to Provinces, Cities, and Colonies, whether
Greek or Roman.

The several Signatures insculped upon the Reverse of the Greek Coyns, do
declare to what Cities they owe their Original; as for example. The Pegasus
impressed upon the Syracusian Coin did intimate it entitled its Original to
Corinth, upon whose Coin a Pegasus was usually represented. The Palm Tree
figured on the Coin of the ancient Cities of Carthage, and Hierapitna and
Lapythae in Creet, do suggest to us, that they acknowledged their extraction
from Tire, whose pecuniary Symbol was a Palm Tree. An Owl, whose impress did
adorn the Reverse of the Coin of Megara, a City of Sicily, as a Monument of
their Original from Athens. A Quadrangular Area was a Symbol insculped on the
Coin of Dyrrachium and Andrios (though Spanhemius asserts the Sculpture
impressed on the last relating to Andrios was a Representation of an Arcula or
little Chest, wherein it is possible the Image of Diana, or some other deity
was treasured up) from which we may conclude that they were a Colony of
Corcyra. Diana was insculp'd on the Reverse of the Coin of Massilium, now
styled Marseilles; to intimate that that City extracted its Original from
Phocea or Phocis. Alexandria, Troas, Neapolis, now Napoli in Romagnia, Germa,
and other Colonies had the Impress of a Wolf suckling two young ones insculp'd
on the Reverse of their Coin; from which we may conclude, that these Cities
were Colonies filled with Inhabitants deduced and transplanted even from Rome
it self. Antiochia, (as the learned Spanhemius has discovered to us) had the
Signature of a Ram and a Star, which was the proper Symbol of that City: the
Star did signify its Easterly situation, and the Ram Salient, its ascent and
elevation. Nicomedia in Bythinia, had the Sculpture of a Triremis, and two
little Aediculae or Turrets on the Reverse, to intimate its Fences, or
Fortifications, and likewise to design to us its near Situation to the Sea. A
Sphynx did adorn the Reverse of the Coin impressed at Chios or Sio, and
likewise the Medals of Augustus; to insinuate to us, that it it was the Emblem
of Fortitude, Industry, and Clemency. Neptune sitting on a rocky Throne between
two Tritons, was impressed on the Reverse of the Coin of the City of Brusa or
Prusa in Bythinia; and did tacitly design (as the learned Seguinus does affirm)
its Empire over the adjacent Ocean. A Star and an antiquated Helmet was
insculp'd on the Reverse of the Medals of that bloody Usurper Triphon; the
Helmet did design his Courage and Magnanimity, and the Star his being one of
the Kings of the East. Messina in Sicily, Tarentum or Tarento in the Kingdom of
Naples, and other Maritime Cities, had the Beaks of Ships, the Acroficia or the
very Snouts of those Beaks, Triremes, and Dolphins portrayed on the Reverse of
their Coyns, whose Signature did declare their Maritime situation. Naples in
Italy had not only a Dolphin insculped on the Reverse of its Coin; but likewise
a Siren (whose Feet resembled the Fins of a Fish) sounding a Trumpet; to
intimate not only the Situation, but the Fame and Celebrity (decyphered by the
Trumpet) of that City. Syracusa had not only a Dolphin embowed in Chief; but a
Strobilos or Pineapple in Base insculp'd on the Reverse of their Coyns; not
only to decypher to us its Maritime position, but likewise to suggest to us the
plentiful growth of those Trees about that City; which were always reputed a
Symbol of Fertility. A Star fixed on a Luna Falcata or half Moon was insculp'd
on the Reverse of several Grecian Coyns, especially of that of Byzantium, and
might significantly denote both the increase and growth, or else the
restitution of a City decayed (described by the Star) to its primitive Light
and Splendor.

Some Cities in Creet had an Eagle insculped on their Coin, perched upon a
Labyrinth, between two Stars in Chief, and two Pileus's on each side the
Labyrinth in Base; the two Stars were Castor and Pollux, or the Dioscuri; the
two Pileus's designed that Liberty they enjoyed under the Tuition and
Protection of Jupiter, intimated by the Eagle, and the two Stars the Twins of
Leda. So Pergamus had described on the Reverse of its Coin, Aesculapius
standing on a Pedestal or Cippus of stone, the solemn Protector of that City,
and between two deminaked Figures, presenting the Image with two Sprigs or
Branches of water Smallage, which certainly did denote the two Rivers that
glided at no far distance from this City, namely Selinus, and Ceteius; their
two Garlands likewise under the Pedestal, which did declare that those did
adorn the Neocoroi or Sacrists, at the Celebration of those Solemnities that
were devoted to the Honor of this eminent Deity. Nice in Bythinia had the Image
of Bacchus lying in a reclining posture, and leaning on a Panther, the signal
Symbol of those Cities which were entitled to his protection, and holding in
his right hand the Image of Victory; from whence the City, it is probable,
might extract the Name of (...), that is, Victoria. On the ancient Numismata of
Damascus was stamped the Signature of a Woman, whose right hand grasped a Prunum
Damascenum or Damsen Prune, of which the Country was abundantly fruitful: and
at her Feet was placed a Wheel; which, it is probable might intimate, that this
was the Effigies of Nemesis, who was Patroness (as Seguinus asserts from
ancient Coyns) of several Cities in the lesser Asia: Now a Wheel was
customarily placed by her, for these two reasons; first to declare the celerity
of Divine Revenge, and secondly to discover to us the Vicissitudes and
Revolutions of it. There is another Coin relating to Nice abovementioned,
published by Seguinus; on the Reverse of it sits Bacchus, representing a
youthful Countenance; to declare the Vigor and Refreshment the Spirits receive
from Wine: his head is embellished with Rays; to intimate, that he was the
first Inventor of Lights. Hence it was, that he was portrayed by the
Egyptians with a Torch in his Hand, and worshipped under the Notion of Bacchus
Lampterios; his right Hand grasps a Thirsus, whose Top is bound about with Ivy,
to suggest to us, that the furious Sallies of Lust or Anger should be bound in
and repressed with the Cords of Moderation and Patience. By him is placed Isis,
with a Bushel on her Head, and a Cornucopia in her right hand; both the
Hieroglyphics of Plenty and Fertility. Upon the sides of whose Chariot are
impressed the Signatures of a Panthers and a Tiger; to discover to us, that
Wine debauches Humane Nature, into the disordered and impetuous Passions of
Pantherr and Tigers. His Chariot is drawn by two Centaurs; to intimate that
Wine renders Men a complicated mixture of Man and Beast. Before them dances the
Boy Lissus, to demonstrate to us, what childish and ridiculous Agitations of
Body are superinduced upon us by the Efforts of Wine: at the left side of Isis,
is placed Cupid, in his right hand brandishing a Torch; to decypher, that both
Love and its Flame are fomented and improved by the Heat of Wine: about the Top
and Base of the Medal is insculp'd (...). Upon the Reverse of an ancient Coin
of the City Tyrus, stamped under the Reign of Antoninus Pius, and transmitted
to the public view by Seguinus, there is the portraicture of Hercules, in his
right hand holding a Dish over a flaming Altar, to denote his Divinity; before
him is placed a Stony Mass, distinguished into two Columns, resembling in their
mode or portraicture two Butts; from whose lower part there is an efflux of
water, which empties it self upon a Shell in the Base of the Coin; by which may
be meant, they understood either Hercules Pillars; fixed near Gades, which was
a Tyrian Colony; or else it is more probable they may design those Rocks
lurking under the water, upon which Tire was erected; and this is enforced from
the waters descending upon the Shell, which certainly was the Exchequer or
Repository of the Tyrian Purple.

Upon the Reverse of the Samian Coin, there was the portraicture of a Temple,
and Juno standing before the Portal, and at the Base of one of the Pillars, on
the left side of it, issued out the Vitex or Agnus Castus; which may denote to
us, that this Island was under the protection of Juno, who was born near the
River Imbrasius, under this shrub or plant styled Agnus Castus, with which the
Banks of this River were abundantly embroidered: and about the Reverse was
insculp'd (...). Although upon the Reverse of the Ephesian Coin an Heart was
usually insculp'd; as a Beast particularly devoted to Diana: yet Seguinus in
his Selecta Numismata has discovered to us another Coin of Ephesus, on whose
Reverse (stamped under the Reign of Antoninus Pius) is exhibited the Effigies
of Jupiter sitting on a Rock, to declare his stability; having his Thunder
lodged on the Palm of his left Hand, to intimate his Clemency; and from a
Cornucopia in his right Hand distilling some Aspersions either resembling Rain
or Dew, to demonstrate his Benignity: Upon a Figure Crowned that lies beneath,
near his Feet, is a Temple, and an adjacent Cypress Tree: Both which discover
to us the indulgent Beneficence of the Emperor abovesaid, by refreshing and
repairing the Ruins not only of the confining Province (designed by the
prostrate Crowned Figure) which possibly had been torn with the Concussions of
an Earthquake, or empair'd with Famine; but Ephesus likewise (decyphered by the
Temple and Tree) which had been assalted by the same Calamities. Upon the
Reverse of the Coin of Laodicea, within a Crown, whose Intexture was of the
Leaves and Berries of Ivy, there was a Chest placed, out of whose Aperture a
Serpent issued, to intimate, that this City was entitled to the Guardianship of
Bacchus; or that the circumambient Region was plentifully productive of Wine,
discovered by the Serpent; which by Tristan is made either to signify the
Genius, or else the Power and Fertility of a Province: and this Coin gives
light to that of Catullus; Pars sese tortis Serpentibus incingebant;
Pars obscura cavis celebrabant Orgia Cistis.
Orgia, quae frustra cupiunt audire profani.


Upon the Reverse of the Coin both of Cyzicum and Sardis were insculp'd two
Serpents, wreathed about two erected Torches, in the midst of which was placed
a Flaming Altar, to intimate, that these two Cities did with the highest
Veneration prosecute and adore both Proserpine and Ceres; the last of which was
frequently portraicted sitting in a Chariot drawn by two Serpents, brandishing
two flaming Torches. Upon the Reverse of the Coin of Philippopolis, there was
the Signature of a Woman half naked, which did signify the City it self,
sitting on a Rocky Hill, which did design the Mountain Rhodope; which with the
Herb Nymphaea or Water-Lilly, which her left hand grasped, and the shrub of
Willow or Osier that issued out of the Base or Foot of the Mountain, did
demonstrate its situation to be not far distant from the River Strymon. About
the middle of the Coin was impressed (...). Upon the Reverse of an ancient Coin
of Thessalonica, was insculp'd the Figure of one of the Cabeiri half naked, to
specify his Innocence; supporting in his right Hand a little Vessel, in his
left he wields a Mallet; to intimate that these Cabeiri were the first
Inventors of the managing the use of (which the little Vessel seems to
comprize) Agriculture, Hunting, and other Mechanic Artifices: about the Margin
of the Reverse is engraven (...). Upon the Reverse of a very ancient Coin of
Catana in Sicily, conveyed to Seguinus by Du Fresne, is impressed a winged
Scepter between two Paterae or sacrificing Platters; the first did signify the
dominion, Power and Swiftness of Eloquence: the Patenae were the Symbols of
Religion, as being the Instruments employed in all the Heathen Oblations. And
therefore Occo does well define it, when he says that Patera was Divinitatis
and Aeternitatis Symbolum, or a Symbol of Eternity, from its Circular or
Sphaerical figure. Upon the Reverse of the Theban Coin, was impressed a
Cantharus or Flaggon, and a Clypeus or Shield; the first being used in
Sacrifices, was an Emblem of Religion, and the other a Type of Strength and
Fortitude.

And as Cities, so had Provinces and Kingdoms their particular Symbols too
impressed on the Reverse of their Coin; as two Snakes embracing a Quiver and a
Bow, on each side of which was placed a Caduceus, was the Symbol of Asia, as
being under the Guardianship and Protection of those two eminent Deities
Hercules and Mercury. Thessaly and Thrace had an Horse, and sometimes an
Horsman and Horse in full Career engraven on the Reverse of their Coin; to
intimate the dextrous skill in Horsemanship that was asscrib'd, in elder Ages,
to the Inhabitants of those two Provinces. A Camel insculp'd on some ancient
Coin, did represent Arabia, as a Beast peculiar to that Country. So the
Signature of a Lion, or an Elephant, insculp'd on the African Medals, did
typifie Africa, as being Creatures likewise proper to that Region; though Mr.
Seldom in his Mare Clausum asserts, that the Sculpture of a Woman, whose Head
was adorned with a Wreath of Sprigs of Corn and Ivory was the Emblem of that
Country; as that of a Woman, whose Head was-encircled with a Wreath of Palm
Leaves, and whose Garment was interlaced with the River of Tagus, was of that
of Spain. But the learned Spanhemius, in his Tract De usu and praestantia
Numismatum, does discover to us, that a Woman sitting, and holding an Olive
Branch, with a Coney placed by her, insculp'd on some ancient Coin, was the
proper Symbol of that Country, it being abundantly productive of Olive Trees
and Coneys. A Palm Branch was the Emblem of Assyria, Parthia, Armenia, and
other Eastern Provinces: and therefore on the Reverse of some ancient Coin,
published by Spanheimius, the Kings of those Regions are represented sitting,
and holding a Palm Branch. An Heart, whose Neck was surrounded with a Wreath of
Ivy Leaves, was insculp'd on the Coin of Pontus and other Provinces, that
obeyed the Scepter of Mithridates, who gloried to be styled Liber or Bacchus;
as affirming himself extracted from that eminent Deity, to whom the Heart, as
well as to Apollo and Diana, was sacred. The Corybantes or Curetes, insculp'd
on an ancient Medal, clashing their Swords and Shields together (from whence
the Pyrrhica and Saltatio Enoplea extracted its original) and in the midst of
them Cybele veiled, (the Emblem of Divinity) supporting an Infant with her
left hand upon her Knee, protected from the Rage of Saturn by their succor,
was (as Seguinus discourses) the proper Symbol of Creet: As the sculpture of an
Armed Vonus, in her right hand supporting an Apple, and in her left hand a
Spear, was the Symbolical representation of Cyprus. A Rose engraven on the Coin
of Rhodes, was the Emblem of that Island. An Eagle with expanded wings, and
lodging both his Tallons upon Thunder, was insculp'd on the Reverse of the
Egyptian Coin, as a solemn Symbol of that Kingdom; and was assumed by its
Princes to intimate, not only their Latitude of Dominion, but likewise the
Dreadfulness of their Power: as some of the Seleuci, Kings of Syria, had a
winged Thunderbolt insculp'd on the Reverse of their Coin; to show not only
the formidablenes, but the Celerity of their Justice. As some of the Kings of
Macedon likewise did impress on the Reverse of their Coin, a Lions Head
Cabosed; to signify they were extracted from Hercules, who destroyed the
Nemaean Lion.

Nor did Colonies want their particular Symbols also, as may appear from the
Reverses of several ancient Coyns. I shall begin with one of Gordianus; on the
Reverse sits a Woman with a Crown embattel'd on head, the common Emblem of
Cities; her right hand grasps some Sprigs of Corn, the Index of Fertility: over
her Head hangs a Sagittarius; which intimates that the City Singara (of which
this Woman was a representation) was not far distant from Parthia, whose
Inhabitants were so eminent for Archery. At her Feet lies prostrate a naked
Figure, seeming to cut the Water with his Laboring Arms; which, it is
probable, is the Representation of the River Tigris, not far removed from
Singara. About the Edge or Limb of the Reverse is this Greek Inscription,
(...). (...). To intimate, that it was begun by the influence of Marcus
Aurelius; but perfected by the concurrent aid of Septimius Severus. The second
is a Coin, stamped under the Rule of Macrinus; on the Reverse sits a Woman,
armed with a Helmet on a Shield (the Emblem of Rome) leaning her left Hand
upon a Spear; whilst her right Hand supports an Eagle, (the Representation of
the Roman Empire) within whose expanded Wings, are two little Images; who
certainly design the Inhabitants of the new erected Colony Philippolis. About
the Border of the Reverse is inscribed in Greek (...), On the Reverse of a Coin
of Augustus, is the Impress of two Figures standing and reaching out their
Hands, as if they summoned and invited Inhabitants to come and reside in the
new established Colony. About the Fringe of the Reverse is inscribed Col. Aug.
Juli. Philipp. To intimate that Philippos, the chief City of Macedonia, was a
Colony of Augustus's Institution. Upon the Reverse of a Coin of Alexander
Severus, there is a Ship under sail, the common Symbol of good success amongst
the Romans; and on each side a Dolphin Naiant, the Emblem of Maritime Colonies;
and about the Reverse superscrib'd (...). From whence we may determine, that
Tarsus, the Metropolis of Cilicia, had been re-edified by Adrian, having
peradventure been shaken and distorted with the Convulsions of Earthquakes,
refreshed by Severus, and adorned or repaired by the Emperor abovesaid. Upon
the Reverse of a Coin of Diocletianus and Maximianus, there is the Figure of a
Woman standing; holding in her right Hand Sprigs of Corn, the indisputable
emblem of Fertility; and in her left grasping Poppy, the Symbol of Repose and
Quiet; and about the Reverse is inscribed, Foelix Carthago, to intimate, that
the Beneficence of these Emperors, by new Supplements and Reparations, had
buoyd up Carthage, that had lain so long sunk amongst its ancient Ruins. He
that will see this Discourse more dilated, let him peruse Goltsius, Angeloni,
Seguinus, Tristan; but above all, the second late Edition of the most learned
Spanheimius.

Now the principal difference between persons of a Colony, and those of a
Municipium, was this. In a Colony they were still drawn out of the Corporation
it self of the people of Rome, as members; but in the other, they were not any
part of that Imperial body, until favorably received by Municipal privilege
into the Freedom; Men generally foreign, else only by admission capable. Those
in a Colony likewise (as some Greek Inscriptions inform me, published by
Spanheimius) were first (...), they were sui Juris, they had no dependence on
any but the Emperor, and by consequence, lived under their own Jurisdiction.
Secondly, they were (...), they had power to Institute Bylaws, and Ordinances,
for the better support and government of the established Colony. Thirdly, they
were (...), they were secured with equal Freedom and Liberty as the people of
Rome. Fourthly they had Jus Asyli, the Right of Sanctuary hence those Colonies,
that were invested with this privilege were styled (...), or Sacrae. Fifthly,
they had Jus and Facultatem cudendae Monetae, they had the grant of a Mint and
Coynage of Money. Sixthly, if any Jews, or others were admitted to the
Freedom of a Colony, they had a Roman Name, added to that Appellation he bore
before; so Saul that was born at Tarsus, a Colony of the Romans, was likewise
named Paul. Seventhly, Colonies had Curias Decurionum, Courts of the Docuriones
(they were called so, says an ancient Glossarie cited by Dr Hammond) because
at first* when Colonies were sent out, the tenth part of them were appointed to
sit as a standing Committee to guide and steer the Public Interest. Eighty,
they had Jus Senatus, Colonies had a Privilege to gather a Select number of
Persons into the Order and Body of a Senate, that in the Managerie and Conduct
of their Counsels, their Public Weal, and more important concerns, might be
involved and wrapped up.

I shall now make some Compendious Remarks on the Consular Coyns, or the Roman
Denarii, which were the Registers of Evidences of several eminent Roman
Families, and of several Illustrious persons extracted ^^om them, who had
improved and enlarged their Fame as well as the Dominion of Rome, ^y diverse
signal Actions commenced both by ^ea and Land, and were likewise the Monuments
and Index's of those Conspicuous Offices they had managed as Consuls, Censors,
Praetors, Praefects of the City, Flamens, Aediles, Questors, and other
Dignities of Principal Importance on which was insculp'd some thing that
represented their Triumphs, their censure of Manners, their Absolution or
Conviction and Condemnation of Criminals, their Dedication of Temples, Sports
and Games (especially the Circensian) and Feasts, their shows of Fencing,
repairing or securing the Ways, establishing Aquae Ducts, erecting of
Fabrics; and lastly, their defending of the Military Vallum or Trench, and the
lines of Circumvallation, circumscribing the Roman Camp. Chains and Bracelets
did adorn the Generals of those barbarous Nations that were in Hostility
against the Romans: and amongst the Coins of Augustinus Tarraconensis, there is
on the reverse of one, two Bracelets in Chief, and two Serpents erected, noded
by their tails, and cast into the figure of a Chain in Base, from whence in the
explanation of the mystery of this Coin, he asserts, It was usual for the Roman
General, and other Eminent Officers, not only to wear the Bracelets and Chains
of the opposite Generals, and other conspicuous Officers, who were slain or
made Captive; but likewise to engrave the Figure of them on the Reverse of
Medalls, which as a lasting evidence, might transport to posterity the memory
of those signal Achievements they had acquired for the people of Rome. If by
their Prudence, Diligence or Fortitude they had secured the Roman Camp, from
the Onsets and Impressions of the Adversary, either by personal Courage, or by
opportune Fortifications, they stamped on those Denarii that had an aspect on
their Families a Vallum or Castrum suis Clathris, septis seu clausuris munitum,
a Trench or Camp fenced and circumscribed with its fortified Lines, Angles and
Outworks. If any of the Illustrious Roman Families had been dignified with the
Office, either of Dictator or Consul, they insculp'd on their Denarii, a Globe,
the type of Empire, the Fasces, the emblem of Justice, the Caduceus, the Ensign
of Felicity and Peace, or else the Cornucopia, the monument of Plenty, and two
hands conjoined and knit together, the Symbol of Concord. If any of them had
undergone the Illustrious Office of Censor, to perpetuate the Memory of so
signal an Employment, they insculp'd on their Denarii, and other Coins, a
Censor placed or sitting on the seat of Judicature, with a Roman, accompanied
with some other Citizens, reaching out, or presenting a bundle of some Laws
unto Him to be corrected, winnow'd or revised by his Animadversion or Censure,
according to that of Tully, Acta ad Eos privata Deferunto. If any of the Roman
Families had been Praetors, they stamped on the Reverse of their Denarii, some
mark or character, that might as an Index inform Posterity they had been
invested with this Office, from whence upon some of them there is impressed, the
Bridge that lead to their Court of Judicature, the Septa or Pen that shut it in
and enclosed it, the Di^ibitorium or partition, that like a pleading Bar
separated it and the Cista or Chest wherein the Praetor treasured up the
public Records; others to testify the same Dignity, they insculp'd, either
little round Tablets, or Repositories, wherein their Suffrages were laid up*
all which were either marked with the letter A, which signified Adjudico or
Antiquo, that is, Antiquam volo; or else with the letters A C and A D, that is,
Absolvo, or on the contrary, Condemno or Absolvo, and in opposition to that
Damno, or else they presented on them a Basilica, that is, their more Solemn
and Majestic Court of Justice surrounded with Pillars and Cloisters for the
Romans to walk in, a Praetorium or Judgement-Hall: And lastly, a Puteal, that
is, an inferior or more contracted Court of Justice, styled so, because the
Tectum or Tegument of it, resembled the brim of a Hat, or cover of a Well. If
any of their Families had been Aediles, and deputed to decide those Actions the
Roman Laws styled Redhibitoriae, they insculp'd on their Denarii two Figures
sitting upon a seat of Judicature; or again, if they had been Aediles Cereales,
and employed by the Senate to buy Corn to support and refresh the people of
Rome, they stamped on the Reverse of their Coin, a ship, out of which seemed to
issue out sprigs of Wheat, or else, a Modius or Roman Bushel placed between two
ears of Corn; or lastly, a pair of Scales placed over a Sella Curulis, which
impress was stamped on their Coin, as well as the Denarii of the Praetors. If
they had been Flamens they stamped likewise some signal Mark on the Reverse of
their Denarii, to instruct future ages, that some of their Families had been
honored with that Office, as if they had been Flamines Quirinales, or Flamens
to Romulus, they insculp'd the Figure of a Woman armed with a Spear and Helmet
(the Representation of Rome) sitting on a Shield, and holding in her right hand
a sharp pointed Apex (the common Symbol of Priesthood) which was the Tassel or
top of the Sacerdotal Pileus, or Flamens Bonnet. Now the Apex amongst the
Ancients was a Symbol of such Eminence and Dignity, that in Ages of an elder
Inscription, several Kings are portrayed and insculp'd on Antique Coyns,
supporting it, to intimate, that in times of a very High Ascent amongst the
Gentiles, the Priesthood was still entwined with the Scepter. I shall exhibit a
brief Scheme of some Examples of it. Strabo asserts, Lib. 5. That in Aritia it
was united to the Priesthood of Diana, and in Cappadocia, to the Temple of
Bellona.

The Old Egyptians and Aethiopians chose their Kings, out of their Colleges
of Priests. Midas, King of Phrygia was consecrated to Orpheus. The Lacedemonian
Kings did always sacrifice in person. Zenophon Records the like of Cambyses;
and Curtius of Alexander. Halycarnasseus affirms, that Romulus managed all that
concerned the Gods by himself. In the East Indies the Malabar Kings do not
disdain the Office of the Brachmans: And it is sufficiently known, that amongst
the Arabs and Saracens, the same person was both Prince and Caliph. And
Diogenes in Stobaeus lays it down amongst the Qualifications and Characters of
a complete Prince, that he should be a good Soldier, a Judge and a Priest. And
hence it is, that at the Inauguration of the Kings of England, one of the
Regalia, that is an ingredient in that Solemnity, is the Collobium or
Dalmatica, a Garment something resembling a Surplisse, to specify, that the
Regal and Sacerdotal Office were combined and twisted together in one person.

If they had been Flamens to Mars, they represented two Figures on their Coin;
one supported the Image of Victory, the other reached forth a Star, to intimate
that he was Consecrated to the service of the Deity abovesaid. If they had been
Flamens to Apollo, they insculped upon a Tripos a Simpulum or Ewer (the Emblem
of Religion) placed between two Stars, to signify the Morning and the Evening
Star, or else the Rising and Setting of the Sun in the East and West. I had
almost forgot that the Aediles and Praetors abovementioned were when the Ludi
Appollinares, Saeculares, Cereales, Consuales or Circenses, and other solemn
Sports or Games were celebrated, to provide* Bulls for sacrifice and baighting,
and Hinds, and other Beasts for hunting; whence all those persons that had
sustained those two Offices to perpetuate the Memory of that Employment,
insculped on the Roman Denarii, either a Bulls head cabosed, or else a Hind,
and a Bow bent and Quiver, which we may see in Fulvius Visinas does still adorn
the reverse of the Consular Coin. If any of the Roman Families had been Augurs
to convey a Commemoratio to posterity they were adorned with that Dignity, they
impressed on their Denarii a Simpulum or Ewer used in Sacrifices, a Tripos, and
a Lituus or crooked Augurall staff; as the Consuls and Praetors stamped on
their Coin, (as appears in Fulvius Vrsinus) sometimes a Rider placed in a
chariot drawn with two horses in full career, sometimes drawn with sour in the
same posture, to intimate, that the Games dedicated to Apollo, or else the Ludi
Circenses or Consuales, the Games devoted to Neptune were exhibited to the
people, when they mamaged the Offices abovesaid. If any of the Roman Families
had obliged the people by the, combat of Gladiators by their Munificence
presented to them, they did engrave on their Denarii two crooked Engines,
resembling two Shepherds crooks in Salteir, a weapon used by the Gladiators,
called Thraces, and a Shield and a Laqueus or Halter, and sometimes a Net,
destructive instruments employed by the Gladiators, styled the Laquearii and
Retiarii to entangle and ruin their Opponents. If they had at any time by a
cautious retreat secured any part of the Roman Armies, they insculped on their
Coin a Pagurus or Crabb, supporting some Weapons and Ensigns. If again, they
had by their prudence, and sober procrastination of affairs, destroyed the rash
and precipitate onsets of the Enemy, they stamped on the reverse of their
Denarii a Crabb grasping a Butterfly. If they had by any Noble and generous
undertaking rescued their gasping Country, or saved the Lives of its Citizens,
or achieved the Spolia opima; they insculp'd on the Reverse of their Denarii,
either the Figures of Amphinomus and Anapias, two Brethren of Catana in Sicily,
who when a Deluge of fire had disembogued it self from the flaming Entrails of
Aetna, and made an eruption upon some part of that Island, snatched up their
aged Parents, and after the demolishing of many Difficulties, saved their lives
by endangering their own: or else a Crown of Oaken leaves; or lastly, an armed
Figure on Horseback, supporting the Spoils and Trophies taken from the
slaughtered Prince. Nor did they want some Representations upon their Coin to
discover from whence they were descended; as if they were descended from
Sicily, they stamped on their Denarii three Legs, coupled and embraced, or
interlaced (the Symbol of that Island;) if from Chios or Sio, a Pitcher or
Jarre with two ears was impressed; if from the Sabins, who boasted their
Extraction to be from the Pelasgi, who first peopled Arcadia, they insculp'd
one of the Stimphalides, a ravenous Bird armed with an Helmet, which the
fictions of Poets made proper only to that Province: Nor did those who had the
care of the Mint, nor those who kept Stakes at the Games styled Tali or
Latrunculi, much resembling the sport of Cockall amongst Children, want some
monument engraven on the ancient Denarii; which might declare that some of the
Family had been Curatores Monetae, or Ludi Magistri; to perpetuate the memory
of the first, they stamped a Forge, an Anvil, an Hammer, and a pair of Tongs or
Pincers; and to enforce the memory of the last, they insculp'd a Temple devoted
Deae Sorti, or else four Quadrilateral Bones, with this Inscription interwoven,
Qui ludit, Arram det, quod satis est. Before I conclude this Discourse, I must
observe out of Vrsinus, that if any of the Roman Families had been invested
with any of those Offices, or all of them gradually or successively, that did
merit the Sella Curulis, as an Ensign or Perquisite of their Dignity or
Dignities; they insculp'd on their Denarii a Sella Curulis, with one Crown as
Ornament imposed upon it, and sometimes with two, three, or four, to intimate
the variety of those eminent Employments they had been engaged in: as Silla
stamped on the Reverse of a Denarius, relating to his Family, four Crowns to
declare his four Victories. Indeed this Sella Curulis was of so honorable
estimate amongst the Romans, that when the Senate of Rome would testify by
some solemn evidences their Affection to those Kings that were in Amity with
them, they usually endowed them with a Sella Curulis, an Ivory Staff, a Tunica
Palmata, a loose Coat or Tunic, embroidered with Palm Branches; and lastly,
Toga Picta, a Gown embellished and adorned with several Figures. And hence it
is that on the Reverse of an antien Coin, Ariobarzanes King of Cappadocia is
insculp'd, vested with a Roman Gown and Tunic, placed on a Sella Curulis, and
supporting in his left Hand an Ivory Staff; to declare he was a Prince that
held an Amicable correspondence with the Romans. Having had had occasion before
to mention the Roman Crowns, I shall now exhibit in a compendious
Representation, the several Species of them, and so conclude.

And first there was Corona Triumphalis, or Aurea, which in elder times was
composed of Laurel, but in more modern Ages was fashioned of Gold. It was sent
by the Senate to the Lord General, as a Trophie to adorn his Triumphs. Secondly
Corona Obsidionalis or Graminea, which was given by the Soldiers to the
General, when he had rescued them from a Siege, and was formed of the Grass of
the place where they had been besieged. Now the Reason of this was, that by
this Monument they might seem to yield up the right of that place to their
Captain. And hence it was that anciently in Races and other Masteries, he that
was subdued, did gather up some of the Grass of that place, and gave it to the
Conqueror as an evidence of his acknowledgment that he was vanquished. Hence
that Phrase, Herbam porrigere, is to confess a Victory. Thirdly Corona Civica
or Quercea, the Civick Crown framed out of Oaken Leaves, which was given to him
that had saved the life of a Roman Citizen, and in procedure of the subsequent
Ages to the General himself, if he had spared the life of a Citizen, when it
lay in his power to destroy him. Fourthly Corona Muralis, or a Crown Mural,
that was given him that first scaled the Wall of any Town beleagured by the
Romans; In memory of which, the Circlet of it was embellished with Trophies
which resembled the Battlements of a Wall. Fifthly Corona Castrensis or
Vallaris, which was given to him that first entered the Enemies Camp; in memory
of which signal Achievement, the Circle or Orbit of the Crown was adorned with
something that represented a Bulwark or Tenalia, or else the Mound (styled in
Latin Vallum) that both supported and strengthened them. Sixthly Corona
Navalis, that was bestowed on him that first entered the Enemies Ships, the Top
or Summit of which resembled in its Figure the Beaks of Ships; from whence it
was likewise styled Corona Rostrata. Seventhly, Corona Ovalis, which was
composed of Myrtle Leaves, and was conferred on those who only had merited an
Ovation, not a Triumph. Now an Ovation was granted when the Adversaries that
were subdued were Thieves and Pirates, that is, of no considerable importance;
or secondly, when the Victory was achieved without much hazard, or effusion of
Blood, the Enemies voluntarily submitting themselves to the mercy or discretion
of the Victor.

I now proceed to take a view of the Roman Imperial Coyns; and first I find one
of Julius Caesar's, on whose Reverse is insculp'd an armed Man supporting the
Image of Victory; and on another's Reverse, an armed Man, sustaining in his
right Hand a little Cell or Chapel, which some may conjecture contained the
Image of Victory; though I rather believe it shrouded the portraicture of the
Eagle, the only signal Trophy or Banner of the Roman Empire: for whereas in
times of an elder Inscription, the Romans bore on their Ensigns the Boar, the
Wolf, the Minotaure, the Horse and the Eagle; they were reduced by Marius
solely to the Eagle; which was established by him to be the solemn successive
Standard of the Roman Armies, and was preserved in a little Cell of
quadrangular Shrine, which was composed sometimes of Silver, and sometimes of
Gold. After Augustus had achieved his Victory at Actium, and reduced Egypt by
Conquest, he stamped on the Reverse of his Coin a Crocodile, and sometimes a
Crocodile Chained to a Palm Tree, with this Inscription, Aegyptia Capta. The
like was observed by Titus, after his Conquest of Judaea and Jerusalem, who
insculp'd on the Reverse of his Coyns, a Woman sitting under a Palm Tree in a
doleful and calamitous posture; and on others, a Woman leaning against a Palm
Tree with her Hands bound (the Symbol or Hieroglyphick of Captivity) and this
Inscription annexed, Judaea Capta. On the Reverse of some of Tiberius his
Coyns, I find the Arms in use among the ancient Germans, lodged in a shuffled
or confused Heap (the Emblem of some Rout or Overthrow) and this Motto
affixed, Germania; the like Sculpture with little or no variation is
represented on the Reverse of some Coyns of Domitian. After Corbulo had reduced
Tigranocerta, the Metropolis of Armenia, Nero stamped on the Reverse of some of
his Medals a Bull attaqued, held or dragged by the Horns, with these words
subjoined, Armenia Capta; by which was intimated his Conquest over that
Country, which was so copiously productive of that sort of Cattle. Indeed when
most of the Roman Emperors had obtained any solemn Conquest over any foreign
Army or Province, they were accustomed to preserve the Remembrance of that
signal Atchivement, by representing on the Reverse of their Coyns a Sagum or
Military Cassock, sometimes hanging on an Oak, and sometimes lodged on a Palm
Tree. When they instituted or established any Colony, if it was erected on the
Maritime parts of any Province, they used to insculp on the right side of their
Coin the Name of the designed Colony, and on the Reverse the Beak or Head of a
Ship (the ancient Hieroglyphick of Naval Peregrinations.) But if again it were
formed or fixed in the more Inland parts, they likewise stamped the name of the
Colony on one side; but on the Reverse, a Plough, or else two Oxen, to intimate
that they had assigned as much Land toward its support or establishment, as
two Oxen could in one day plough up in a Circular Figure. When they would
manifest the Faith of their Armies, they stamped on the Reverse of their Medals
two Hands clasped and lodged on a Sagum or Military Cassock, the Symbol of a
Soldier; when they would represent their Concord, they insculp'd three Armed
men in Fesse embracing each other. When they would exhibit a Representation of
public Peace or Tranquillity, they insculp'd a Woman supporting a Patera, a
Platter or Dish used at the Rites of Sacrifices, in one Hand, and in the other
a Horn fraught or laden with Corn, Fruit, and Flowers; to suggest to us, that
both Religion and Plenty did most thrive and flourish under the calm and
Serenity of a public Peace. Hope was represented on their Medals by the
Sculpture of a Woman grasping in her right Hand some Sprigs of Corn, as yet in
its infancy or Minority. The Image of good Event, on the Reverse of some coyns
of Trajan, is exhibited to us by the Figure of a Woman, reaching out in one
Hand a sacrificing Dish or Platter, and sustaining some mature Ears of Corn in
the other; to intimate, that we must never expect any prosperous success or
event of affairs, unless we first make our Application or Address to Heaven
(typified by the sacrificing Patera) to improve the undertaking: and on the
Reverse of another Medal of Trajan abovesaid, there is the Sculpture of a
Thunderbolt reposed on a Pillow, tacitly to insinuate to Princes, that the
severity of Justice should be mollified and attempered with Mercy. When they
expressed the public Security of the Empire, they insculp'd the Gate of a City
on some of their Coin, and on others the Impress of the Arches of a Bridge.
Providence was represented on the Reverse of their Medals, by the Figure of a
Temple, with six Eagles perched on the Top (the ancient Emblem of Piety and
providential Perspicacity) three respecting the Eastern, and three beholding
the Western Situation of it. When the Youth of the Emperor was to be
represented, and his Improvement in years, or rather indeed the Increase of the
Empire in Dominion and Extent, and Gradation of power, upon the Reverse of some
Roman Medals was stamped the Impress of Jupiter bestriding a Goat, with this
Motto affixed, Jovi Crescenti. On other Reverses in insculp'd the Effigies of
that Deity abovesaid, in an erect posture, grasping in his right hand his
three-forked Thunder, and in another a Lance, with these words annexed, Jovi
Propugnatori; and on other Medals his Figure is exhibited to us, stretching out
his right Hand armed and instructed with Thunder, and leaning his other on the
Gate of a City, with this Inscription endors'd, Jovi Custodi. In Augustinus
Tarraconensis his Numismata Antiqua, there is the Delineation of two infrequent
Antique Coins; the first expresses the Sculpture of the Body of an Eagle, and
instead of an Head, there is lodged on the Trunk a Sun Raionce, or Refulgent in
his Glory, with this Motto annexed, Foelicitatis Reparatio. By the Body of the
Eagle was typified the Roman Empire, and by the resplendent Sun was intimated
that Calmness and Serenity that succeeded those Tempests and Clouds of
Calamitous infelicity that had darkened the Roman Grandeur. Indeed Clouds may
obscure and eclipse the Rays of the Sun; but when that gloomy Skreen is
resolved and dispelled, all things are refreshed by his Light, and reanimated
and fortified with his Heat and Influence. On the Reverse of the second is the
Signature of the Trunk of a Man, with an Anubis or Dog's Head, his right Hand
supporting a Pot of Incense, and his left Hand grasping a Caduceus wreathed
about with two Serpents, with this Inscription adorning the Margin of the
Medal, Vota Publica. The Caduceus encircled with the Serpents, was amongst the
Romans always the Emblem of Religion, the Pot of Incense, of Prayer; and the
Dog's Head intimated that the public Vows were offered up to the Deities above
by Mercury the Messenger of the Gods. When they would discover how they had
supplied the people with Corn, both Emperor and Consuls pourtrai'd on their
Medals a Man's Head with five Ears of Corn issuing out of it. When they would
express that Religion and Concord or Peace were supported in their security by
Laws, they insculped two Hands clasped in one, lodged upon a Caduceus entwined
with two Serpents, and beneath that the Figure of a Lictor's Axe. When any of
the Emperors had been invested with the Office or Dignity of the chief
Pontificate, they portrayed on the Reverse of their Numismata the several
Representations of a Pitcher, a Sacrificing Knife and Platter, a Simpulum, and
other Instruments, subservient and ministerial in the Rites relating to the
Sacrifice. The Liberality of the Emperors was declared by the Effigies of a
Woman, sustaining in her left Hand the Horn of Plenty, and in her right Hand
the Roman Congius, which contained ten pounds, with this Motto inscribed,
Liberalitas Augusti. When they would manifest their Triumphs, they represented
the Signature of a Chaplet of Laurel, lodged on the Top of a Sella Curulis; and
sometimes more, if they had deserved to be dignified for their generous
undertakings with several of those signal and pompous Solemnities. When Jupiter
had in their Estimate supported and secured the Empire from the pressure of
some incumbent Disaster, by some eminent preservation, they exhibited his Image
on the Reverse of some Medals holding a Ball or Globe; on some supporting the
Horn of Plenty, and on others the Image of Victory; and expanding or stretching
out his right Hand, as though with his Power and Providence he had covered both
the Roman Territories and Armies; with this Inscription annexed, Jovi
Conservatori. There is a Medal of Valerian's with this Motto endorsed on the
Reverse, (...), which I rather mention because the word (...) frequently
occurrs both on the Reverse of the Greek and Roman Coyns: the Sculpture is
three Temples, in the midst an Altar, the Fire kindled, and wreathed about with
a Serpent (the ancient Hieroglyphick of Religion.) Upon the Face of the Coin
are three Heads correspondent to the three Temples; the first of the Emperor
himself, the other of Galienus and Valerian his two sons. Now the word (...)
(as Mr. Gregory in his Notes and learned Disquisitions upon the word observes)
imports as much as Aedituus, one that takes care of the Temples; and was an
Office of such sacred Estimate both amongst Greeks and Romans, that the most
Eminent Cities desired to have the Appellation of the (...), the Guardians or
Sacrists of the Temples of those principal Deities, whom they asserted to be
their tutelary Protectors. The Consecration or devoting the Roman Temples to
their respective Gods, was intimated by the Signature of a square Temple with
Fire issuing from the top, with this Inscription affixed, Consecratio; to
insinuate that Devotions exhaled in those consecrated Repositories should be
like that Element, intense and fervent.

The Apotheosis or Deisication of the Emperors was declared upon the Reverse
of the Roman Medals by the Figure of an Eagle ascending up to Heaven out of the
Flame of their Funeral Piles. There is one Coin peculiar to Nerva, which I had
almost omitted; that is, four Horses unbridled on the Reverse, and running in a
loose career, with this Inscription, Vehiculatione per Italiam remissa; by
which is intimated that he had remitted that severe pourveiance of Horses for
his Use and Carriage, which had been before so generally disgustful to the
Territories of Italy. Most of the Roman Games, especially the Circensian, had
their Solemnization celebrated in Meadows, the Fringes of whose Banks confined
on the Margent of some River; hence the Romans stamped (also Jos. Scalliger in
his Manilian Exercitations observes) on their Ancient Coins, by a River a
Horseman in full career armed with a Lance with this Motto affixed, Decursio.
On some Coins of Antoninus Pius the Emperor, the Reverse bears the Sculpture
of a Woman attired in Blew, seated on a Rock circumscribed and environed with
the Sea, with this Inscription subjoyned, Britannia; by which was insinuated
that Britain was an Island; or else tacitly suggested that Dominion and Empire
she was entitled to, over the circumambient Ocean. Upon the Reverse of an
Ancient Coin in my own possession, there is a Woman placed on a Rock,
supporting a Pillar in one Hand, and leaning the other on a pan of Fire, with
these Words annexed, Constantia Imperatoris: the Head is so defaced, that
unless it be the Effigies of Pertinax, I know not whom to entitle it to. There
is on the Reverse of a Medal of Antinous, who was Deified by the Emperor
Adrian, the Effigies of a Man holding a winged Horse; now Celebrity of Fame
amongst the Graecians was typified by a Pegasus mounting up to Heaven, from
whence we may conclude that they only in the Vogue of Adrian were fit to be
enrolled in the Register of Consecrations above, (as Antinous was) who had
merited it by a Celebrity of Fame or Beauty below.

Having so often mentioned the Roman Coins and Medals, I shall take a brief
Prospect of some Coins in Use amongst the Greeks and Romans; and first I shall
discover that the Ancients insculped several Signatures or Images on their
Money from which Impression they borrowed the Appellation of Nummi Philippei,
Alexandrei, Berenicii, Demaretii, Darici, Ptolemaici, from the Faces or Aspects
of those Kings or Queens; namely, Philip, Alexander, Berenice, Demaretus,
Darius, Ptolomy, whose Sculpture did adorn their Medals.

Hence was it that the Signature of an Owl did illustrate the Attick Money;
that of a Pegasus was stamped on the Corinthian Coin; but the Impress of a
Mouse was visible on that of Argos; the Image of a Horse was insculped on the
Coin of Cephalonia; those of Mitylene did adorn theirs was the Image of Sappho;
and the Coin of Chios or Gio, did represent the Pourtraicture of Homer; and in
Imitation of these, the Romans anciently and originally did stamp on the
Reverse of their Coins either a Ship, or else the Image of Janus with two Faces.

Now the most minute and inconsiderable Coin, both for cheapness and matter, as
being of Copper amongst the Romans, and I believe too amongst the Greeks, were
the Siliquae and the Folles: the first were equivalent in weight to four
Grains; the last both in their weight and value did not out-ballance or outvie
our English Halfpenny. The Roman Coin styled Sestertium, contained two Asses
and an Half. The Victoriatus or Quinarius was proportionate in its Estimate to
five Asses. Now the Roman Asses were Coin of so contemptible an account, that
by the suffrage of all, one of them did amount to but four fifths of a Penny.

The Roman Cistophori were a Species of Coin that were in value equal to half
of the Attick Trinarnica. Now the Trinarnica did in their weight poise an
Attick Dram, that is the Eighth part of an Ounce. The Dram was the Denarius
Consularis, or Consular Penny, as the Triobolus was the Semi-Drachma, or
Semi-Denarius Consularis, the half Consular penny. Now the Aureus, a piece of
Gold so styled amongst the Romans, did when Rome was under the Government of
Consuls, weight two Denarii, that is fifteen Shillings Sterling; but under the
Emperors its weight decreased to thirteen Shillings Sterling. The Roman Stater
in Silver was valued at two Shillings four pence; but in Gold its Estimate was
rated at sixteen Shillings four pence Sterling.

The Aureus under Severus was first called Solidus, because then it was divided
into two Parts, viz. the Semisses and Tremisses, and so relatively to these the
whole Aureus had the Appellation of Solidus imposed upon it.

The lesser Talent among the Romans weighed sixty pound, which was
proportionate in its Estimate to one Hundred seventy nine pound Sterling; But
the greater Talent amongst that people swelled in its Bulk and Volume to a
weight of eighty pound; that is equivalent in its Value to two Hundred ninety
nine pound and a Noble Sterling.

There were other Coins called Hypatia, Tremisia and Hemisia, which indeed were
Medals scattered amongst the People at the Solemn Inauguration of the Roman
Emperors. So amongst the Greeks there were Coins, or rather Medals, which had
the Title of Epicombia bestowed upon them; three of which being of Silver, and
three of Gold, accompanied with three little pieces of Brass, were treasured up
in little Bundles fastened or tied about with linen Ligatures, and to the
Number of ten Thousand were by the Injunction and Command of the Greek
Emperors thrown and dispersed amongst the People near the Ascent or Threshold
of the Palace, after their Public Unction and Inthronization. Both which are
more amply discovered to us by Mr. Seldom in his Learned and Elaborate Tract of
Titles of Honor.

An Appendix to the former Discourses concerning Imperial Coins.
UPon the Reverse of several Consular Denarii and Imperial Coin also, there is
the Figure of a Woman standing and reaching out a Patera or sacrificing Dish to
a Serpent; By the Woman Vrsinus conjectures is understood Juno Sospita the
Patroness of Rome, when she was afflicted with the incumbent pressure of any
Distemper; for my particular, I rather believe the Figure represents the Genius
of Rome it self, who offers up an Oblation to a Serpent, the Symbol of
Aesculapius to divert the Pestilence and other Diseases that then perchance
assaulted the City. On the Reverse of a Denarius of Mark Anthony published by
Vrsinus, there is the Figure of a Man standing in a Chariot drawn by four Sea
Horses, which was impressed to signify his Dominion over the Land and Sea. Upon
the Reverse of a Coin of Augustus there is a Pileus stamped with this
Inscription, Libertas Augusti. Now the Pileus or Bonnet, and a little Wand
styled Rudis or Vindicta, with which the Praetor softly touched Slaves on their
Heads upon their Manumission, were ever the Ensigns of Freedom; hence it was
that when Brutus had sacrificed Caesar to the Public Liberty, he insculped on
his Denarii a Pileus between two Daggers. After the Battle of Actium, Augustus
did engrave on the Reverse of his Coin, a Capricorn, to signify he was born
under the Auspicious Influence of that Sign, whose Feet leaned upon the Helm of
a Ship, to intimate his Victory was Naval, and a Globe to declare the Empire
that accrued to his Family by that Conquest, and a Cornucopia to discover that
Plenty was likewise the Result of his Success. So Vespasian and Titus impressed
on the Reverse of their Coin two demi Capricorns rising Back to Back out of the
Globe; the Globe signified their Empire, and the two demi Capricorns, the
double Success that attended the Victorious Arms of those two Emperors. Upon
another Coin of Augustus is stamped an half Moon between five Stars; the Moon
did denote the Increase of his Empire, the five Stars did represent (as Vrsinus
affirms) five eminent Games, as the Ludi Saeculares, and others that were
celebrated under his Government; though I rather believe the two upper did
intimate that he was descended from Venus and Romulus, the two middlemost Stars
did declare his Empire over the East and West, and the Star in Base the
Consecration of Julius Caesar: And my Opinion is established by another Coin of
Augustus published by Seguinus, on whose Reverse a Cupid is mounted on a
Dolphin between two Stars; the Cupid denoted Augustus himself, the Dolphin (who
amongst the Ancients was the Symbol of Love) signified Venus to whom this Fish
was peculiarly devoted; the two Stars were Phosphorus and Hesperus, which were
still the Emblems of the East and West: So two Stars charged upon a Lion
Passant, and engraven upon some Coyns of Leo the Emperor, signified his
Dominion over the Eastern and Western Parts of the World: as a Star charged
upon a Lion Passant and insculped upon both the Ancient Roman Denarii, and
Imperial Coin, was a Symbol either of increasing Youth, or augmented Empire.
Upon the Reverse of a Coin of Tiberius there is exhibited a pair of Scales in
Sculpture, to intimate the Justice and Equity of that Emperor; and the
Inscription subjoyned is Aequitas Augusti, which affords Light to that Maxim of
the Civil Law, which asserts, that Aequitas Legis est Convenientia Rerum in
duobus Paribus. Proportionate to this is the Figure of a Woman insculped on
some Imperial Coyns, holding a pair of Scales, with this Inscription added,
Moneta; to insinuate that Money received its value from its weight: And to
confirm this Deduction; on the Reverse of a Coin of Diocletian mentioned by
Occo, there is the Figure of a Woman in her left Hand holding a pair of Scales,
and in her right Hand a Cornucopia, to suggest that Justice and Equity are
still the Parents of Peace and Plenty. Upon the Reverse of a Coin of Claudius
there is insculped the Sun in the Figure of a Colossus, placing a Crown upon a
Trophy, to intimate that some of his Family had been Victors in the Ludi
Apollinares, or the Games devoted to Apollo or the Sun. Upon the Reverse of a
Coin of Nero's, published by Spanheimius, there is the Signature of the Sepia
or Cuttlefish, the Polypus, the Pompilus, and lastly the Gammarus or Creyfish,
all which amongst the Romans were the Representations of Pregnancy and
Fertility: from whence it was that Nero upon the Birth of his Daughter Claudia
by Poppea, which he received with most vehement exultation, insculped these
Symbols as Index's of her Fecundity. Upon the Reverse of a Coin of Otho's there
is an Eagle with expanded Wings, treading upon a Branch of Olive, whose Beak
supports a Crown of Laurel, with an half Moon between her Legs, and a Branch of
Palm lodged upon her right Wing; the Eagle typifies the Roman Empire, the Olive
Branch represents that Peace which he designed to restore by his Victories
intimated by the Palm and Laurel to the People of Rome; the Crescent was the
Emblem of his newly blooming Authority. On a Coin of Vitellius is stamped the
Cortina or covering of the Tripus, at the Portal of which is placed a Crow, a
Bird dedicated to Apollo, as being the Emblem of Sagacity; and on the top of it
is lodged a Dolphin to show the Maritime Situation of Delphos: All which were
impressed to discover that the Father of this Emperor had exercised the Office
of Augur, and one of the Quindecim viri, that preserved the Sibyls Books. On a
Coin of Vespasian, and likewise Domitian, there is the Sculpture of a Serpent
incumbent on a Horse, to intimate that both Prudence and Celerity are exacted
in the Managery of Affairs that are of Public Concernment. On the Reverse of a
Coin of Trajan, there is an Owl perched upon a Pillar to intimate the
perpetuity and fixed constancy of the vigilance of that Emperor. On a Coin of
Marcus Aurelius there is a Cupid bestriding a Tiger, to suggest to us that Love
does charm and mollify the most savage and barbarous Affections. On the Coin
of Caracalla and Maximianus there is a Lion passant, whose Head is adorned with
Rays, and whose Mouth contains a Thunderbolt; the Lion Passant is the Symbol
of Prudence, the Rays either of Majesty or Divinity, and the Thunderbolt both
of Providence and Empire. And from hence it was that the Kings of Epire did
stamp on their Coin a Thunderbolt in Fesse, between a Star in Chief, and a Dart
in Base; the Star did signify the Splendour and flourishing condition of their
Monarchy, or else their Descent from Hercules that was then Deified, the
Thunderbolt their Power, and the Dart the celerity and suddenness either of
their Revenge or Justice. On the Reverse of a Coin of Pertinax there is the
Figure of a Woman holding in her right Hand a Cornucopia, and in her left Hand
a Tessera Frumentaria, or Ticket for Corn; And on a Coin of Nerva there is the
Emperor sitting on a Throne on a Sella Curulis, and issuing out his Tesseras
Frumentarias to the People, who ascend by steps to receive them: the like
Representation with some little variation is on a Coin of Alexander Severus;
all which Signatures do declare the Bounty of the Emperors abovesaid in their
supplying the People of Rome with a stock of Corn, when they were afflicted
with the Danger of an approaching Famine.

Now there were Tickets of Wood likewise thrown amongst the People by the Roman
Caesar's, with the Name of Corn, Plate, Servants, and Garments superscribed upon
them, which being caught up by any, and carried to an appointed Officer,
brought him that whatsoever it was, which was written upon it. Something
proportionate to this is what we find upon two Coyns of Galba; the first has
the Figure of a Man laden with a Heap of Spoils stamped on the Reverse; the
second a Man with a Bow with this Inscription added to both, Quadragesima
Remissa: the meaning is, the fortieth part of men's Estates, which had been
exacted by Amerciaments and Fines imposed upon their Goods, and violently
levied per Equites and Sagittarios, by Horsemen and Archers was remitted; and
upon a Coin of Adrian, on whose Reverse there are the Figures of three Romans
engraven, of whom one seems to lift up his hand and rejoice, and by them is
placed the Emperor grasping a Scepter in his right Hand, and in his left Hand
a Torch, with which he puts Fire to a Bundle of Papers; the Declaration of
these Signatures is, that Adrian had remitted the Public Debts and other
Arrears which had accrued to be due to the Imperial Exchequer from the People
of Rome and other Provinces, by the Decursion of Sixteen years past, by burning
the Original Obligations. On a Coin of Severus, there is the Representation of
a Gorgons Head, as it is pourtraied upon the Center point of Pallas's shield;
to denote not only the power of that Emperor, but likewise the Terror that
his Victorious Arms had infused into his Enemies. Upon the Reverse of a Coin of
Gordianus, there is an armed Man mounted on an Horse, whose Dexter fore-leg
instead of an Hoof concludes in an Hand, which grasps a Serpent wreathed about
a staff (the Symbol of Aesculapius;) all which do signify that that pious
Emperor did like another Aesculapius, or rather like the Genius of the
Province journey through the lesser Asia to relieve the Necessities of this
Province, piece up the breaches, and repair the ruins that had been
superinduced upon it by those two winding sheets of Nature, Earthquakes and
Inundations. On another Coin of the Emperor abovesaid, there is an armed Man
on Horseback, trampling on a chimerical Monster, whose Head resembles that of a
Lion; out of whose side issues out the Head of a Goat, and at his Tail the Head
of a Dragon, to specify that he had triumphed over the irregular Qualities of
those three Creatures, that is, the Fierceness of the Lion, the Salacity of the
Goat, and the Rapacity of the Dragon. So on a third Coin of his, there is
impressed a Centaur; not that he ever exhibited a real Centaur to the Roman
People, as Angeloni conjectures, but to declare that the nobler part of Man,
his Reason, had subdued the more brutish, his sensual Affections. Upon a Coin
of Probus there is the Figure of a Woman sitting between two Naked Figures
lying prostrate at her Feet with this Inscription annexed, Siscia. Now the
conjecture of Angeloni is, which is not improbable, that by the Woman sitting
in a more elevated posture is signified some City of the Name abovesaid, that
either had been erected by the Emperor abovesaid as a Fortress or Colony to
repulse the eruptions of the Adjacent Barbarous Nations, or else had submitted
to his successful Arms; and the two naked Figures two Rivers which glided by
it. On the Reverse of several Imperial Coins represented to us by the
Collection of Angeloni; there is the Figure of a Woman holding a Sistrum, which
is an Instrument not unlike a Cymbal, with this Motto annexed, Providentia
Augusti. Now the Sistrum amongst the Egyptians, as the Patera amongst the
Romans, was the Hieroglyphick of Divinity because the Priests employed the
Noise of this Instrument in their Sacrifices, and other Divine Ministeries, to
keep the people from sleeping.

There were other Sculptures which were common both to the Imperial Coin and to
the sular Denarii; as namely a Scepter, Dolphin, and Trident; and secondly, the
Image of victory placed on the Beak or prow of a Ship were the Customary
Emblems of Naval Conquests: Correspondent to which was the Signature of an
armed Figure in his Right Hand, holding a globe with this Superscription
superadded, Securitas Orbis: and secondly, a Trophie placed between two
Captives sitting in a disconsolate Representation, at the Pedestal of it were
the assured Indexes and Evidences of Field successes.

A Brief Discourse or Digression of the Money in China, Japan, Persia, and
other parts of the East Indies.
Gold and Silver Money in China is Current only by its Weight, not by any Mark,
Stamp, or Signature impressed upon it: So that Merchants there, lest the
Intercourse of Commerce should meet with any Obstruction or Impediment, carry
always Weights about them to balance and poise those Lumps and Fragments of
Gold and Silver they either receive, or else issue out and disburse.

An Oeban of Gold in Japan swells to forty thousand Thayls or Crowns. A Cockien
there is a Crown in Silver. A Thousand Caxias, make a Thayle, and sometimes
three and a half.

They have three sorts of Gold Coin in Japan; whereof the first weighs Six
Spanish Rials, and is in Value Forty eight Thayls, accounting every Thayl Five
Shillings Sterling. Ten of the second sort weigh a Rial and half a quarter, and
are each of them in Value one Thayl and a fifth part. Ten of the third sort do
weigh a Rial and an Half and half of a Quarter, and are in value each of them
the sixth part of a Thayl.

The Silver Coin in Japan is of no determined weight, but has the form of a
Lingot; but it is so ordered that as much as amounts to Fifty Tayls is to be of
a just Weight, which they dispose into Rolls of Paper, in each as much as
arrives to twenty Crowns. There is a lesser Silver Coin in Japan, which has
the Figure of a French Bean; its Value is from Seven Pence to Six Shillings or
better, which is of a fixed and certain Weight, when it swells to such a Sum.

A Coin made of a thin plate of Lead called Catt and Pity, is current at
Bantam, and over all Java and China. A String of two Hundred Cattas compose the
Coin styled Sa^a; which is in Value three farthings sterling And five Satas
tied together make a Sapocoon; And thirteen Sapocoons amount to Crown.

Two Foangs in Siam and Pegu make (...) Mase, and four Mases compose a Ticol,
in value about Thirty Sols in French Money. Four Ticols make a Tail, and twenty
Tayls, amount to a Catty in Silver.

Twenty Six Peyses or Tacques in Indostan, or the Territories of the great
Mogul, make a Mamoudy or Shilling: A Ropia is in value half a Crown French
Money: A Lac amounts to an Hundred thousand Ropias: An hundred Lacs make a Crou
or Carroa, and ten Carroas make an Areb: A Theil of Silver makes eleven,
twelve, or thirteen Ropias current Money: A Massas and an half make a Theil of
Silver, ten whereof compose a Theil of Gold: A Xeraphin in Gold is in value
thirteen Ropias and an half: Eight Persian Larees in Decan make a Pagod, that
is a Noble current Money English, though sometimes it amounts to eight
shillings, and sometimes to ten shillings; nine brass Basarniques make a Peiso,
and eighteen Peisos or twelve ounces of Brass compose a Laree.

The Abas in Persia is in value about the third part of a Rix Doller, or one
Shilling eightpence sterling: The Garem, Abas or half Abas is commonly styled
^hodobenda, because first Coined by Mahomet Chodobenda King of Persia. The
Scahi are in value the fourth part of an Abas; and two Bisti and an half make a
Scahi; A Persian Tomain in Gold amounts to fifty Abases. The Persians style all
Copper or Brass Money, by the general Name of Pott. But there is one particular
kind thereof, called by them Kasbeki, forty of which compose an Abas. Shach
Ismael Coined in his time a kind of Money named Larie, in Value ten pence
English current Money, and it was formed after the manner of a thick Latten
Wire flatted in the midst to receive those Characters that discovered its
Estimate or Value.

Of the Mythology of the Greeks and Romans.
Having unravelled the Mysteries that lay concealed in the Rituals of the Jews;
I shall now unvail those that were muffled up in those Disguises and Vails the
Ancients, either Greeks or Romans, had artificially, to skreen them from vulgar
Inspection; put upon them: And first I shall begin with Adonis, in Memory of
whose disastrous Fate the Athenians celebrated those Feasts styled Adonia, at
which the Women were accustomed to conduct on a Bier or Hearse the Image of a
dead Youth to his Sepulcher, with much Regret and effusion of Tears, and
therefore they painted Venus in the Habit of a mournful Woman distilling of
Tears; with a vail over her Head condoling the Loss of Adonis. By Venus may be
understood the Earth, for that is the beautiful Mother of all living
Productions. By Adonis (as Macrobius affirms) is implied the Sun, who is slain
by the Boar, that is, the Winter; for then his Beams are faint and infirm; and
which is wild, untractable and rough, as that Creature, and deplored by Venus,
that is, the Earth deprived at that Season of the more vigorous Influence and
Impression of the Sun. In that he is said to be transformed into a flower, it
insinuates to us the frailty and fading transitoriness of Beauty.

Achelous was a River, and all Rivers were anciently like Men with long Beards,
and long Hair, leaning on their Elbows over a large Ear then Pitcher of Water;
the Hair and Beard may signify the Weeds and Sedge of the River; the leaning
on the Elbow intimates that Water by its weight tends downwards, and is
supported by the Earth, and circumscribed within the Concavities of it. They
were painted like men, because the fictions of Poets asserted the supposed
Deities of Rivers to have appeared in that shape and Signature. He was said to
be the Son of Terra and Sol, or of Oceanus and Terra, because all Rivers have
their Increase or Improvement from the Sun, Sea and Earth: It was styled a
Serpent from its many windings; and a Bull, from its Noise and Bellowing: The
two Horns are its two streams; one whereof was cut off by Hercules and
dispersed into several Rivulets; by which the Country was enriched, and the
recompense of the labor of Hercules was a greater Increase.

Adnietus was a King of Thessaly, whose Sheep Apollo did both feed and keep.
Every Monarch should be the Shepherd of his people; who without Apollo, that is
Wisdom, can never guide and manage them justly, and therefore he is said to
marry Alceste, that is his kingdom, by the concurrent Aid of Hercules and
Apollo, that is Strength and Prudence.

Aeacus, Minos and Rhadamanthus were sons of Jupiter, and when they were by him
constituted Judges in Hell, his directions obliged them to take their passage
through a delightful Meadow styled the Field of Truth. None were admitted into
the presence of these Judges but naked souls disroabed of vesture; to intimate
that Magistrates that possess the place of Judicature should not be warped to
Partiality or Injustice by Beauty, Riches, Power, or any other Gandy or Pompous
Appendages. These three Judges were so placed that Aeacus and Rhadamanthus who
were the milder Brothers sat always together, but Minos the more morose and
rigid by himself: this was as eminent for his severity, as the other were for
their Softness and Clemency; to intimate to us that Justice should be tempered
with Mercy, but so that Mercy should be always prevalent.

Aegeon, Briareus or Enceladus, (for by those different Names he is represented
to us by the Fictions of Poets) is said to have had an Hundred Hands: the
Original of which Fable, is that he lived in a City styled Centochiria, which
in the Greek has a signification of the same Identity. Aegeon is affirmed to
have the custody of Hell Gates, because the winds by which he is understood,
are often imprisoned in the Entrails and Enclosures of the Earth and Sea.
Aegeon commences a War against Jupiter, when the Winds obscure the Heavens with
congested Clouds, which are broken and dispelled by Thunder, and the Winds
appeased: And because Aetna never disgorges Fire, but when some Sulphurous
Winds or Exhalations are collected or generated in the hollow Holes or Caverns
thereof, therefore Aegeon is said to lie and move there.

Aeolus, Monarch of the Winds, is styled Jupiters Son, because Winds are
produced by the Motion and Influence of the Heavens: He was an Astronomer, and
could presage storms and calms: It was conjectured he had the dominion of the
Winds. His City was affirmed to be walled with Brass, because it was secured
with armed men. The Marriages between Aeolus and a Sea-Nymph intimate the
relation that is between the Wind and the Ocean. He reigned over Islands
because they are most exposed to the onsets of Storms. He imprisons the Winds
in a hollow Cave, because some Caves are replenished with Vapors, which often
burst forth into the violence and disorder of a Tempest.

Aesculapius was by Antiquity painted like an Ancient Man, with a long Beard,
Crownned with Bays, having in one hand a knotty or knobbed Staff, with the
other he leans upon a Serpent, and has a Dog at his feet; by which are
represented to us the Endowments and Qualifications of a Physician; he ought to
be Grave and Aged, prudent as the Serpent, vigilant as the Dog, and should be a
subduer of Diseases, as his Laurel Garland suggests: The knotty Staff intimates
the difficulty and intricacy of Distempers and Maladies in their several
mixtures and complications; and therefore Hygiaea and Jaso, Health and Cure,
are the Children of Aesculapius. His Mother was Coronis, derived from the Greek
(...) Misceo and Tempero, or the just Mixture or Temper of the Air, which
because it depends on the influence of the Sun, therefore Apollo is said to
have begot Aesculapius of her; but when he slew her with his Arrows is
understood, that the Sun with his Beams did first overheat, and then infect the
Air with Pestilence; so that the Flame without caused the natural heat within
to degenerate into Fevers and Inflammations. The Serpent, Cock, Raven and Goat
were consecrated to Aesculapius, to intimate that a Physician must be endued
with the Serpents wisdom, the Cocks vigilance, the Ravens eye and prescience,
and the Goats celerity.

Amphion was the Son of Jupiter; by which is intimated that Music is the
production of Air, for no sound either by voice, instruments or water, but is
produced by that Element. Mercury instructed him and gave him the Lute, to
declare the resemblance and equal Power of Eloquence and Music. Eloquence
being a speaking Harmony and Music, a speechless Eloquence; the one by words,
the other by sounds having an Influence on the Affections. The erecting of the
Walls of Thebes by his Music, declares that the rudest people are drawn to
Religion, Policy and Civility by the Magic and forcible operation of Eloquence.

Antaeus is the Symbol of a Covetous Man; the more his Affections touch Earthly
things the stronger is his Avarice, until he be raised from the Earth by
celestial Cogitations, and then his covetous Thoughts expire and die.

Apollo may be the Hieroglyphick of the supreme Divinity it self; for the
Gentiles painted him with his Harp and three Graces in one hand, and with a
Shield and two Arrows in the other; by which, peradventure, they understood
that God was not only a punisher of Impiety, but a rewarder of Goodness; as he
had two Arrows, so he had various punishments, yet he has reserved the
melodious Harp of his Mercy to sweeten them; and having but two Arrows has
three Graces, to intimate he has a greater stock of Mercies than Punishments;
and therefore the same Hand that grasps the Arrows, sustains also the Shield,
to declare, that even then when his Arrows are levelled at us, his Shield
secures and shelters us. Apollo, the same Deity with the Sun, was by Antiquity
painted with Wings to signify the swiftness of his Motion, and with one side
of his Head shaved, and the other hairy; by which was intimated, that whilst
the Sun enlightened one Hemisphere, the other was dark; for by his hair they
signified his Beams, and by his baldness, Darkness produced by his absence: His
Tripos may signify the three Circles in the Zodiac which every year he
touches, namely the Ecliptic, and two Tropicks: His Shoes and Garments were of
Gold, to discover to us the Refulgency of his Beams. The Sun was sometimes
painted by the Ancients adorned with a Crown, studded with twelve Jems, and
sometimes with four Urns, or Pitchers at his feet; by which was signified the
year, with its twelve Months and four Seasons: Sometimes again they placed him
on a Lion, with a Basket on his head, and a Lance in his hand, with the Image
of Victory on it, by which they intimated that the heat of the Sun subdues the
wildest Creatures, and that all their plenty and filling of their baskets,
resulted from his influence, who like a triumphant Conqueror, rides in his
Golden Chariot of light about the world.

Neptune and Apollo were affirmed to build the Walls of Troy, because Mortar
and Brick are composed by the Aid of Water and Heat; or else because Laomedon
either purloined or borrowed some Treasure out of the Temples of Apollo and
Neptune, to erect them.

Asopus was the name of a River in Baeotia, styled the Son of Jupiter or of
Neptune; to intimate, that all Rivers are either begot of the Air converted
into Rain, or of the Sea. Asopus was destroyed by Jupiters Thunder, whilst he
pursued after him to rescue his Daughter Aegina from his intemperate embraces;
by which may be signified that the River was dried up by the heat of the Air.

Atlas was a King of Mauritania, who from the eminency and bigness of his
Stature was fabulously asserted to be transformed into a Mountain of that name:
He was said likewise to have a Garden of Golden Apples because of the plenty of
Golden Mines in his Kingdom. Atlas was the name of an Hill, which from the
height of it was affirmed to support Heaven; and to be begotten of Heaven and
of Day because of the continual Light lodged on the Top of it, as being not
obscured with Mists, or disordered with Vapors and Clouds. This is the name of
him who first discovered the learning of Astronomy, and the invention of the
Sphere, and from this knowledge was said to support Heaven.

Aurora was asserted by Antiquity to be the Daughter of Hyperion which
signifies to go above, for it is from above we have the light of the Sun: her
Mother was Thia, to intimate that it is by divine Gift that we enjoy Light; for
nothing does more exemplarily represent the Divinity than Light; her Chariot
signifies her Motion, which sometimes has two, sometimes four Horses, to
declare that sometimes she rises slower and sometimes sooner. The restoring of
ancient Tithonus to youth by Physic, discovers to us that those Medicinal
Drugs and Simples that are transported from the East, are powerful for the
improvement of Health, and restitution of vigor to the body.

Bacchus was worshipped with Ceres, and esteemed her inseparable Companion; to
insinuate, that our life is sustained jointly by Corn and Wine, and that one
without the other will not support us long: Bacchus is said to be extracted out
of his Mother Semeles Ashes, because they being hot, are esteemed good Compost
for the Roots of Vines: and to be cherished in Jupiters Thigh; because the Vine
prospers best in a warm Air. And since moisture is required to the increase and
improvement of Wine, therefore Bacchus is said to be nursed and educated by the
Nymphs and Hyades: He was painted sometimes with a bald Head, with a Since or
Sickle in one Hand, with a Jugge or Pitcher in the other, also with a Woman's
Garment, and a Chaplet of Roses about his head, which may denote the
consequences or Effects of Wine; It produces Baldness, because its immoderate
use or excess dries up the Radical Moisture of the Brain, and fills it with
superfluous and adventitious humors which introduce Baldness: the Since
demonstrates that the disorderly taking in of Wine (typified by the Pitcher) is
an efficient cause of the abbreviation and cutting off of humane life: the
Woman's vesture and garland of Roses represent the effeminacy of Drunkards, and
that propension to Venery, to which Wine and Roses are powerful incentives and
provocations. Bacchus was always represented naked, to intimate that wine
dismantles the enclosures of the Soul, and opens secrets, and therefore the
chattering Pie was as his own Bird peculiarly assigned and devoted unto him;
and because Wine quickens and refines ingenuity, therefore the quick-sighted
Dragon was consecrated to Bacchus likewise. His Chariot was drawn by Panthers,
Tigers and Linxes, to suggest to us the Rage, Violence, disordered Passions,
and other variety of humors (noted by the Linxes) that result from excess of
Wine.

Boreas was the Son of Neptune and brother of Iris; for as Winds are the
product of maritime Vapors, so are Rains, Clouds, and Rainbows by the aid of
the Sun. Boreas ravishes fair Orithia, or the North Wind blasts and deflours
beauty.

Zetis and Calaus the Sons of Boreas, that is Cold and Dryness, dissipate the
Harpies, that is Southern Pestilential Vapors which are so ruinous and
destructive to living Creatures: For in the Southern Wind there are three
properties correspondent to the three names of the Harpies, sudden and swift
blasts, that is Ocipite, storms Aello, and obscurity Celaeno.

Out of the fiction of Castor and Pollux we may collect the creation of the Sun
and Moon, for in the Beginning the Spirit of God like a Swan moving upon the
waters, out of a confused Egg, that is, out of the Chaos extracted these two
refulgent Luminaries, whose jurisdiction is over the Sea; because by their
Influence, Light and motion, storms and vapors are both excited and dispelled.
They ride on white Horses, to intimate their Light; and they discovered the
Golden Fleece, because no Metals are produced but by their influence, nor can
they be traced out but by their Light.

Cadmus, which in the Phoenician Dialect imports as much as Oriental, was the
Son of Agenor, and his Wife Harmonia the daughter of Mars and Venus; and they
both (as the learned Bochartus conjectures) were Canaanites or Hivites; and he
fortifies the evidence of this assertion from this, that Hivite in the Hebrew
or Syriack Dialect has a near cognation or alliance to a word that in that
Language imports as much as a Serpent, into which the fabulous Legends of
Antiquity did affirm they were transformed. Cadmus is said to sow the Dragons
Teeth that produced armed Men: Now in the Phoenician Language the Teeth of
Serpents signify also Spears of Brass, with which Cadmus first armed his
Soldiers in Greece: and Higinus Cap. 2. page 74. testifies Cadmus first
purified Brass discovered at Thebes; hence the Ore it was extracted out of was
styled by the Ancients Lapis Cadmius, and Terra Cadmia; and Hermonia, as the
same Bochartus does believe, was descended from Mount Hermon, where Mars and
Venus, it is possible, were adored by the ancient Canaanites.

The Centaurs were said to be begot of Ixion and a Cloud; because they were
Subjects of Ixion a King of Thessaly, and the Town where they dwelt was styled
Nephele which imports as much as a Cloud: And because in Thessaly was first
Managery of Horses, and use of Horsemanship; therefore the Centaurs were said
to be half Men and half Beasts. Chiron the Centaur was the Son of Saturn and
Phillira; to insinuate to us, that Astrononomie, Physic, Music, and the
Retinue of other Arts and Sciences are the result or product of Time and
Experience, or of Time and Books; for Phillira is a think Skin or Parchment or
Paper between the Bark and Wood of the Tree, and is styled by Antiquity Tilia,
on which they were accustomed to write.

By Charon the Ancients understood Time, and asserted he was the Son of Erebus
and Night; because the secret Decree of Heaven gave being to Time, before which
it lay concealed behind the Skreen of Night or Darkness: his residence is said
to be in Hell or here below; because in Heaven there is no use of Time, for
there is Eternity: Charon is said to transport and ferry Souls over Styx* to
the other Bank; to intimate that Time brought us in, and will conduct us out of
this World, which are the two Banks of this troublesome River, the Emblem of
our temporal condition: Charon's Garments were sordid and ragged; so is the
state of this Life, if balanced with Eternal happiness. If we understand
Charon literally, then he is said to be that Ferriman that transported the
Mumial Bodies from the City Memphis to the adjacent or opposite shore of the
River Nilus, there to receive the last Rites of Enterrment.

By Cerberus likewise the Ancients prefigured Time, who with his three Heads,
past, present, and future, destroys and devours all things; he lodges at the
gates of Hell, that is the Grave; and therefore he is styled Cerberus; quasi
(...) Flesh-eater, for all must pass through his Throat that go thither; that
is, all must have a fixed time to die. He is said to be engendered of the Giant
Typhon from his strength, and of the Snake Echidna from his winding Revolutions
and Vicissitudes. But if we take this Fiction more literally, we shall discover
that Cerberus was but a King of the Molossians's Dog, who devoured Men, and was
subdued by Hercules.

Ceres by the Gentiles was the Goddess to whom they entitled the protection of
Corn; and therefore they painted her with Peace placed by her, holding in her
hand Plutus the God of Wealth; to intimate that Corn and other Fruits of the
Earth do flourish and increase, and Money also is redundant in the calm and
serenity of Peace. Therefore Ceres would not affiance her Daughter Proserpina
to Mars, though he made his addresses to her; for Husbandry, which is the
improvement of Corn, is disordered and subverted by War; nor yet espouse her to
Apollo, who had made the like amorous applications to her; because wise Men are
fitter to guide and sway the Helm of State, than manage and conduct the Plough.
Ceres is Corn, which Saturn and Ops, that is, Time and the Earth produce.
Proserpina is the Seed which Pluto ravishes, because it lies some space
concealed under ground. The lighting of Torches, is the Heat and Light of the
Sun and Moon, by whose influence the Corn is matur'd and generated. Therefore
Ceres is said to obscure her self, that is, the Corn is not seen, until Pan,
that is the Sun, by his Heat discovers and extracts it. The nourishing of
Triptolemus by day with Milk, and by night with Fire, is the fomenting of the
Corn with Rain by day, and the improving it with Heat in the Bowels of the
Earth by night. The tasting of Pluto's Fruit, is that Food and Nourishment
which is imparted to the Corn by the Earth. Ceres was anciently depicted,
riding in a Chariot drawn by two Dragons, or Winged Serpents; by which was
intimated that both Corn, and Husbandry, receive their perfection by Celerity,
Vigilance and Prudence.

Cetus was a King of Asia, not far distant from Troy; which laid the Basis of
that Fiction which affirmed him to be a Sea Monster: he was an adversary to the
Trojans; and did them much prejudice by his naval strength; therefore he is
styled the Whale, or stupendous Fish, invading the Shore, and destroying the
Trojans; who were forced to becalm his fury, by prostituting their Daughters to
his lust. This is that Cetus, that in subsequent Times made an inroad into the
Territories of Cepheus, and had defloured his Daughter Andromeda, had he not
been subdued, and destroyed by Perseus.

The Chimaera, that Bellerophon subdued, was a Monstrous Composition; having
the head of a Lion, breathing Fire; the Belly of a Goat, and the Tail of a
Dragon: By which some understand a Mountain, on whose top were Lions, and
Vulcans of Fire; about the middle, Goats and Pasture; and at the Foot of it,
Serpents or Dragons; which was by Bellerophon made habitable: other more
probable Conjectures suppose that there were three Princes discomfited and
slain by Bellerophon, who bore in their standards the Effigies of a Lion,
disgorging of Fire, the Pourtraiture of a Goat, and the Resemblance of a Dragon
or Serpent.

Circe (says Natalis Comes) is the mixture of the four Elements occasioned by
heat and moisture; the four Elements are her four Handmaids: She is immortal,
because this mixture is perpetual; and the strange shapes do discover the
variety of Forms, introduced by Generation: She had no dominion over Ulysses;
because the soul is not extracted out of the mixture of the Elements, or the
product of Generation.

Coelus was the Son of Ether and Dies, and by his Intermarriage with the
earth, became the Parent of the Titans, Cyclops, etc. By which is intimated
that those Fiery Meteors in the upper Region of the Air do entitle their
generation to his heat, motion and impression to those and hot dry exhalations
that stream out of the bowels of the Earth. Saturn his son, that is Time, the
Measurer of the Heavens Motion, is said to gold Coelus, that is the Heavens
shall wax old, and lose their Power of Generation, when the Stars shall be rent
into Threads of Light, and all things shall confess their Ashes.

The Ancients painted Cupid standing sometimes close by fortune; to insinuate
how prevalent the concurrent Aid of that Deity is in the Managery of the
affairs of Love: and sometimes they painted him standing by Mercury and
Hercules, to declare that Love is most vigorous when he is attended by
Eloquence and Magnanimity: They puortrai'd him likewise young, for Love must
never decay; with Wings, Love must be swift; Naked, for in the transactions of
Love, the Heart and Tongue must be of one piece; and our Addresses are not to
be attired with the specious Vesture of Hypocrisy; Blind, for in the Mantle of
Love are wrapped up many imperfections: His Head was adorned with Roses, to
declare the delectable complacence of Love; and those cast into the Figure of a
Crown, to manifest his Empire, Sway and Dominion. The Image of a Lioness with
little Cupids disporting about her, some tying her to a Pillar, others pouring
drink into her Mouth with a Horn, do represent to us, that the most savage
Creatures are reclaimed by Love. Therefore Cupid grasps a Rose in one hand, and
supports a Dolphin in the other, to declare the Properties of Love, which are
swift and officious like the Dolphin, and obligingly sweet as the Rose.

By the Cyclops some understand Water, for they are said to be begot of Neptune
and AmPhitrite, and yet they were subservient to Vulcan, that is Fire; to
intimate that in Generation, Moisture and Heat are complicated, that no
productions can be complete without their mixture. By the Cyclops, others do
apprehend those Vapors which by the Influence of Heaven are drawn out of the
Earth and Sea, and lodging in the Air engender Thunder and Lightning to be
ministerial to Jupiter. Therefore they are said to inhabit near the Hill Aetna
in Sicily, because Heat is the Parent of Thunder; they were thrust down to Hell
and came up again, because those Vapors that in Winter lie treasured up in the
Womb of the Earth, receive their Elevation by the Warmth of the Spring: Ulysses
subdued Polyphemus, that is, Man by his Wisdom and Inspection traced out the
secrets of natural causes: Apollo is said to destroy these Cyclops, because the
Sun dispels Vapors.

Diana, styled Luna, Hecate, and Dictinna, from a Net, because she had the care
and tuition of those that related to Fishers and Hunters, was by Antiquity
painted sitting in a Chariot drawn by two Horses, the one White and the other
Black, by which was understood the swiftness of her Motion, and the diversity
of her Aspects; for the white Horse represented her brightness in the Full, and
the Black her darkness in the Ebb or Wain of Light. They pourtrai'd her
likewise placed in a Silver Chariot to intimate her Splendour, drawn by Staggs
to declare her swiftness, and attired her with Wings still, to manifest the
Celerity of her Progress, and armed her hand with Arrows to suggest to us the
powerful operation of her Beams and Light: They painted her sometimes holding a
Leopard and a Lion in her hand, and sometimes trampling or treading upon the
last; by which they represented that the raging Heat of the wildest creatures
was composed and attempered by the moisture of the Moon; and because her
increasing and decreasing Light has the resemblance of Horns, therefore the
Bull was sacrificed to her: Sometimes Antiquity depicted her supporting a Torch
to demonstrate she was the great Taper of the Night; and sometimes covered with
a Vail to intimate her Eclipses, and obscurity in the Conjunction, and
sometimes invested with a parti-colored Garment to manifest her various
Aspects: Her conversing in Woods and on Hills declares that her Operations and
Effects are most visible there; for all Herbs, Plants and Trees are improved by
her Influences and Impressions.

Palaephatus will have the Fiction of the Bull ravishing away Europa,
understood of an eminent Pirate, who forced away diverse young Ladies, and in
their Register was Europa, Daughter to King Agenor, and violently transported
them to Crete: But others with more probability conjecture that this was a Ship
of Crete, on whose Stern was the pourtraiture of a Bull, in which Vessel were
the Cretans embarked, who forcibly ravished away Europa.

The Ancients styled Fortune the Daughter of the Sea, to intimate her
instability, and that her Vicissitudes are typified by the Flux and Reflux of
its Waters: Sometimes they painted her placed upon a Globe, to declare her
Dominion over the World, and drawn with four Horses, by which they signified
the four Branches of Divine Providence, by which the Love and Influence of the
first and supreme cause was communicated to the World, namely Creation,
Conservation, Gubernation, and Ordination of things to their fixed and
determined end. Sometimes they pourtrai'd her standing on a Wheel, to discover
to us the variety of her Revolutions, by which some are exalted to Glory, and
others again depressed and crushed into a calamitous Ruin.

The Roman Genius was accustomed to be painted with the Horn of Plenty in one
hand, and a Dish replenished with offerings, extended toward the other; to
intimate that not only the Roman, but all other Commonwealths were supported by
outward plenty, and by Religion and Devotion toward God. The Figure of
Serpents in which the Genii were adored, does discover to us the Prudent and
Vigilant Care the Angels have over us: Therefore the Genii were pourtrai'd by
the Romans with a Platter full of Garlands and Flowers in the one hand, and a
Whip in the other, to declare the power they were invested with both to reward
and chastise us.

By Gerion with three Bodies and one Head some understand a City styled
Tricarinia, erected upon three Hills, in which Gerion dwelt when he was
destroyed by Hercules: Others by this Fiction affirm him to be King of three
Islands annexed to Spain, named Cadiz, Erithia and Tartessus, which were three
bodies politic united to one Head: But the general opinion is, that there
were three brothers that ruled in Spain with that complaisant Agreement,
Unanimity and Affection, that though they had three bodies yet their Counsels
were so cimented, that they appeared to have but one Head; these were subdued
by Hercules, who Sailed to Spain in a Brazen Pot, that is, in a Powerful Fleet,
fraught with Armor of Brass.

By the Giants that commenced a War against Heaven, the Ancients understood the
Winds and Vapors which are the Children of the Earth and of Coelus, for they
are bred in Subterraneous Caverns, and fomented by Rain, which may be styled
the Blood of Heaven; they are said to rebel against Jupiter when they
discompose the Air, and are transpierc'd with Apollo's and Diana's Arrows, that
is dispelled and exhausted by the Beams and Influences of the Sun and Moon:
their hairy Feet denoted the Windings and Rollings of Vapors; their Hairiness,
their Variety and Copiousness.

Venus and Cupid were said to accompany the Graces, to intimate that Humane
Nature is preserved by Generation, represented by Venus and Cupid, and by
Mutual Benevolence and Bounty expressed by the three Graces, which were Thalia
a flourishing Estate, Aglaia Honor of Glory, Euphrosyne true Joy and Comfort,
which are the Handmaids of Love. The Temple of the Graces was erected in the
midst of the Street, that all persons might remember to be both Bountiful and
Grateful. Apollo and Mercury are painted sometimes ushering the Graces to
declare the Prudence and Celerity are requisite to that supporting of
Thanksgiving and Bounty. Seneca by the three Graces understands three sorts of
Benefits, some given, some received, and some returned back upon the
Benefactor; two look toward us, and one has her Face from us, because
Benefits are oftentimes doubly requited: They clasp each other by the Hand,
because in beneficence there should be no Interruption: they are naked, or as
some affirm they are attired with a thin and transparent Vesture, because
Bounty should still combine with Sincerity: Their Smiling and serene Aspect
discovers to us that Benefits should be given freely; they are still young,
because the Remembrance of Benefits should never wax Old. They have Winged
Feet, to insinuate that our Beneficence should be quick and active.

By Hercules some understand the Sun, who is the Glory of the Air, which then
glitters most when it is gilt and enamelled with the Beams of the Sun. His
twelve Labors are the twelve signs of the Zodiac which every year he passes
thorough, and all those Vapors and Clouds which he dissipates and exhausts,
are those Difficulties and Oppositions which Juno the Air casts before him, to
obscure his Glory. He is married to Hebe the Goddess of Youth, because when he
returns to us in the Spring, the World buds forth again in a renewed Youth. By
Hercules the Ancients did not only understand Magnanimity and Courage, but the
power of Eloquence likewise; which they expressed, when they painted him with
Chains proceeding from his Tongue, and tied to the Ears of People, whom he drew
after him; by which they signified how powerful Eloquence is to subdue the
Affections of the Vulgar, and to attract them from far. The Romans were
accustomed to worship Mercury within the City, and Hercules without, to suggest
that their Commonwealth was supported by Strength and Industry abroad, and by
Eloquence and Policy at home. Soldiers and Wrestlers used to consecrate their
Devotions to Mercury and Hercules together, to intimate that in War and
Wrestling, Policy and Strength should still unite in an equal Combination.

Some by the golden Apples of the Atlantides or Hesperides understand Sheep of
a yellow Fleece like Gold; for (...) in Greek, signifies both an Apple and a
Sheep: These Sheep Hercules transported from Africa to Europe, after he had
destroyed Draco the Shepherd: By these Golden Apples may be signified a Golden
Mine near Mount Atlas in Africa, which Hercules first discovered. By this
Garden guarded by a Dragon may be understood some rich Orchard environed by a
winding Branch of the Sea, which Hercules passed over, or by cutting it and
diverting the Tide made the passage open: Lastly by the three Daughters of
Hesperia and the Golden Apples may be meant the Stars, which because they begin
to appear in the Evening may be styled the Daughters of Hesperia or Hesperus,
and because the Stars are round like Apples and of a Golden Color, therefore
they fell under the notion of Golden Apples. By the Dragon may be understood
the Zodiac, which winds about the Earth like a Dragon or Serpent: By the
Conquest of Hercules over the Dragon, and carrying away the Golden Apples, may
be meant the Sun, whose appearance takes away the sight of the Stars and Zodiac.

By Hyacinthus, a beautiful Youth, beloved by Apollo, and destroyed by
Zephyrus, and after transformed into a Flower; may be signified that all
Flowers, and especially the Hyacinth, prosper when they are glanced upon and
fomented by the Beams and calmer Influence of the Sun, but are destroyed by the
ruder blasts and injurious Impressions of the Wind. By Apollos shooting his
Arrows at Zephyrus and chasing him to the Mountains, to expiate the ruin of
Hyacinthus, may be understood, that the beams of the Sun which are his Arrows,
dispel and consume those Vapors, that are the matter that stock and engender
the Winds.

Hymen or Hymenaeus because he was the first composer of Wedding Songs, was by
the Gentiles styled the Deity of Marriage: He was by Antiquity, painted with a
Garland adorning his Head, composed of sweet Marjoram, and Roses, with a Torch
in one hand, which if it did not burn clear was deemed ominous, and the Nuptial
Veil in the other, by the Romans styled Flammeum from the Color of the Flame
which represented the Virgins blushes; by which picture is intimated the Nature
of Matrimonial Love, which ought to consist in sweetness typified by the mixed
Chaplet abovesaid, in Cheerfulness designed by the clear burning Torch, and in
Modesty signified by the Veil: As they used to call upon Hymenaeus so they were
accustomed to invoke the Goddess Concordia in their Marriages, and to abandon
all Military Instruments, as the Trumpet etc. contenting themselves with the
Harp, and other Musical Instruments subservient to the softer strains of peace;
by which was intimated that in Matrimony, Love, Concord, Peace and Union of
Affections should be entertained; and nothing that might relish of Discord or
Animosity.

By Iapetus the Gentiles understood Heaven, and the swift Motion of it; whose
Sons are, Atlas, the Axis on which the Heavens roll about and divides the lower
from the upper Hemisphere; his second Son was Hesperus, for all the Stars being
parts, may be styled the Sons of Heaven: His other Sons Prometheus and
Epimetheus, may signify the Rational Soul, whose Original is celestial, if
provident, it may be styled Prometheus, if negligent, Epimetheus introducing
Sorrow and Repentance with it: And Atlas may be denominated the Son of Heaven,
if we understand the Mountain of that name; because of its near approach to the
Firmament; from which it was judged to support it: His Daughters were the
Pleiades and other knots of Stars.

By Janus, Macrobius understands the Sun: Therefore the Gentiles constituted
him Guardian of the four Doors of Heaven; the Eastern is the Spring, out of
which he seems to come; the Western is the Winter, into which he appears to
return when he moves from us. They gave him two Faces, because the Sun looks
backwards and forwards; and they placed in one of his hands a Scepter, and in
the other a Key, to intimate both his Dominion over the World, and that by his
light he opens it in the Morning, and shuts it up again in the Evening: Janus
his two Faces may signify the two Principal seasons of the Year, the Winter
and Spring; therefore one of the Faces appeared young and vigorous, the other
shrivel'd and sad: Or they discover the two kinds of Life he managed, the one
rude and Barbarous, the other cultivated and Civil.

Ino styled Matuta and Leucothea was by the Gentiles esteemed a Deity of the
Sea, and made likewise a Goddess of the Morning; peradventure because the
Morning appears to rise out of the Sea: they maintained likewise that she
appeased Tempests, because the Winds that are tumultuous in the Night, are
accustomed to be settled and composed toward the Morning: And because after a
calm and serene Night the Winds usually break out in the Morning, and swell the
Sea into Sedition and Disorder; therefore she and her Son Palaemon are affirmed
to have fallen into the Sea.

When Juno is styled Jupiter's Sister, the Air is understood, which much
resembles Heaven, that is Jupiter: when she has the appellation of his Wife,
the Earth is signified, which like a fruitful Woman, conceives and produces the
Creatures by the Celestial Influences. Juno was by Antiquity painted in the
Form of a Matron, in a long Robe, grasping a Lance in one Hand, and a Platter
in the other; peradventure to intimate the Power, Dominion and Extent of
Riches; she was likewise painted, placed in a Chariot of Gold and Silver,
drawn by Lions, her hand supporting a Scepter, to suggest to us that Riches add
Beauty, Strength and Courage to men. By Juno may be signified the Air, which
that Picture declares where she is pourtrai'd holding Thunder in one Hand, and
a Drum or Cymbal in the other: she wears a party-colored Garment, and is
attended by Iris, the Rainbow, and Castor and Pollux, two Meteors presaging
Serenity. The fourteen Nymphs which are constituted her Retinue by Virgil, are
but so many Exhalations engendered in the Air: Her grasping a Pomegranat in one
hand, and a Scepter with a Cuckoo placed upon it in the other, insinuates the
tranquillity of the Air, in which the Cuckoo delights, that chaunts only in the
Spring; and that Fruits prosper best in a temperate Air. Juno had her education
from the Hours, and was nourished by the Ocean, Thetis and the Sea Nymphs, to
declare that Wealth is the product of Time or Opportunity, and Navigation; or
that the Aerie exhalations are both engendered and fomented by Moisture. By a
Law of Numa, Juno's Temple at Rome was to be open roofed, to discover that
Marriages should be publicly solemnized, and not be performed in dark Corners
and Recesses.

Antiquity, in Ancient representations, placed Jupiter on a Throne, to declare
his Immutability; invested him with a Crown, to intimate his Authority; they
attired him with a Vesture, representing Light, and Flames of Fire, and
embellished with Stars, to discover his Divine Nature and eminent Glory: they
put a Pair of Globes in one hand, the one of Amber, the other of Gold, to
signify that both the Globes of Heaven and Earth are under his jurisdiction;
in the other hand a Viol or Citron, to suggest to us, that he is the Original
of that admirable Harmony which is in the World: His Throne is covered with a
Garment of Peacocks Tails, to represent his Providence and Omniscience; his
Sandals or Shoes are of a Green Complexion, and he trod upon Neptune's Trident,
to intimate that both Sea and Land are under his Dominion; they painted him
with Thunder in his hand, to discover he is the chastiser of Impiety: sometimes
they represented him with a Scepter in one hand, and a Circle in the other, to
intimate he is the Monarch that sways and controuls the Universe. They placed
sometimes the Image of Victory in his hand, to manifest that all Victories and
Conquests are but the results of his power and providence: They painted him
sometimes without Ears, sometimes with four Ears, to insinuate that Princes
should have no Ears for Sycophants or Slanderers, but many for complaints and
advice: they gave him also three Eyes, whereof one was situated in his
forehead, to declare that the Knowledge of Princes should be more eminent and
sublime, by seeing farther and higher than any private speculation. Justice is
always painted by Jupiter, to signify that the actions of Princes must be just
and equitable. Jupiter subdued Aegeon and the remainder of the Giants, to
manifest that Kings must not suffer Tyranny and Oppression to pass unchastised.
Jupiter is said to have begot diverse Daughters, styled Prayers, to represent
that Princes must have a paternal care of their peoples entreaties and
addresses, and not reject or contemn them. Jupiter espoused Metis which
signifies Counsel, and after by swallowing her, conceived Pallas in his Brain;
so Princes must wed themselves to sober Counselors, and by swallowing their
sage advice, their Heads shall be pregnant with Wisdom, and they shall produce
prudent Actions. Jupiter was Father of the Muses, to intimate that Princes
should be Patrons and Guardians of learned men.

Ixion was tied to a Wheel with Snakes, which may denote he was a Man corroded
with Malice and Envy, and that the Lives of Tyrants are as unsteady and
unstable as a Wheel.

Lycaon was a Bloody Prince of Arcadia, who was by Jupiter said to be changed
into a Wolf; which fabulous Legend had its rise and growth either from his
Barbarous Tyranny and oppression, or from his being infested with the Disease
styled Lycanthropia which renders men melancholy, sad, desolate, ravenous and
savage, or else being expelled his Kingdom for his barbarous excesses in
Government he retired into the Woods, where he lived the Life of a Wolf, by
pillaging and destroying of Passengers; or fourthly, because he wore a Wolfs
Skin, and instructed his people to cover and secure their houses with the Skins
of Wolves and other savage Beasts; or lastly he is affirmed to receive this
transformation because he was the first that devoted the Feasts styled Lycaea
to the Honor of Jupiter, who gathered from thence the Appellation of Jupiter
Lycaeus.

Lincus a King of Sicily is asserted by the fictions of Antiquity to be by
Ceres for his Murder of Triptolemus transmuted into a Lynx; to intimate to us,
that when Princes become Tyrants, they cease to be men, and degenerate into the
nature of the most savage Beasts: or else by this was suggested that he was a
Prince of various, inconstant and unsteady resolutions, typified by the Spots
and party-colored Skin of the Lynx. He was a Prince of that quick and active
sight, that he is affirmed that he could see through the thickest bodies of
Trees, the body of the Moon and that of the Earth, nay to take Cognizance of
Ships in the remotest Harbors; but all these were Romances, which if we
unveil, we shall discover that they insinuate to us, that Princes standing upon
the Battlements of Sovereignty see farther than other men; and because Lincus
was the first that discovered those Mines that lie locked up in Subterraneous
Recesses, he is said to see through the body of the Earth; and from his exact
knowledge of the Nature of Trees, he is affirmed to have seen through the
bodies of Oaks; and because he had made accurate observations of the Changes of
the Moon, therefore he is asserted to have shot his visive beams thorough the
body of that Planet; and from his inspection into the causes of Winds and
Tides, he was said to take a view of Ships in the most distant Harbors.

Mars was styled by the Ancients the Deity of War, because he was the first
that instituted Military Discipline: his Mother was Juno, to intimate that
Riches engender discords and hostile Animosities; and Thero or Fierceness was
his Nurse; his Associates were Anger and Clamor, for these do inseparably
accompany War, therefore Fear and Terror were the two Horses which drew his
Chariot, and Bellona his Sister, with a bloody Whip, still attended upon him:
Fame with her Wings full of Eyes, Ears and Tongues, blew the Trumpet before
him, to discover to us that Wars oftentimes had their first Efflux or Emanation
from false rumors and ill established reports. The Romans to insinuate how much
they detested Civil Wars or mutual Contests, interdicted the painting of the
Image of Mars on the public Gates of Cities or the private Doors of Houses,
but permitted the pourtraying of it on those of Cottages and Villages; but
instead of that, adorned the entrances of their Cities and Mansions with the
representation of Mercury, to suggest to us, that by maintaining War abroad,
they preserved Peace at home: Vulcan bound Mars and Venus together, but Neptune
disengaged them of that restraint, to intimate that Lust is improved by the
heat and warmer Sallies of Youth, but congealed and mortified by Age, which is
cold and moist, and was fitly designed by Neptune.

Mars likewise was styled Necin or Necis by the Acitani, a People of Spain, and
worshipped under that denomination; who pourtrai'd the head of his Image
surrounded with a Circle of Rays; and it is very probable that the custom
amongst the Ancient and more Modern Christians of pourtraying the heads of
Martyrs, Saints, and other Pious Men deceased, with a Glory Raionce or a
Coronet of Beams encircling them, from hence extracted its first Original. See
Macrob. Satur. Lib. 1. Cap. 9.

Mercury by the Ancients was constituted the Deity of Eloquence, and therefore
some assert he was styled Mercurius, quasi medius Currens, for Speech is that
which runs between Man and Man: He was painted winged both in his head and
feet, either to demonstrate the various motions of the Planet Mercury, or else
the nimble acuteness of Eloquence. He subdued and destroyed Argus, to insinuate
that Princes by the concurrent Aid of Orators charm and reduce the many eyed
Multitude, who are sooner reclaimed to obedience by Tongues than by Swords.

Mercury was likewise painted with a Rod in his Hand wrapped about with two
Serpents embracing each other, by which is signified the confederacy that is
required between Eloquence and Wisdom, typified by the Serpent; and where
Eloquence and Wisdom are entwined, there the State is well managed, intimated
by the Rod or Scepter, the Symbol of government: or else this discovers to us,
that the most brutish and Serpentine Dispositions are suppled and made tame by
Eloquence. He was pourtrai'd supporting a purse, to declare that gain of which
he was the Deity was to be improved by diligence, expedition and ingenuity:
hence he was painted with a Cock, and a Goat by him, to suggest that as
vigilance is exacted in a Merchant of which the Cock was the Type; so he should
demolish all Difficulties that should occur, as the Goat surmounts the most
difficult and ragged precipices. By Mercury some of the Ancients understood the
Sun, and then his Wings may signify his Velocity; the killing of Argus may
represent that the appearance of the Sun puts out the light of the Stars, which
are as so many Eyes of Heaven. The Sun seems to behold us with a threefold
Aspect, Pale, Red and Blew; the first presages Rain, the second Winds, and the
third serenity: and therefore it is probable they painted Mercury with three
heads upon a square Stone, to demonstrate either the four parts of the World,
or else the four Seasons of the year, or else to demonstrate the Constancy and
Stability of Speech and Eloquence of which he was the Author; or lastly to
discover that the knowledge of Letters, Vaulting, or Wrestling, Music and
Geometry, entitled their primary invention to Hermes or Mercury. And to declare
that the Sun never languishes into age, or decays in vigor, they represented
Mercury always young, Beardless and cheerful; and peradventure the Effigies of
Mercury like a Youth carrying a Ram, may declare that the Sun seems to appear
young and makes the World look Youthful, when he enters into the Sign of the
Ram in the Zodiac: He was painted still with his head covered, to denote that
subtle and ingenious heads still wrap up their Designs in dark, ambiguous and
gloomy pretenses.

Minerva was styled Jupiter's Daughter, to declare that wisdom is a Signal
Gift of Heaven: she was extracted from his Brain because that is the seat of
Wisdom; without the Aid of Women, because Wisdom is improved, not by
Generation, but by infusion, study and experience. Minerva's Target styled
Aegis was clear and polished like Glass, and had a Gorgons head on it
enwreathed with Snakes, to intimate that Wisdom is terrible to impious men,
and that that and sincerity expressed by the clearness of her Target should
always combine together. Minerva was by Antiquity painted with a Helmet and
Crest, with a Cockperched on the top of it, to suggest to us that Wisdom is
the defense and Ornament of Mankind, and is still accompanied with Vigilance.
Therefore they likewise pourtrai'd her with an Owl by her side, a Crow in her
hand, a Cock on her hand, and a Dragon at her feet, all which import the
Sagacity, piercing sight and perspicacity of Wisdom: They represented her
supporting a round Target on her Arm and a long Spear in her hand, to
demonstrate that Wisdom both protects and sways the World, and that it can
transpierce the most entangled and difficult Affairs, and attaque them at the
remotest distances. Minerva was painted sometimes with an Helmet of Gold, with
a Sphynx lodged on the top of it, to insinuate to us not only the Glory and
Splendour of Wisdom, but the Intricacy and Mysteriousness of it. Whosoever
beheld Minerva's Helmet was transformed into a Stone, to discover to us that
Wisdom renders men solid, unamazed, unmovable in times of the greatest
perplexity. As there were some Images consecrated to Pallas and Mercury, styled
Hermathenae, so there were some devoted to Mercury and Hercules, denominated
Hermeracliae, to denote that Eloquence, Wisdom and Strength support the World.
The Romans sacrificed to Minerva and Vulcan on one Altar, to inculcate to us
that Wisdom should be always complicated and mingled with Zeal.

By Midas's Ears may be understood the extraordinary height or procerity of
them; or else that he was a man of a stupid or Asinine Condition or Capacity;
or thirdly his long Ears being a Prince, might import he had those in every
dark Recess, which gave him intelligence of what was acted or spoken; for Kings
have long Hands and long Ears: or lastly his Asinine Ears did insinuate, that
though he heard many Complaints and Execrations against his arbitrary and
Tyrannical Government, yet he no more resented those, than if he had been
transformed into as Ass. Peradventure being a Prince of vast opulency, and
having much treasure, in cutting the River Pactolus into small Streams for
fertilizing and enriching the Country, contributed Rise and Growth to this
fiction, that he washed away his Golden Faculty in that River; which became
thereby replenished with Golden Sands, for so Rivers may be styled, that
improve Countries by their overflowing, or by their Mud or Slime.

Nemesis, or the Deity of Revenge, styled likewise Rhamnusia and Adraste was by
Antiquity affirmed to be the Daughter of Jupiter and Necessity, and therefore
they painted her with a Bridle and a Ruler, to intimate divine Justice curbs
and rules the World, in punishing the Guilty and protecting the Innocent. They
painted her likewise in the shape of a Virgin of a truculent Aspect, sad,
quicksighted, sustaining a Balance in one hand, and a Whip or Rod and an
Hatchet in the other, to discover that Divine Justice is inexorable,
quicksighted in unveiling of truth when it lies folded up in obscurity, and
that it does not chastise delinquences with complacence or delight. The
Balance signifies its Impartiality in recompencing the good, and correcting
the Impious; the Whip and Hatchet, the diversity of Punishments proportionate
to the variety of Offenses. They pourtrai'd her Naked, placed on a square
stone, to show that she is open to applications and complaints, and that she is
square, steadfast and unvariable. She was likewise represented standing on a
Wheel, to intimate her revolutions or vicissitudes in the world; with a Crown
on her head, to denote her Dominion, which carried Staggs with small Images of
Victory, supporting Palms, to manifest that Vengeance makes men fearful,
because she is Victor over the World. Her hand grasped a Cup, on which were
insculp'd Aethiopians, to suggest that Vengeance can overtake a Sinner, though
he runs to the remotest Aethiopia, and therefore her pourtraicture was
furnished with Wings to demonstrate her Celerity.

Neptune is by Antiquity affirmed to be the first inventor of Horsemanship,
because he first instructed Men to manage Horses, or else because he was the
first that framed Ships, which appear to ride on the Sea. They were accustomed
to paint Neptune, Nereus and the residue of the Sea Gods, with an Aspect
sometimes frowning, sometimes smiling, to declare that the Sea is sometimes
tempestuous, sometimes calm: They assigned him a Chariot, drawn with Horses,
and as some have delivered with vast and monstrous Fishes, to signify the
quick and swift Motion of the Sea. Instead of a Scepter, they furnished him
with a Trident, with which he sometimes makes a concussion in the Earth; that
is the Sea, by some Subterraneous passages, often moves and shakes the
neighboring Shoars with Earthquakes. He was represented Grey-hair'd and
invested with a blew Garment, the first expressed the foaming, the last the
color of the Sea: They pourtrai'd Neptune likewise with a Plow and a Cart
behind him, to insinuate that by accident, the Sea is the cause of the
fertility of the Earth, either by Rain engendered by Vapors extracted out of
the Sea, or else with that Mud or Weeds collected from its Shoars, which in
some places is an excellent compost to manure the adjacent fields; or lastly,
by its saltness, which by overflowing Tides or other secret Channels is
transfused into the Entrails of the Earth. Some conjecture that Neptune was
styled the Deity of the Sea, because he was Admiral to Saturn, and the first
who rigged and launched out a Fleet of Ships; and then possibly his Trident may
denote the three Squadrons into which he divided his Navy: But if by Neptune we
understand the Sea it self, then it is probable the Trident may signify its
threefold motion, the one natural, as it is Water to tend downwards; which
results from its active form, the other natural likewise as it is Sea water,
which proceeds from its passive form, that is to ebb and flow; the third is
violent as it is rolled into Tempest and Tumult by the impetuous agitation of
the Winds. Neptune, Minerva and Vulcan were usually worshipped on one Altar, to
manifest that Mechanical Artifices and Designs could not be improved or
perfected without Wisdom, Fire and Water.

The Oreades, that is the Nymphs of the Hills; Napaeae, that is the Nymphs of
Pastures; the Naides, Nymphs of Rivers and Springs; the Limiades, Nymphs of
Pools, nourished Ceres and Bacchus in their infancy, to intimate that Corn and
Wine have their Growth and Improvement from Water.

Oceanus was styled the Son of Coelum and Vesta, that is of Heaven and Earth,
because the Sea entitles its preservation and motion to the Heavens, and by
them is encompassed, and is supported by the Earth, as a Child is sustained by
its Mother. Oceanus was denominated Father of all the Gods, to declare that all
things ascribe and denote their Original to moisture, without whose
concurrence, there could be neither Generation nor Corruption: Oceanus was
likewise affirmed to be Father of all the Nymphs, because all Springs and
Rivers attribute their first pedigree and extraction to the Ocean. All the Gods
are said to be carressed and feasted by Oceanus; perchance this Fiction was
established to confirm the Ancient Opinion of the Stoics who asserted that the
Stars being of a fiery constitution, were not only attempered, but likewise fed
by those moist Vapors which were exhaled from the Sea: Oceanus was by
Antiquity painted with a Bulls head, either to insi^^ate the impetuous rushing
of the Ocean against the adjacent shores, or else to manifest the Bellowing and
Clamor of its Waters, when they are breathed upon and discomposed by
intemperate and tumultuous Winds. Juno is said to be nourished and educated by
Oceanus, to denote, that correspondence the Air maintains with the Ocean, both
by Situation and Nature; for the Water is easily converted into Air, and that
again into Water; the Clouds are ingendered of marine Vapors, and those melt
and dissolve again into the Lap of the Ocean. Tethis, Wife to Oceanus, was
anciently painted with Gray Hairs, and a white Garment, either to signify the
Antiquity of Navigation, or else to demonstrate the Fears and Cares of
Navigators: and therefore Thetis is said to have been married to Peleus, who it
is probable was some Island Prince, and an experienced Navigator.

Orion is a constellation composed of seaventeen Stars, which usually arises in
Winter, at which season violent storms are excited, and Cataracts of Rain
descend: therefore in relation to that darkness of Air caused by Orion, by
muffling it up in such a quantity of gloomy Exhalations that engender Tempests,
Rain, and Thunder, he is said to obscure the Celestial powers themselves; and
because much Rain entitles its production to his influence, therefore he is
affirmed to be engendered of the Urine of the Gods: He was destroyed by Diana's
Arrows, because his fainter Beams are involved in the more refulgent light of
the Moon. Others deliver he was slain by the Scorpion, for when this rises, the
other sinks and is obscured.

Orpheus was an Astronomer who instructed the Graecians in that mystical
knowledge, by discovering the Motion, Harmony and Order which is amongst the
seven Planets, typified by his Harp whose Music did result from seven
strings, for which cause they placed it amongst the Stars; about which
Antiquity lodged the Bull, Lion and other Creatures, which afforded Original to
that Fiction, that the most Savage Animals were charmed into softness by the
entrauncing music of his melodious Harp.

By Pan may be signified the Universe, as the word imports: therefore to
improve the Fiction, Antiquity affirmed he was compacted of the Sperm of all
Penelope's Woers, because the World is composed of the Seeds of all things; his
red Face was to denote the Color of Heaven; his being attired in the spotted
Skin of a red Bear represented the Starry Firmament; his long Beard suggested
the Masculine Virtue of the Fire and Air, in the production of things; his
Rough and Hairy Thighs and Legs insinuated the roughness of the Earth, made
rugged with Rocks, Trees, and Bushes. By his Shepherds Crook in one hand, may
be intimated that Providence by which the World was swayed and managed: by the
seven Pipes in the other hand, may be typified the Harmonious Motion and Order
of the seven Planets. The Ancients painted him with Wings to discover the
Celerity of the Motion of the Celestial Orbs. By Pan, some understand the Sun;
his Horns intimate his Rays, his crooked Staff the Suns oblique Motion in the
Zodiac; his prolixe Beard, his Light, which he casts downwards, as his Horns
resembled his Beams which he darts upwards; with these he illuminates the upper
Region, with those the lower: His Wings denote the swiftness of his Motion; his
cloven feet signify the two Hemispheres: He was by Antiquity pourtrai'd
invested with a flowery or branched Garment to discover how the Earth is attired
with Herbs and Flowers at the Suns approach. He is the Deity of Mountains,
Woods and Groves, because in those recesses he was first adored: He was the
Tutelary God of Shepherds, because they first admired the Suns Motion,
Influence, Power and Beauty, and therefore attributed divine Honors to him.
Pan was the inventor of the Trumpet or Cornet for War, with the unacquainted
sound of which the Persian Army was so astonished that they fell into the
disorder of a Defeat, and gave up the Day, and themselves to a cheap Execution:
Hence sprang the appellation of Panick Terrors to express sudden Fears. The
Arcadians maintained a perpetual Fire in the Temple of Pan, by which they
represented the Sun, and his constant and uninterrupted Light.

By the three fatal Sisters styled Lachesis, Clotho and Atropos, and by a more
general Title denominated the Parcae, may be signified the secret decrees of
Heaven concerning Man's Birth, Life and Death. Therefore Antiquity affirmed them
to be the Daughters of Jupiter and Themis or Justice, because nothing attends
us in this Life, but by the Decree of the supreme Cause established upon his
Justice: and because these Decrees should rather be adored than pried into, the
Fictions of Antiquity asserted these three Sisters to inhabit a gloomy Cave;
and to be the Daughters of Erebus and Night, because the judegments of Heaven
are inscrutable: and because the Eternal Decrees are immutable, therefore the
Gentiles affirmed the Fates to be the Daughters of Necessity, into whose Temple
at Corinth, it was not lawful for any man to enter; insinuating that no man
ought to scan or search the secret Decrees of Heaven.

Perseus was said to be engendered by Gold, either because his Hair was Yellow,
or that his Mother was bribed by Gold to prostitute her body to Jupiter, or
lastly because a vast Stock of Wealth devolved to him from his Predecessors.
The Gorgons which Perseus destroyed are thought by some to be a Species of
Serpents in Africa styled Catoblepae, which kill with their Eyes looking still
downwards. If we will be like Perseus Christian Soldiers indeed, and merit a
Place amongst the Stars like him, we must subdue the Catoblepae or Gorgons
within us, even those narrow, covetous Affections, that are still looking
downwards, and fastened on Earth and Earthly Affairs.

By Pluto the Ancients understood the Sun: he is styled the God of Hell, in
relation to his being under the Earth, when he gilds the Antipodes with his
retired Light: he is said to ravish Proserpina, that is the seminal virtue
which dwells in Plants, Trees, Herbs and Corn, which in Winter, when the Sun is
in his recess or Apogaeum, lies folded up in the entrails of the Earth: Pluto
or Plutus is painted with Wings when he abandons us, but halting when he
approaches us, to intimate that Wealth is slow in coming, but swift in
departing. Pluto was denominated the Deity of the departed Manes or Ghosts,
either because he first discovered the Method of burying the Deceased, who
before lay uninterred; or it is probable the Rights, Obsequies and Ceremonies
of Funerals, entitled themselves to his original Institution.

Priapus was styled the God of Gardens, because he was the Son of Bacchus, that
is the Sun, and of Venus, that is Moisture; to demonstrate that Fruits, Herbs,
Flowers, Plants and Trees are engendered and improved by the Suns Heat, and
their own radical Moisture: Some make Priapus the Son of the Nymph Nais, others
of Chion, which signifies Snow; by which is insinuated that Moisture in Summer
and Snow in Winter, by Cloistring up the natural Heat of Herbs and Plants, are
the Causes of Fertility.

Prometheus it is probable was an Astronomer, who continually and curiously
beholdding the Celestial Fires, that is the Stars, and upon Caucasus observing
the Suns Motion, was said to be chained to that Mountain, and to have his Heart
corroded and gnawn by the Eagle of Care and Study. Prometheus was a Philosopher
who diligently observing lightning Comets and other flaming Meteors, was said
to steal Fire from Heaven, and was the first that found out the use of Fire for
the benefit of Mankind: for which after his decease he was honored with
Altars, Sacrifices and Festivals; in which to enhaunse the Memory of this
Important Invention, Men in the Night traversed the Streets with lighted
Torches. Prometheus made up his Man of the parts of other Creatures, and by
consequence of their qualities also, to intimate that Man alone has in him the
noxious dispositions of the wildest Beasts, the Foxes subtilty, the
dissimulation of the Crocodile, who is said to weep when Death lies bathing in
his Tears, the Goats Salacity, the Bears or Wolves cruelty, the Lions
fierceness and Anger, and the Tigers Rapacity.

By Rhea the Ancients understood the Earth, deduced from ((...)) to flow,
because she flows with all things, either necessary or superfluous; or rather
because all Springs and Rivers are continually flowing in her and upon her: she
was styled Ops, either from Wealth or Help, either because she contributes
Riches, or else is subservient to us under the pressure of Danger or Necessity:
Rhea was painted like an ancient Matron, attired in a branched or flowery
Vesture, with a Crown like a Tower on her Head, with a Scepter in one Hand and
a Key in the other; her visage did signify the Earths Antiquity, her flowery
Superficies her Circular or Orbicular Figure, the Castellated Crown her
Strength in supporting so many Towers and Cities, as likewise her Dominion over
all Creatures, for the Earth in their composition is most predominant; and her
Key does suggest that sometimes she is open, as in Summer and Spring when
Plants and Trees bud out of her Entrails, and sometimes shut, as in Winter: her
Chariot was drawn with Lions, which may denote either Earthquakes or
Inundations, which are indeed the two great winding Sheets of Nature.

Saturn was by Antiquity represented in the pourtraicture of an Ancient Man,
bareheaded, in a ragged garment, holding a Hook and a Key in his Hand, and
devouring his Children, by which they signified the Antiquity and long duration
of time: his bare head intimated that Time unvails the most gloomy secrets; his
ragged Vesture insinuated that time corrodes and consumes all things, which was
also understood by his devouring his Children, as also by his Hook and Sickle;
his key declared that Time unlocked all those Mysteries that lay wrapped up in
the dark Cabinet of Fate: Saturn was likewise described with Six Wings and
woollen feet, to suggest to us that time seems to glide away silently and
slowly, whereas indeed he flies away swiftly. Saturn devoured all his Children,
except Jupiter, Juno, Neptune and Pluto; to signify that Time destroyed all
compounded bodies, but the four Elements, to wit, Fire, Air, Water and Earth,
which by reason of their simple Nature are not liable to corruption: Saturns
Genitals were cut off by Jupiter, and cast into the Sea, and of them and of the
Marine Froth was Venus engendered; by which may be discovered that the coldness
of Saturn is attempered by the Heat of Jupiter, and so Venus was produced; for
there can be no procreation, where Heat does not qualify Cold: or else by this
was insinuated that Saturn, Jupiter and the Sea are required to the production
of Venus; that is to say, that Time, the Influence of Heaven and Moisture are
obliged to concur to the accomplishment of Generation.

By Scylla and Charybdis Palaephatus, understands two such Pyratical Ships and
Galleys in the Tirrhene Sea pillaging all Merchants that traded that way, which
from their swiftness in sailing, and the Rapacity of the Pirates within them,
were affirmed by Antiquity to be transformed into a Sea Monster composed of
Dogs and Wolves: These Vessels Ulysses, by the conduct of a successful Gale of
Wind outstript and so declined all prejudice. Natalis Comes and others by
Scylla and Charybdis assert two dangerous Rocks between Sicily and Italy to be
signified, which being hollow, and the Tides gliding through them produced an
horrid Noise, resembling the howling of Wolves or barking of Dogs; and because
there were diverse Monstrous Fishes, that lurked within their Cavities, and
devoured the bodies of those who had suffered the angry Fate of Shipwreck, the
luxuriant Fictions of Poets delivered that these were monstrous Women above,
and Dogs and Wolves below.

Scylla Daughter to Nisus King of the Megarenses, betrayed his fatal Hair to
Minos; that is, her Fathers most intimate Counsels to his Capital Adversary.
In that Nisus was metamorphosed into an Hawk, which still pursued Scylla
transformed into a Lark; we may discover the nature of a guilty Conscience,
which abandons a Man not in Death, but is distorted with the Agony and Torture
of its own Conviction and affrightment wheresoever it resides.

Some understand Sphynx to be an Amazonian woman, but an eminent Robber
infamous for her Rapine and Effusion of Blood, who lurked amongst in hospitable
and almost inaccessible Rocks, who with a collected body of Outlaws, made
frequent excursions from the Hill Sphingius upon the Thebans, but at last was
subdued, and destroyed by Oedipus. The Thebans were accustomed to bear the
pourtraicture of Sphynx on their Ensigns: Minerva placed it on her Helmet, and
the Egyptians at the Entrance of their Temples; to intimate that wise men,
Soldiers and Priests, should be cautious and circumspect, and so involve their
Words, and Actions, that they might not be too open, or despicable, to the
prejudice of the State or Religion.

The Sirens were said to be the Daughters of Achelous the River, either in
reference to that melodious murmur its Waters compose in their gliding, or else
in relation to those Musical Instruments, or Water Organs, Antiquity styled
Hydraulae; and because of that Harmony that resulted from their Music they
were affirmed to be the Daughters of Calliope one of the Muses.

Styx, Acheron and Cocytus the three Infernal Rivers were affirmed to be the
Daughters of Oceanus and Terra, to intimate that they as all other Rivers
ascribed their Pedigree to the Sea, but particularly these had some secret
passages under Ground. Styx signifies Hatred, Acheron, Joyless, Cocytus,
Complaint or Lamentation; because when we are deserting this Life, the Joy of
all Sublunary Delights do untwist and determine, either in a detestation of
them, or in Regret and Lamentation that we are abandoning them. These Rivers
are said to flow from Pluto's Throne, because the remembrance of that Dominion
that Death has over Mankind, is the cause that inforces these Sorrows and
Complaints.

By Tityus may be understood, the Corn which is by Jupiter, that is, the Air,
and the Earth, fomented and extracted; this covers many Acres of Land and is
killed by Apollo's Arrows, that is, by the Heat of the Sun is reduced to
Maturity, to be cut down by the Reaper: the Raven which devours his Heart,
which grows again, is the Moisture which putrifies the injected Seed, which
shoots up again into new Growth and Verdure.

By Typhon may be signified Subterraneous Exhalations or Vapors engendring
Earthquakes, and sometimes Eruptions of Fire, Ashes, Stones and Pestilential
Fumes, as if they designed to dislodge Jupiter from his Throne: He is asserted
to be the Son of Titan and Terra, because they are produced by the Influence
and heat of the Sun, in the hollow and spungy Caverns of the Earth.

Venus was by Antiquity painted rising out of the Sea, to signify that those
things that have a Tincture either of Volatile or fixed Salt, are apt to
improve venery; and placed in a Shell in which she was transported to Paphos,
to declare the Dangers and Difficulties Lovers are exposed to: she was also
pourtrai'd naked, to intimate that all things should be open and unvailed
amongst Lovers, and nothing in the Heart muffled up in an affected Concealment.
She was crowned with Roses, to discover the Empire, and yet sweetness and
complacence of Love: her Chariot is said to be drawn sometimes with Doves, to
manifest the Sincerity, want of Gall, or Malice in Love; sometimes with Swans
and Sparrows, to insinuate that as sometimes there is nothing but Purity and
Innocence in Love, so sometimes again there is nothing but Salacity: Venus was
likewise represented sitting upon a Goat, and treading upon a Snail, to suggest
that a modest Matron should subdue Goatish wantonness, and like the Snail, be
constantly resident in her House, and consecrate her self to silence; for the
Snail wants a Tongue. Venus was espoused to Vulcan, because there can be no
Generation, if there were not an Union between the natural Heat expressed by
Vulcan, and the radical Moisture signified by Venus. The Romans placed near to
Venus Mercury, Pitho and the Graces, to denote that Love is procured and
supported by Eloquence, Persuasion and Bounty. Wine was offered in the
Sacrifices devoted to the Terrestrial Venus, but never in those, consecrated to
the Celestial one; to suggest to us that Wine is destructive and ruinous to
divine Contemplation or Love.

By Vesta the Ancients sometimes understood the Earth it self, and in this
relation she is styled the Mother of Saturn; and sometimes they meant the Fire
within the Entrails of the Earth, or that Natural Heat by which all Sublunary
Creatures are generated and fomented, and so Vesta was said to be the Daughter
of Saturn and Rhea, because this Flame is produced in the Earth, and of the
Earth. When all the other Deities wandered abroad in their Chariots, Vesta is
said to continue unmovable in Jupiter's House; that is, of all the simple
bodies, the Earth only remains unmovable in the midst of Jupiter's House,
intimated by the Air that encompasses it round about.

The Egyptians were accustomed to paint Jupiter thrusting an Egg out of his
Mouth, and out of that Vulcan issuing, to intimate that God created the World,
and out of that extracted the Natural Heat which contributes Vegetation to all
things. Vulcan was affirmed to shed his Seed upon the Earth, because he could
not debauch Minerva by his Lustful onsets; to insinuate that the natural Heat
has no Dominion over Heaven, which remains still a Virgin, that is pure from
the Embraces of Elementary mixtures, but that it is the Earth that is pregnant
and replenished with Seed, by the Aid and supply of this Natural Heat, by which
all things are both generated and preserved.

He that would be more amply instructed in this discourse let him survey
Natalis Comes, Palaephatus, Fulgentius his Mythology, and Hyginus, where he
shall discover this subject to be more diffusedly treated on.

FINIS

