PHILIPPUS IV HISPANIARVMET INDIARVM REX CATHOLICVS


The Original and Growth OF The Spanish MONARCHY United with the HOUSE of
AUSTRIA. Extracted from those Chronicles, Annals, Registers and Genealogies,
that yield any faithful Representation how the Houses of Castile, Aragon and
Burgundy became knit and combined into one Body. To which are added several
Discourses of those Accessions and Improvements in Italy, Africa, with the East
and West Indies, that are now annexed by Alliance or Conquest to the Diadem of
SPAIN.

By THOMAS PHILIPOT M. A. Formerly of Clare-Hall in Cambridge.

London, Printed by W. G. for R. Tailor, in St. Martins le Grand near St.
Leonards Church yard. 1664.

To the Learned and Judicious St RICHARD FANSHAVV Knight and Baronet, One of
HIS MAJESTY'S most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL, and Designed Lord Ambassador for
Spain.
My Lord,
YOur Experience and practical Observation being the best Comment on those
Annals and Registers which have an Aspect on this ensuing Treatise; Give me
leave to offer it up to be Scanned and Winnowed by your particular scrutinie;
and if it shall receive its Approbation in your Vogue and Estimate, I fear no
Blot from the Common Suffrage. For I shall not Fear that Justice, which is so
even and Impartial; nor despair to find an Absolution there where the former is
mixed and complicated with so much Charity and Candor. And I dare with much
Confidence expect to be Assoil'd by the Public Decision, if once it shall
appear that Your Private Determination has discharged and acquitted

(My Lord) Your very humble Servant THOMAS PHILIPOT.

The Preface to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
SInce the Printing off the first Sheets of this Treatise, the signal Battle
was Commenced between Don John of Austria, and the Conde de Villaflore General
for the Portugal, where (after an eager and Blo^^^ Debate) the Spanish Grandeur
did so sink in the Fatal Carnage of that Field, that many Conjecture (how
truly or falsely I know not) it will not buoy up again, (at least for some
years) from that important Ruin. Nor has a less Destructive Wound been
lately inflicted on the House of Austria by the Turkish Scimeter, which has
lopped off New-hausel from the Dominion and Interest of the Emperor; which as
it has a dangerous prospect toward Novigrad, Cassovia, Tokay, and other Towns
of the Upper Hungary, so it has a dismal Aspect on Moravia, Austria, and the
residue of that Princes Hereditary Territories; and from the Prejudice its
Loss may probably super induce, does tacitly seem to implore other Christian
Princes to Concenter in a Noble and just Confederacy, to stop the Impetuous
Current of the Turkish Conquests, which like an Inundation threaten (if not
timely intercepted) to intombe not only the House of Austria, but Germany it
self in a Ruinous Devastation. And since I am engaged in this Discourse of the
Turkish Greatness, you may be advertised that if this Essay find any
acceptance in the Public Estimate, I shall represent in a Compendious ^^lume,
the Original and Growth of the Turkish Empire, and from what a narrow Increment
this Thracian Bramble has shot out and improved it self to that Excrescencie,
that it has not only by an unhappy Diffusion, overspread the Lesser Asia, but
a considerable part of Europe it self.

I have no more to add but this, that those Errors which through the
Inadvertency of the Press, and peradventure too, through my own, have by an
unhappy Intertexture been Imbodied with this Treatise, (as namely, Page 19.
line 30. in my Discourse of Castile, for Despois Nos Vos, read Despues de Nos
Vos. and then line 31. for No es Lover read No ay Lugar. And in my Discourse of
Portugal, Page 26. line 25. for John the fourth, is inserted John the fifth)
have made this Treatise and my Self the Object of your Charity. There may
possibly occur other Mistakes of a lesser Dimension, on which you may exercise
at once, both your Justice and your Candor; with the first you may Censure,
and with the last excuse

T. P.

Imprimatur,

October 27. 1663. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

The ORIGINAL and GROWTH OF THE SPANISH MONARCHY.
THE Spanish Monarchy is like a tall Colossus swollen by new Acquists to that
Bulk and Dimension that it bestrides almost two parts of the habitable World,
that is, Europe and America, and indeed its glory has in these latter ages
arrived to that Eminence and Luster, both in its Latitude of Power, and extent
of Empire, that it is by a successful competition grown almost corrival with
the great Eye of the Day, the Sun, who both rises and sets in those Dominions
which are subservient to the Interest of the Spanish Scepter. And though its
Grandeur has been lately Eclipsed, and the wide circumference of its
Jurisdiction and Command has been contracted into a narrower Orb, by the
Revolt of Catalonia, because its ancient Rights were invaded by Conde Olivarez;
and the total Defection of Portugal, because its Native Franchises and
Immunities were assaulted by Vasconcelos the Secretary, and other ill Ministers
of State; yet is Catalonia by the valor and Magnanimity of John de Austria,
and the prudent Conduct of the Marquisse of Mortara, almost retriv'd and again
knit to the Spanish Patrimony; nor did the Duke of St. German and the Marquess
of Viana not long since manage and improve the increasing Hopes of the Spaniard
to less advantage in Portugal; for since the Reduction of Olivenza by the
first, and the subduing of Monzon and Salvaterra on the River of Minho by the
last, that Crown and Scepter did then seem to shake, and was feared (if not by
a timely supply supported) it might have fallen from the Head and Hand of their
own Native Sovereign, to prostrate themselves at the Feet of the Spanish
Monarch. But not long after, the Victory of Elvase did so expiate these crooked
and sinister accidents, that the Diadem of Portugal that did before look
somewhat dim, did by this Conquest and other successes of a more modern Aspect,
seem to recover its primitive luster.

Having in this short Preface limn'd out a Compendious prospect of the Spanish
Empire, I shall now take a more full and serious view of all those Limbs which
like so many Ingredients fall into the Composition of this great Body; and
first I shall consider those Provinces which lie immediately wrapped up within
the Verge of Spain. Secondly, those which like so many Excrescencies have been
annexed to this Scepter, by the collateral Designs either of Marriage or
Conquest. And thirdly, those Islands and other Dominions and Principalities
which lie scattered on the Continent either of the East or West Indies, and
which by any modern Discovery have been successfully subdued and made Captive
and Ministerial to the Power and Jurisdiction of the Spanish Diadem.

Spain was in Times of an elder Aspect styled Hesperia, from Hesperus the
Evening*star, under whose Beams and Influence it is believed to be situated;
Secondly, it fell under the Appellation of Iberia, which Name was conceived to
be borrowed from the River Iberus now called Ebro which disembogues it self
into the Mediterranean Sea, not far distant from Tortosa in Catalonia. Thirdly,
it had the Denomination of Hispania, either from Panus an Iberian Captain, o^
else from Panus a Punick word, which imports or signifies in that Dialect, a
Cony; with which Creature this Continent in elder Times was much infested. It
stretches out it self to a length of Eight hundred miles, and is again dilated
into a breadth of Five hundred and six of the same proportion, so that the
whole Circuit amounts to Two Thousand eight hundred and sixteen miles. It was
anciently distinguished into three parts or divisions, known by the Names of 1.
^arraconensis, 2. Boetica, and 3. Lusitanica; which afterward by Constantine
the Great, were broken and multiplied into seven Divisions or Provinces styl^^
1 B^tica, 2 Lusitanica, 3 Gallicia, 4 (...)haginensis, 5 ^arraconensis, 6
^ingit^^^, 7 The Province of the Isles, embracing w^^^^n its Verge and Circuit,
Ma^orc^, Minorca, Ebusa and F^umentari^.

Spain after many Contests and signal Decisions in the Field, wherein the ^ate
of this Nation was put to the bloody Umpirage of the Sword, first sto^ped and
surrendered its Neck to the Rom^n servitude, but when the Vandalls like an
^nundation swollen with success and Victory, b^oke in upon Spain and bore down
all before them, the Romans were supplanted and disseised, and being wholly
dislodged from their ancient Acquists, this Kingdom was once mo^e resigned up
as a prey to the successful Sword of Gunderious King of the abovesaid Nation.
But the same Vic^ssitude which had crushed the Romans, ^^^led in upon the
Vandals, who being in several Conflicts and encounters broken and dispersed by
the ^lla^n and Suezians, gave up their new C^nquests to be enjoyed by the
Victorious Hand of there early Invaders; but their triumphs were bl^sted, and
those Laurels and Chaplets which they expected like a happy Guerdon should have
Crowned their Victories, suddenly withered, being torn from ^^eir Temples by
the rough (...) of the Go^hs: For Athaulfus their Lead(...) Match*d with
Placidia Sister to Honori^^ (...) ^^p^rour, e^poused his Quarrel, and
b(...)tun^^e ^rup^^on made on the Spanish Re^^o^s, ^ co^^^^^ted ^he power, and
dissipated the ^^r^ngth ^f these bold ^^ttuders, that they erec^^d ^h^t Throne,
upon which they intended to fix and (...) that ^^n^rchy they aspired to in
this Nation, upon their Ruins. So that about the year 420. the Temples of
Vallia Successor to Athaulfus, were empal'd with the Diadem of Spain; yet was
it not obtained without the regret and reluctance of the Relics of those
Roman Forces who were scattered into the several Provinces of Spain, who being
wholly broken and subdued about the Year 641. the Conquest then appeared to be
wholly p^rfected, and the Scepter confirmed in the Hand of S^intilla the
second, to whose successful Managery of Affairs the Gothi^h Nation seemed first
to owe the Glory and Gran^eur of a full Establishment in their Triumphs over
this Kingdom. No^ was their such an inherent tincture of Barbar^ime in the
minds of the Goths (though I know they appeared black in elder Times for their
Ra^ure of Histories and demolishing of Records and other Monuments of
Antiquity) but the Culture of Discipline did melt and supple m^^^ into a
capacity which made them fit to (...) a nobler Complexion; for though the Laws
(...) Spain peradventure borrowed an imperfect Institution from the Romans, yet
were they mingled with the Customs of the Goths, which were after digested
into shape and Order by Euricus the first. But in procedure of Time these being
found of too general a latitude to be calculated for the Climate of every
Province, they about the Year 1296. were refined and new polished by Ferdinand
the third, that being thus attired they might be made proportionate to the
manners and temper of his Subjects, and fit for the Genius of Castile. And thus
they continued without any thing of moment or importance being added to them,
until the Year 1492. and then King Ferdinand (the Scourge of the Moors) and
Isabella his Queen Ordained and decreed by a Statute enacted at Corduba, that
all Gentlemen of those Signories and Lordships which were Subject to the Crowns
of Castile and Aragon, were obliged to appear and exhibit a just proof and
Testimony of their Pedigrees and Nobility; which Law, because it received its
first Birth and Institution there, has ever since obtained the Appellation of
the Law or Statute of Corduba. But I have digressed, I now return, and shall
discover a compendious Series of the Gothish Kings of Spain, as I find their
Names Recorded upon their ancient Coins, from whence their Catalogue has been
drawn, and exactly Registered by the Industrious Pen of Augustinus Bishop of
Tarragona, in his learned Discourse of Ancient Coins.

369. Athanarick joined with Fridigerne reigned 13 years. 382. Alarick united
with Radagaise governed 28 years. 411. Athaulfus ruled 6 years. 416. Segeric,
who being suddenly after his being invested with the Crown destroyed by a
traitorous Combination of his own Subjects, upon his Decease one Vualia
ascended the Throne and managed the Scepter 3 years, as Vulsa and Isidore
testify, and not twelve years as Sigebert asserts. 419. The^deredus governed
33 years. 452. Turismund held the Scepter but one year according as I^idore
avers, and not three as Jornandes and Sigebert record. 453. Theuderick and not
Theodorick ruled 13. years. 466. Euricus wore the Gothish Crown 17. years. 483.
Alaricus the Second ruled 23 years. 506. Gesaleicus and in other records styled
Gesalicus and Gesalaricus reigned four years. 511. Theudericus the Second was
invested with the Diadem 15 years. 526. Amalaricus swayed the Scepter 5 years.
531. Theudis, and in History sometime written Theudes and Theudius, governed 17
years. 548. Theudiseulus sat on the Throne one year and five months. 549.
Agila, and in other Monuments of Antiquity styled Aquila, sat five years and
three months. 554. Athanagildus governed 15 years. 567. Liwa, and not Liuba or
Luiba as some Historians falsely intimate, ruled one year. 568. Leovigildus, so
his name is exhibited on his Coins, and not Leovegildus or Liuvigildus as some
Historians represent, reigned 18 years. 586. Reccaredus weilded the Scepter.
601. Liwa the second governed two years. 603. Wittericus or Wittricus, not
Victericus as some Records insinuate, sustained the Scepter six years. 610.
Gundemar not Gundimar reigned two years. 612. Sisebutus managed the government
8 years and 6 months. 621. Reccaredus the second ruled but some few days. 621.
Suintilla not Scintilla or Cintila swayed the Scepter Ten years. 631.
Sisenandus and not Sisnandus as Histories misrepresent his name, governed 3
years. 636. Suintilla the second reigned 3 years. 640. Tulca not Tulcas
governed two years. 642. Chindassuintus, not Cindasiundus or Ghindasuintus, as
his name is falsely registered in some Annalls, ruled 6. years and odd months.
649. Reccesuinthus not Reccesiundus, for under that notion Antiquaries have
registered him, supported the Diadem 23 years. 672. Wamba not Bamba as his name
is placed in ordinary Registers, managed the Government eight years. 680.
Erigius, erroneously sometimes written Eringius, continued placed on the Throne
six years. 687. Egica falsely styled Egipsa weilded the Scepter of the Goths 15
years. 701. Witiza and not Vitiza, as his Name is enrolled in some Chronicles,
reigned in a joint Combination of Government with his Father five years, and
five years he swayed the Scepter alone. 711. Rudericus, so his Name is
inscribed on his Coins, and not Rodericus, as it is registered in the Spanish
Annalls, governed one year, and then having by an injurious and violent Rape
polluted and debauched the Honor of Cana Daughter to Count Julian an eminent
Nobleman of Spain, he to assoil his Name and Family from that Stain which this
ignominious Affront had spread over it, invited the Moors of Africa, under the
Conduct of Musa, to expiate the former violence, who indeed executed the
Vengeance designed by him for Roderick so solemnly, that in a signal Battle
commenced at Xeres de la Frontera in Andalusia, the Fortune of Spain was
entombed in the Carnage of that Field, and Roderick abandoned both Crown and
Kingdom to the prevailing Sword of the Moors; and Musa being supported and
reinforced by new Supplies, by frequent successes, forced almost all Spain to
bow to a universal Conquest, whilst the scattered Relics of the pale and
amazed Goths immured themselves in the inaccessable Retreats of Asturia or
Leon, from whence Garcia Ximenes a Nobleman, extracted from the Royal Gothish
Blood, about the year 713. or as others assert about the year 716. descended
with 600 men, and after diverse successeful encounters with the Moors, gave a
Beginning to the little Kingdom of Suprarba locked up within the Pyrenean
Hills, which sometimes after dilated it self, and spread into the Valleys,
which from hence assumed the Name of Navarra, or Navierras, which in Spanish
imports as much as plain grounds: And of this Kingdom I shall now render an
Account.
NAVARRE.
NAVARRE is circumscribed on the East with the principality of Berne in the
Kingdom of France; on the West with the River Ebr^ or Iberus; on the North
with the Cantabrian Mountains, and on the South with the River Aragon which
seperates it from that Kingdom.

The ancient Inhabitants were the Vascones, invested not only in the possession
of this Track, but of Biscay and Guipusc^a also. It was ravished away from
these by the Romans, who were expulsed by the Goths, and they again were
disseised of the tenure of this Province by the invading Moors, who finally
were dislodged from their new Acquists by the Magnanimity of Garcia Ximenes
abovementioned; whose Successor Ximenes Garcia dying without Issue, after an
Interregnum of four years, Inigo Arista Son of Simon Earl of Bigorre, was
advanced by Election to the Royal Dignity of Navarre as the next Heir in the
Collateral Line to Ximenes Garcia abovesaid; and he was Ancestor to Sancho the
fourth, who in respect that he was possessed by Descent of Navarre and Aragon, of
Castile in Right of his Wife Donna Nugna or Elvira Sister and Heir of Sancho
the last Earl thereof, and of Leon by Conquest, incorporated into his style the
Title of Great; and he upon his Decease bequeathed the Kingdom of Navarre to
his eldest Son Garcia, whose Son Sancho the fifth was unnaturally assassinated
by his younger Brother Raymir; after whose Tragical Exit, and the brief
interposition of this bloody Intruder who had bespattered the Throne of Navarre
with such a purple Effusion, this Diadem was plucked from his Temples by Sancho
Ramires, to invest his own; after whom, Pedro and Alfonso Kings of Aragon
likewise did severally and Successively weild the Scepter, and manage the
Government of Navarre: But this Alfonso dying without Issue, and his Brother
Raymir a Monk unclouding his Head of his Cowle to adorn it with the Crown of
Aragon, the Sovereignty of Navarre was vested in Garcia Raymir Grandchild of
Garcia de Nagera, and Son of Raymir the Usurper abovementioned; so that the
Right of this Descent so fortified his Title, that he ascended the Throne of
Navarre as the direct Heir of that Kingdom, from whom the transmission of
Descent transported it to his Grandchild Sancho the eighth, in whom the Male
Line of Garcia Ximines was wound up in a Conclusion; for he going out without
Issue, Theobald Earl of Champaigne Son of Blanch his Sister and Heir, was
entitled in Right of this Descent to the Diadem of Navarre; and from the Thread
of Succession wafted this Dignity to his Grandchild Henry, who determining in
Joan his sole Daughter and Heir, she by Matching with Philip the Fair King of
France, by this new Alliance inoculated the the Scepter of Navarre on that of
France, and in the Hands of his Posterity it flourished during the Government
of Lewis Hutin, Philip the Long and Charles the Fair, Kings of France and of
Navarre his Lineal Successors; but Charles the last of these, expiring without
Issue, Jane Daughter of Lewis Hutin, as Heir General of this Charles, was
invested in the Possession of this Kingdom; and in her Right, Philip Earl of
Eureux her Husband stepped into the Throne of Navarre; and from these two did
the Diadem of this Province devolve by Successive transmission to his
Grandchild Charles the third King of Navarre, in whom the Male Line
determining, the Distaff prevailed against the Spear, for Blanch his Daughter
annexed this Kingdom to the Patrimony of her Husband John King of Aragon, who
likewise found his Name wrapped up, as to this particular Match, in two
Daughters and Coheirs; one of whom styled Leonora, by espousing Gaston de Foix,
gave up the Roialty, Possession and Crown of this Kingdom to empale the Brow
of this Earl her Husband; and from these two the Sovereignty was conducted down
by successive Delegation to their Grandchild Francis Phoebus, who deceasing
without Issue, the Crown and Dignity of Navarre came to embellish the Head of
Catharine his Sister and Heir, and she being espoused to John d'Albret of
Gascony, descended from Amani d'Albret; which Amani (in the Government of
Charles the fifth King of France, was wedded to Margaret of Bourbon, Sister to
Jane Queen of France, and by that Alliance very much improved the splendour of
his House) linked the Kingdom of Navarre to his Patrimony; and from these two
descended Henry their Son and Heir, who was King of Navarre, and Matched with
Margaret Sister of Francis the first, King of France, by whom he had Issue Jane
the sole Inheritrix of Navarre, who by espousing Anthony of Bourbon, entitled
him to the Crown and Scepter of Navarre; and she was Mother of Henry the
fourth, Grandmother of Lewis the thirteenth, and Great-grandmother of the
instant Lewis the fourteenth, successively Kings of France, who by Authority of
this Alliance, have ever since inserted and interwoven the Title of King of
Navarre amongst their Style and Inscriptions. But alas! this is only a barren,
naked and empty Title, for the actual Possession of the Crown, which should
give support and vital Energie to it, was long since torn away by Ferdinand
the Catholic King of Aragon and Castile; the occasion which ministered
materials to that Foundation on which that Detention was established, was this:
About the Year 1510. Lewis the twelfth having by a signal Victory over the
Venetian at Aignadel humbled that People, much retrenched their Power, and
infused a Terror into all the Princes of Italy, fell into contention with Pope
Julius the second, and their mutual Animosities were enhans'd with that
Acrimonie and Spleen, that the Quarrel was prosecuted almost to a Scihsme; for
Julius blasted all the Partisans of Lewis with an Excomunication, and put their
Estates under Interdict, in the Register of whom was John d'Albret King of
Navarre, who was disseised of his Crown and Scepter by Ferdinand above
mentioned; for this Ferdinand varnishing his Design of ravishing this Kingdom
away from the House of D'Albret, with a pretense and show of passing into
Guinne, to combine and unite his Forces with the Confederate Invading English,
by Virtue and Authority of the Papal Interdict to seize and subdue the Crown of
France, suddenly retriv'd his Army, and like a Tempest, dropped on the Kingdom
of Navarre; and by Conquest about the Year 1512. supplanted and expelled John
d'Albret above mentioned; upon this pretense, that he was entwined and linked
in Confederacy with Lewis the twelfth, who was a Rebel against the Church, and
an avowed Enemy to the English, with whom he was wrapped up in mutual Alliance;
and more to fortify this pretense, he asserted, that there was an ancient
Compact or stipulation between the Kings of Spain, by which they did Covenant
and Indent with each other, not to suffer or permit that any of the Spanish
Crowns should fall into Foreign Hands, or under the Power and Seignory of
Houses not Sovereign, as those of Foix and Albret were, and who likewise by a
kind of Servile Coherence and Connection had their Dependence on the Crown of
France: And though in Ages subsequent to this, the French have protested
against this Invasion and Forcibl^ ^ntry, and have likewise endeavored to
vindicate their Interest by the more powerful Argument of the Sword; yet has
it ever since been so firmly linked to the Spanish Patrimony, that it still
obeys the Scepter, and confesses the Dominion of Philip the Fourth, King of
Spain.

CASTILE.
CASTILE is bounded on the East with Navarre, Aragon, and part of Valentia; on
the West with Portugal; on the North with Biscay and Guipuscoa and Asturia; on
the South with Estremadura, Andalusia and Granada. It is divided into the Old
and New Castile; the first of which assumed that Appellation, because it was
the ancient Patrimony of the first Earls thereof: The other has borrowed the
Distinction of the New, because it was incorporated into the Old Demeasne when
the successful Conquests of the Castilians had rent it from the Moors. The
ancient Inhabitants of these two Provinces were, the Vaccai, Ventones,
Arevacae, Oretani, Dittani and the Carpentani, whose Chief City was named
Castulo, now shrunk into an obscure Village, hav^^g its ancient Glory entombed
in neglected Rubbish, from whence some Conjectures have asserted, that the Name
of Castile was imposed on this Province. But all these Inhabitants having been
much harrassed by the frequent Incursions of the Romans, not able to stand the
shock of so powerful an Opposition, fell under their Conquests, and became a
part of the Roman Empire; from which again they were rent off by the Alani, who
again were disseised of their violently extorted purchase by the Intrusion of
the Goths, who being overwhelmed by the Moors, who like an ^nnundation not
cloistered up within the shore and channel of any Restraint, bore down all
before them, for some distance of Time gave way to the Torrent; but not long
after, their spirits, which before seemed to have been sunk, buoyed up again,
and by the Assistance of the Kings of Leon, so resolutely vindicated their own
Interest, that they disengaged themselves wholly of that yoke of Moorish
servitude, that with an uneasy Load had so crushed their shoulders; and the
better for the ^uture to secure themselves from the Eruptions of the Moors,
resigned themselves up to the dominion and protection of the Kings of Leon, who
managed this Province at first by Provincial Earls; but they having made ill
use of that power they had entrusted them with, by making too frequent Inroads
upon the peoples Liberties, were by the instigation and influence of one
Ordogno, who much fomented this Defection, barbarously assassinated by the
impetuous Multitude; having thus thrown off all Obedience to the Scepter of
Leon, they were afterward Governed by Judges; and secondly, by Earls, as an
absolute and Independent Estate, chained by no subserviency to any Foreign
Diadem; but still this did not so supersede the Claim of the Kings of Leon, but
that they often endeavored by the power of the Sword to assert their Title,
until Sancho King of Leon being engaged in a Debt to Ferdinand Gonzales, ^e to
absolve himself From this Obligation, quitted and released* all pretense and
Claim to the Earldom of Castile, so that Ferdinand Gonzales from this signal
Investiture is looked upon in the Spanish Annalls as the first Proprietary Earl
of Castile; and from him it came down to his Great Grandchild Garcias the
second, who being treasonably assassinated, and concluding without Issue,
Sancho the Great, King of Navarre, in Right of his Wife Elvira Sister and sole
Heir to this Garcias, entered upon it and linked it to his Revenue; and upon his
Decease settled by particular Donation on his Son Ferdinand; and more to
enhaunse the glory of this Grant, annexed the Title of King to this Concession;
and from him did the Crowns of Castile and Leon by the Devolution of many
Descents come to empale the Temples of Sancho the third, second Son of Alfonso
the fifth, King of Castile and Leon; who by the Revolution of humane Affairs,
having the Fate to survive his elder Brother Ferdinand de la Cerd^, contrived
so many Stratagems in his Fathers Life Time, which Artifices of his were so
closely combined and knit together in the Contrivance and Contexture of them,
that by Aid of these, and the concurrent support of a prevalent Faction
beside, he extorted the Scepter of Castile and Leon from the Heits of his Elder
Brother, though many Attempts were made to retrive the Diadem thus placed on
the Head of Sancho, which being by the prudence of Sancho broken and
disappointed, Alfonso Son of Ferdinand, retreated for shelter into France,
where he Matched, and had Issue Lewis Earl of Clermont, which Lewis, by Leonora
de Guzman, extracted from the House of Medina Sidonia, had Issue Lewis and
John, both which were extinguished without Issue, and Isabella de la Cerda, who
by matching with Bernard, a Natural Son of the House of Foix; and so all the
Right of that Family which was concentered in her, was now lodged on him; which
Bernard, King Henry the second, (the more by some solemn Obligations to endear
and fasten to himself) adorned with the Title of Earl of Medin^ C^li; and his
Son Gasto^, the better to enforce and propagate the memory of the Nobleness of
his Antiquity and Extraction, discarded the Name of Foix, to embrace that of De
la Cerda; which has ever since been transmitted with the Title bestowed on
Lewis, Grandchild to this Gaston, and to his Posterity, though there has not
wanted a successive regret and murmur in this Family, to be thus excluded from
the Spanish Diadem. It is customary for this House, at the Coronation of the
Kings of Spain, to put up a Petition to the Prince, wherein they exhibit their
Claim to the Spanish Scepter, that at the least, upon the Defailance of this
Family now Reigning, the stream of Sovereignty might flow back into this House;
to which demand the King subscribes this Answer, Despois Nos Vo^, After Us,
You: And sometimes, No est lover, There is no place for him. Thus have I in a
compendious Prospect represented the Fate which attended on the Stock and
Lineage of Ferdinand de la Cerda: I shall now trace out what Vicissitudes
waited on Sancho the third, from whom the Scepter of Castile and Leon (by the
unbroken Thread of Succession) came to be swayed by the Hand of his Grandchild
Pedro the Cruel; who was expulsed out of the possession of his kingdoms by the
procurement and influence of his natural Brother Henry Earl of Transtamare,
because of that havoc and ravage his savage Executions had acted both on the
Nobility and Populacy; who after the discarding and Renunciation of him, was by
the Favor of the People advanced to the Crown of Castile and Leon; but his Son
John the first, finding that his Title was established but upon a crazie
Foundation, unless there were some more powerful Buttresses to sustain, more
to fortify his claim, matched his Son and Heir Prince Henry to Catharine
Daughter to John of Gaunt by Constance one of the Daughters of Pedro the Cruel,
and so twisted the two differing Titles into one; and from him did the Diadem
devolve to his Great Grandchild Henry the fourth, who going out without Issue
Male, Isabell his Sister and sole Inheritrix, being Wedded to Ferdinand Son to
John King of Aragon, incorporated it with the Patrimony of his Crown and
Scepter; but both these Princes dying without Issue Male, Jo^n their only
surviving Princess of Castile, Leon, Granad^, etc. and of Aragon, Navarre,
Sicily, Naples, etc. by espousing Phillip Archduke of Austria, and Lord of
Belgium, fastened these vast Territories into one Body; the Ciment which knits
them together has been in subsequent Ages so closely united by the combination
of many reciprocal Leagues and Marriages, that they are still the Demeasne of
the Austrian Family; and particularly, the Scepter of this Kingdom is lodged
in the Hands of Phillip the fourth, now Monarch of Spain.

PORTUGAL.
PORTUGAL is bounded on the North with the Rivers Minio and Avia, which
separate it from Gallicia; on the South, with Algarue; on the West, with the
Atlantic Ocean; on the East, with the two Castiles, and Estremadura.

The ancient Inhabitants were the Lusitani; and from them the Name of Lusitania
was imposed upon it; but though these were the principal, yet the Celtici and
Turditani, who dwelt on the South Side of Tagus, and the Gallaici Braccarii (so
styled from the Gallaici Lucenses, who were Proprietaries of Gallicia) and who
inhabited on the North of Duero, were entitled to a considerable part of the
possession of it.

It was at first by the successful Sword of the Romans made Subject to their
Empire, but when their Power began to sink under the Impressions of those
barbarous Nations who had so fatally assaulted them, this was extorted from
their Jurisdiction by the Alani; but continued not long twisted into their
Acquists, for the Suevians breaking in upon them, supplanted the Contexture of
their newly obtained Conquests, and forced them to dislodge, and tamely to
surrender their Interest here to them; but a usurped Right can have no solid
Foundation to establish itself upon, for not long after, these new Invaders
were cast out from their new encroachments by the prosperous Attempts of the
Goths; but they again sunk in ths Ruins of Spain, (particular Lamentations are
not distinguishable in universal Groans) when the Moorish Invaders by a
public Conquest made the Liberty of Spain stoop to their Commands and
Success, and after it had for some Ages groaned under those Fetters they
imposed upon it, it was rescued from its servitude by the noble Conduct of
Henny of Lorrain, to whom (as a just Recompense of his Virtue and exemplary
Services) Alsonso the sixth, King of Leon, espoused his base Daughter Teresa,
and with her, to improve her Fortune, transmitted that part of Portugal which
he and his Ancestors had by some auspicious Conquests rent from the Moors; and
and to make his Bounty more conspicuous, he Invested him with the Title of
Earl; from whom it came by Descent to his Son Alfonso, who by the Sovereigns of
Leon, was as Guerdon to poize both his Valor and his Virtue, and that
testimony of an excellent Courage he exhibited at the Battle of Obriqu^, Anno
1139. he Governed as Earl and King seventy two years, and managed his Scepter
with that Art and Prudence, that at his Decease he made his Exit with the Fear
and Reverence of his Enemies, and the Adoration of his Friends. And from him
did the Diadem of this Kingdom descend to Alfonso the Wise, who by a successful
Conquest enlarged the Dominions of Portugal, and wrung the Kingdom of Algarue
from the Moors of Morocco, who had before supplanted the Moors of Sevill, and
so broke the Power of Aben Mefad, one of the most Puissant Princes of this
Track, that most of the Towns and petty Governors became by a subordinate
Vassalage subject to the Scepter of Portugal; and having thus entwined the
Right of these two Provinces, he transmitted them to his Grandchild Pedro, who
left Issue Ferdinand the first, in whom the Male Line of Hen. of Lorrain
determined, so that the Right both of Portugal and Algarue was concentered in
Beatrix his Daughter; who was disseised of her Title to the Crown by her Uncle
John, Natural Son to Pedro above mentioned; who having thus dislodged her from
the Throne, by ill Arts and dark Stratagems, disdaining to be tired down by any
bordering Title by an unlawful Disherision, di^carded and cast out the
remaining Lawful Issue of his Father Pedro; and having thus by these crooked
Designs grasped the Scepter, and empa^'d his Temples with the Diadem of
Portugal and Algarue, he to fortify and support his unjust pretensions,
Matched with Phillippa Daughter to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, with whom
so many noble English Families entered Portugal, that most of the Eminent
Houses of this Nation spin out their Extraction from them at this Day. And this
John the first, had by this Alliance Alfonso the fifth, and John the second,
successively Kings; who both Deceasing without any Issue surviving, Emanuel Son
to Ferdinand Duke of Vis^o, third Brother to these two Monarchs, ascended the
Throne of Portugal; and from him it descended to his Grandchild John the
fourth; who upon his Decease left it to be enjoyed by his Son and Heir Don
Sebastian, who being unhappily slain in the Fatal Battle of Alcasar, which
stained the Feilds of Africa wi^h so much Blood, Henry third Brother to King
John above mentioned, and Uncl^ to this Sebastian, put off his Cardinals Hat to
adorn his Head with the Diadem of Portugal; but he being Aged and Impotent,
his Hand was too we^k to Manage or sustain a Burden of that importance (as the
Royal Scepter) long, so that being assaulted with Cares, and over-laid with
Years, after some short Time of his assuming the Crown, shrunk into Ashes, and
paid that Debt we all owe; upon his Decease, several pretended a Title to this
Diadem; Lewis second Brother to King John above mentioned, died without any
Lawful Issue, but left Antonio, Christopher and others begot in unlawful
embraces; Antonio fixed his Claim upon a pretended Act of Legitimation from the
Estates of Portugal, but there were Titles which appeared more specious and
plausible which stav'd his off; for Edward the fourth Brother to King John,
though he concluded without Issue Male, yet he left two Daughters and Coheirs,
Mary wedded to Alexander Duke of Parma, and Catharine Matched to John Duke of
Braganza; and the two Aunts of the Deceased Sebastian, namely, Mary was
espoused to Charles the fifth, and Beatrix was married to Charles Duke of
Savoy; from both which Alliances there proceeded Issue, so that now the
Controversy was, whether after the Decease of Cardinal Henry, a Brothers
Daughter, or a Sisters Son had the more fixed and established Pretense to the
Crown and Scepter of Portugal; and when this Question was begun to be winnowed
by the Civil Lawyers, the Duke of Alva to endear himself to his Prince, who
was Phillip the second, King of Spain, and Son to Charles the fifth and Mary
above mentioned; and to assoile himself from that Stain his stupendous
Massacres in the Netherlands had contracted, persuaded his Master to cast his
Claim upon no other Debate, but the Umpirage of the Sword; and this counsel
had so great an Operation upon him, that he employed this Duke, and a puissant
Army under his Conduct to assert his Title to the Diadem of Portugal; the
Effects of which Invasion were so visible, that after some Trivial Opposition
made by the Portuguees, who were broken and split into Division and Faction,
the whole Kingdom stooped and resigned it self up (with a Restriction to havs
its original Franchises preserved and supported) to the Dominion and Scepter of
Phillip the Second; and under the command of his Successors it continued until
the year 1640. and then by the Arts and dark Engines of Cardinal Rich^lieu, the
Negligence and Supine inadvertency of Conde d'Olivarez, and the ill managery of
Affairs in Portugal it self by the King of Spain's Ministers, that Kingdom
was torn off by a total Defection from the Crown of Spain, and the Scepter
placed in the Hand of John Duke of Braganza, who was with the public Applause
of the people acknowledged for King, by the Name of John the Fifth; and upon
his late Decease this Kingdom is come to confess Alfonso his Son just Heir to
his Dominion and Scepter.

Leon and Oviedo.
THe Kingdom of Leon and Oviedo is bounded on the East with Biscay, on the
North with the Main Cantabrian Ocean, on the South with Castile, on the North
with Galicia. The ancient Inhabitants were the Astures, from whence the name of
Asturia was imposed upon it; and were divided into the two general names of the
Augustani and Transmo^tani, in which the particular Tribes of the Pesici,
Gigari, Zoelae and Lanci^^s^s were involved and circumscribed.

It is divided into two parts, Asturia de Oviedo confining on Galicia toward
the West, and Asturia Santillana approaching Biscay toward the East. From
which Divisions thus approportioned, the eldest Son of the Monarch of Spain is
styled Prince of the Asturias, which Denomination some probably conjecture was
derived from this Foundation, that this Country was the first that like a Dam
stopped the Current of the Moorish Fury, which before like an impetuous
Inundation carried down all before it, though other Spanish Writers of
Authentic credit, refer the rise and original of this Appellation to that time
which was cotemporary to the Match of Catharine Daughter to John of G^^nt, and
in Right of her Mother Constance the indisputable Heir of Castile, unto Henry
Son of John the first, then planted in the possession of the Kingdom of
Castile, it being then assented to more to improve the Honor of this married
pair, that as the Heir apparent of England is styled the Prince of Wales, so
the eldest Son of Castile should be named Prince of the Asturias.

It was first conquered by the Romans, and by Augustus Caesar made parcel of
the Province Tarraco^ensis, and part afterward of the Province of Gallicia by
the Emperor Constantine; torn it was from the Roman dominion by the conquest of
the Goths; and from them again it was extorted by the invading Moors, though
they were not long after supplanted. For as the Lust of Roderick, excited the
injured Count Julian to call in the Moors, so the intempered and disordered
Lust of Magnutza a Moorish Viceroy, engaged him to ravish the Sister of Prince
Pelagius, whilst he had embarked the said Prince in an Embassy to Musa the
Moorish General, who being a person of noble pretensions and daring Hopes, at
his return to expiate this Dishonor and Infamy with which his Family was
bespattered, to assoil this Stain, he gave up the life of this Viceroy as an
Oblation offered up to the Justice of his Sword, and the Price of so great an
Insolence and Lust; Despairing of pardon for this Act, he flew to defensive
Arms, as his noblest Sanctuary, and fortified himself in the most inaccessable
Retreats of this Country, to which many of the old inhabitants resorted, and
having prospered under his Command, elected him for King, by the Name of King
of the Asturias, though after he had reduced the City of Leon, he assumed the
Title of King o^ Leon, and left it to his Son Fasila; who dying without Issue
it devolved to Alfonso, for his piety surnamed the Catholic, who had wedded
Ormisind his Sister; and he had Issue Froilla the Repairer of Oviedo, Aur^lius
and Odesin matched to Sillo, who after the Decease of the two others was King
of Leon, after whose Exit the Crown of Leon was unjustly usurped by Mauregate
natural Son to Alfonso; in which violent detention he was supported by Aderamen
King of the Moors, who was obliged to this supply by an infamous stipulation
transacted and made between him and the said Mauregate; by which this Usurper
was engaged to pay him, as an annual Cense or Tribute, fifty Virgins collected
out of the Families of the most eminent and noblest Estimate in this Region;
but after his Decease the Crown of Leon returns to invest the Temples of
Veramund, Son to Froilla abovementioned; and from him the Clew of Descent
guided it down to his great Grandchild Alfonso the Third, who not only with
Contempt and Scorn disdained to pay the ignominious Tribute of Virgins
abovesaid, but in so many signal contests and encounters retrenched the power
of the Moors, that he justly merited the Title of Alfonso the Great; and he
left Issue Garcia, who deceasing without Children, the Crown and Scepter of
Leon devolved to his second Brother Ordogno who was King of Gallicia; and from
him the Inheritance by many Generations flowed down to his Successor Veramund
the Third, who engaging in an unsuccesseful War with Ferdinand King of Castile,
was by him in a prosperous Conflict discomfited and slain; upon whose Tragedy
the Scepter of Leon was seized on by this Ferdinand, as having matched with
Sanctia Sister and Heir to Veramund; and he left the Crown of Leon to Alfonso
his youngest Son, and that of Castile to Sanctius his eldest; which Sanctius
dying without Issue both Scepters devolved to be grasped by Alfonso, from whom
the Efflux of Descent cast them into the possession of his Daughter ^rraca
Queen of Leon and Castile, and she had two husbands Raymond of Burgundy, and
Alfonso the Seventh King of Arrag^n and Navarre; by the Raymond she had issue
Alfonso the Eighth, who succeeded in the Realms of Leon and Castile; and he had
issue Sancho the Second, on whom he settled the Kingdom of Castile, and
Ferdinand the Second, on whom he enstated the Realm of Leon; and from him it
went along to Alfonso the Ninth of Leon, who (more to twist the complicated
Interest of these two Diadems) espoused with Berengaria Sister of Henry King of
Castile, from which Alliance descended Ferdinand the Third King of Leon, who by
the Arts and Designs of his Mother Berengaria, was advanced to the Sovereignty
of Castile, to the prejudice of Blanch her eldest Sister, matched to Lewis King
of France. And thus the Crowns becoming once more united, they were never since
dissever'd, though the Title by the violent Assaults of Sancho second son of
Alfonso the fifth, was distorted and planted in his Family, to the injury and
apparent disherison of the Children of Ferdinand de la Cerda. Of which
discomposure I shall discover more when I come to treat of Castile.

Biscay and Guipuscoa.
BIscay is bounded on the West with Leon, on the East with the Pyrenean
Mountains and Guienne, on the North it confines on the Cantabrian Ocean, and on
the South with Navarre and Old Castile.

The ancient Inhabitants of this Province were the Cantabri, subdivided again
into the several Tribes of the Mar^ogi, Caristi, Antrigones, Varduli, and the
Cantabri properly so called, a people as eminent for their Antiquity as they
were for their Valor and Conduct, which they exemplified in many solemn
Contests with those Adversaries of theirs that endeavored either to retrench or
else absolutely to subvert their Liberties; nor lost they any thing by their
intermixture with the Vascones, who came out of Navarre and settled amongst
them, but rather improved their courage by this union, so that notwithstanding
the frequent Impressions and Onsets made upon them by the Romans,
Carthaginians, Goths, and Moors, they remained as in their Liberties not
vanquished so in their Language unaltered, the Reasons of which eminent Courage
of theirs may be assigned to be these: First, their Habitations being amongst
the craggy and inaccessable Retreats of inexpugnable Mountains, those natural
Bulwarks cast up at Gods own charges, might make them more confident and
daring; and secondly, the purity of their native Air, might so fan and winnow
their Spirits from those Dregs and compacted humors, which thicker fumes and
grosser exhalatious frequently amass together, might possibly render them more
active and vigorous. This has made them so impatient of servitude, and not
easily yiedling a tame Compliance to any thing they resent with dislike and
regret, so that this scale of privileges still fortifies their Liberties.
First, Though they give obedience to their Prince with their Bodies, they deny
him the service of their Purses; being exempt from all Tallages and
Impositions, for when ever the King of Spain approaches their Borders, he is
accosted in his progress by the Noblesse of the Country, near the Borders, and
there they present him with some small pieces of Brass, called Maravedies,
treasured in a Lethern Bag appendant to the End of a Lance, which he is
obliged not to take; which refusal (as they conceive of his,) does enwrap a
Tacit Symboll of a Confirmation of their Immunity from Taxes. Secondly, at all
their public Assemblies, the Women first taste of the Cup, which custom has
grown by tacit Consent into use, and has been made hoary and reverend by a
prescription of many years, ever since Ogne Countess of Castile attempted to
destroy the Life of her Son, by a Cup of Wine fatally mingled with poison.
Thirdly, they admit no Bishops; which averseness to that Order, peradventure
had its Rise and Growth from some antecedent pressure imposed upon them by that
Order, as our modern Sectaries from some personal Defects they beheld in the
English Protestant Bishops, did arrive at that height of Animosity as to
abrogate their Function; as if this were an equitable piece of Logic, because
there is an Error in the Seed therefore consequently there must be one in the
Soil, not considering that these Biscainers by the want of Bishops and
Episcopal Visitations have fallen into that ignorance, rudeness, and excess,
which like a Cimmerian Mist dwells yet about them. Fourthly, they allow or give
license to no Priest to officiate amongst them unless he bring his Concubine
with him, to appease his desires; affirming it impossible to preserve their
Wives chaste and unmixed from the embraces of the Incumbent, if he has not a
woman with may allay the wilder flames of Concupiscence. But to proceed, though
the ancient Inhabitants were so martial and vigorous, yet the frequent Assaults
of the Romans so wasted their strength, that though they were not wholly
subdued, yet they were forced to resign themselves with some Salvo or Provision
which had a Reflection on their Liberties, to the Command of Augustus. Under
the Romans they continued until that Empire shrunk into its own Ruins, and
then not brought under Servitude by the Goths, but surrendered to them with the
Residue of Biscay. And this indeed may be added to their glory, that they were
the last Province of Spain which offered themselves up to the successeful Fury
of the Moors (excepting the Asturias never part of their Triumphs) and the
first which disengaged their Necks of that yoke of Conquest the Moors had
loaded them with, animated in that design by Soria, who so managed and improved
their increasing Hopes, with Conquests and augmentation of Territory, that
about the year 870. he undertook the Command of Lord of Biscay, and from him
did the Title and Estate by the steps of several descents pass down to his
Successor Lopez Diaz the third, the first who assumed to himself the Surname of
Haro, borrowed from a Town of that name of that Foundation; and from him did it
descend to his Successor Nugno de Lara, who determined without Issue; so that
his two Sisters and Coheirs, Jean and Isabel were entitled to his
Inheritance; but were defrauded of the Possession by the forcible Intrusion of
Pedro King of Castile; Ferdinand the younger Son of Ferdinand de la Cerda King
of Castile, Matched with Jean Nugna the Edest of these two Sisters; and from
this Conjunction Issued Jean Manuell espoused to Henry the second, King of
Castile likewise; and he had Issue John who was invested also with the
Diadem of that Kingdom, and he in Right of his Mother was planted in the
Propriety of Biscay; and from him did it devolve to his Successor Henry the
fourth, King of ^^^tile, who dying without Issue, it came to confess the
Title of his Sister and Heir Isabella; who by Matching with Ferdinand King of
Aragon, placed the Propriety of it amongst those Flovvers which adorned his
Diadem, where it has been so permanent and fixed, that though several
Revolutions have intervened in this Family, yet still it acknovvledges it self
to be an Appendage to the Crown and Scepter of Philip the fourth, now King of
Spain.

GUIPUSCOA.
AS for the Fortunes of Guipuscoa, they had this Aspect as they stood in their
posture toward the Rest of Spain. First, the Vascones, then the Cantabri,
subdivided into the Marbogi, Caristi, and other petty Colonies abovementioned,
enjoyed the Possession of this Track, and for sometime were disseised of the
Propriety of it by the Invading Romans; but having vindicat^^ their Interest
from their Encroachments, they were at last forced to bow to the Dominion of
the Goths; and from them was it torn by the Moors; and being again rescued
from their Slavery by the Kings of Navarre, it was linked to that Kingdom, and
remained a Member of that Crown, until it was wrung from Sancho the sixth King
of Navarre, by Alfonso the first King of Castile, about the Year 1079. by whom
it was entrusted to the Managery and Sway of Lopez Diez de Haro Lord of Biscay.
But after the Decursion of some Time, it was again upon following
Capitulations, surrendered to the Kings o^ Navarre, to whose Scepter it
continued fastened until the Year 1200. when the People of Guipuscoa having by
a just and equal Resentment tasted of both Governments, and rellishing that of
Castile better than that of Aragon, they by a voluntary Resignation bowed their
Heads to the Command of Alfonsus the fourth, King of Castile, who without the
least Decision of the Sword received this Country into a full Subjection, and
left it thus settled and confirmed to his Successor^ the Kings of Spain, in
whose Demeasne and Revenue the Seignory of it is yet constantly treasured up.

GALLICIA.
GALLICIA or Gallaecia, is bounded on the East with Leon, on the South with
Portugal, from which it is separated by the River Minio, on the North with the
Cantabrian Ocean, and on the West with the Atlantic. The Ancient Inhabitants
were the Gallaeci, whence it assumed its Name, broken into the several Tribes
of the B^dyi, Su^ri, Cilini, Capori, and Lemavi.

It was one of the last Provinces which resigned themselves up to the Power of
the Romans; encouraged to this Noble Defense and asserting of their Liberties
by that Chain of Cantabrian Mountains, with which this Country is almost
interlaced; out of which Consideration it was selected as a Refuge or Sanctuary
by those afflicted Christians who groaned under the Conquest of the Moors.

It was in Times of an Elder Inscription a Limb of Hispania Tarraconensis;
after it swelled it self into the Estimate of a Province, and had the Name of
Gallicia imposed upon it, being augmented with the Asturia's, and some part of
Portugal, and the Old Castile. In the Eclipse of the Roman Power, the Suevi, a
warlike Nation of Germany (accompanying the Vandals and Alani in their
Eruptions) invaded Spain, and achieved the Conquest of this Province. But not
satisfied with their new Acquists, they assaulted the Silings, a Collateral
Tribe of the Vandalls, then invested in the Possession of Boetica; whom they
subdued, and by a successful Province extorted that Province from them,
animated to this Conquest by the presence of Richila their second King. They
not long after improved their Victories by the Addition of Lusitania; but their
farther progress was intercepted by Theodorick the second, King of the Goths,
by whom they were discomsited and shut up within the Recesses of Gallicia;
which they enjoyed until their final Suppression and Subversion by L^u^igild
King of the Goths, about the Year 858. and then this Province was linked to the
Gothish Scepter. In Times subsequent to this, it was incorporated into the
Kingdom of Leon, being Conqueted by retaile and in pieces from the Intruding
Moors by the Kings of that Province. It was first erected into a Kingdom by
Alfonso the third, surnamed the Great, Anno 886. and given to Ordogno, his
second Son, who upon the Decease of his Elder Brother Garcia was entitled to
the Crown of Leon likewise, and so Gallicia became once more united to Leon;
but so as by particular Compact it was beheld as an independent distinct Realm
of it self. But this Connection was not very permanent, for in the Year 955. the
Gallicians resenting with regret the ill Government of Raymir the third,
elected Veramund for their King, who was Son of Ordogno the third, and had the
most manifest Title to the Diadem; who being advanced to the Crown of Leon on
the Death of Raymir, once more incorporated the two Realms under one Scepter;
but it was torn off once more from Leon, by Ferdinand King of Castile and Leon,
who gave it unto Garcia his youngest Son, Anno 1067. But it was again reduced
under the Sway and Dominion of Leon, by Sancho eldest Son to Ferdinand above
mentioned, by whom the Forces of Garcia were broken, and he himself made
Captive in the Year 1081. never since broken off from Leon and Castile; but
when Leon was rent from Castile, being still involved with Leon in those
Distinctions till that dis^nion of Leon and Castile was sodered together and
Cimented in the Person of Ferdinand the second, in the Year 1230. And being
thus entwined they are by Successive Descent brought down to confess the
Diadem of Philip the fourth, now King of ^Spain.

CORDUBA.
CORDUBA, as it stood when it was by Conquest rent from the Moors by the
Spaniards, was thus environed. On the Fast it was contiguous to Murcia and
the Mediterranean; on the West to Portugal and the Ocean; on the North to the
Mountains of Sierra, Morena, and Castile; and on the South with the Ocean, the
Straits of Gibralter, and the Midland-Seas. It extracts this Denomination from
Corduba the Principal City, and did anciently enwrap with its Limits Andalusia,
Gades, Estremandura and Granada; of which last I shall speak more hereafter.
The ancient Inhabitants of these Provinces were the Turduli, the Bastu'i, the
Yurditani of Andalusia and Granada, the Celtici, and some part of the Lusitani;
all which were reduced to the Roman Obedience, and contributed to the making up
those Triumphal wreaths which adorned the Temples of Scipio African, about the
Commencement of the second Punick War. From the Romans the Seignory of these
Provinces was ravished away by the Vandalls, who passing over into Africa,
there to multiply their Conquests to a larger Extent, transmitted it to them;
but they were scarce planted in their new Patrimony, but they were disseised by
Theodorick the Fourth, King of the Goths, who by these Victorious Atcheivements
made all Boetica augment the Grandeur of his Diadem; under the Scepter of whose
Successors it continued constant, until the Fatal Eruptions of the Moors, who
having by perpetual Conflicts and Inroads enslaved almost the whole Continent
of Spain, were first subservient to the Commands of the great Caliphs, who
spread their Rule over the Saracenical Empire, commanding here from Ulidor
Ulit, by whose Influence and reiterated Supply they perfected their Triumphs
over the Goths, Anno 714. to Abdalla, Anno 757. at what time Abderamen of the
Line of Mahomet the Impostor, declining by flight the Fury of Abdalla, by whom
the ancient Line of the Caliphs of the Race of Humeia (from which Stem this
Abderamen was extracted) had been divested of the Empire, sought for shelter in
Spain, and was with many Symtomes of Joy and other unusual carresses received
by the Spanish Moors entirely devoted to his House, whose Government (upon his
shaking off all dependence or subordination to the Caliphs or Mahumetan
Emperors) he wholly assumed to himself. In his Line the Title flowed with an
even and undisturbed Current until it streamed down to Hizen the Second; after
whose Decease the Scepter of Corduba seemed to be broken to pieces by the
surprizal or encroachment of subsequent Usurpers and Pretenders, the last of
which was Mahomet the Son of (...), after whose Exit the Body of the Carduban
Monarchy (having evaporated its most vigorous and most active Spirits at those
wounds the successeful Swords of the Kings of Castile and Leon had inflicted on
it) languished into decay, and fell to pieces; the Fragments of which dissolved
Monarchy, were gathered up by several Royolets and erected into new
Principalities; as namely, one started up at Sevill, another at Toledo, a third
at Valentia, and a fourth at Corduba. After this great onset made on the
Monarchy of Corduba, which so broke the Scepter and disordered the Diadem, made
now contemptible and cheap by the tearing off so many Provinces from its
Seignory and Jurisdiction, the Series of those Princes who were Successors to
Mahomet above mentioned, is so ravel'd and discomposed, that there is no Track
in the Registers of History made visible to us by which we may pursue their
Remembrance, only several petty and inconsiderable Tyrants by an unjust
Usurpation endeavored to grasp the Scepter; but their Arrogance and insolent
comportment so disgusted and disobliged the people, that to rescue themselves
from that Load of Oppression which with so Calamitous a pressure sat heavy upon
their Lives and Fortunes, they called in the Miramomolins, or Kings of Morocco,
who so nobly asserted the Peoples Liberties that all those Roytelets were
totally by them subdued. Under seven Princes of Morocco did the Government of
these Spanish Moors continue unbroken, that is to say, from the Entrance of
Joseph Telephin in the Year 1091. unto the going out of Mahomet the Green, in
the Year 1214. During which Interval of Time, which made up an Account of an
Hundred and twenty years, their Affairs and Designs were so well managed by the
Conduct and Inspection of these active Chieftains, that they lost nothing but
Estremadura, which was snatched from them by Alfonso the Second, King of
Castile and Leon; and the City of Lisbon torn from them by Alfonso the First,
King of Portugal. But Mahomet the Green being discomfited at Serra Morena, by
the Forces of the Christians, concentered and knit together in in a joint
Confederacy or Combination about the Year 1214. was so dispirited with this
disastrous Success, that he made an obscure Retreat, abandoning all that Care
which might have obliged him to a farther defense of this Monarchy; after whose
Recesse this Kingdom was once more split and dissolved into diverse
Principalities and small Royalties almost equal to the number of great Towns,
which after various Contests were incorporated into that Regal Patrimony which
bowed under the several Scepters of the Kings of Castile, Aragon, and
Portugal; but the Kingdom of Corduba, having too crazy and infirm a
Foundation to support a Fabric so ruinous and tottering, sunk into its own
Ruins, being plucked asunder by the victorious Hand of Ferdinand the second
King of Castile in the year 1236. who afterward fastened to that Revenue which
owned the Jurisdiction of that Crown and Scepter, where the Title has remained
ever since so fixed and permanent, that by the Steps of several Descents it
has been conducted down to confess the Power and Authority of Philip the
fourth now King of Spain.

GRANADA.
GRANADA is circumscribed on the West with Andalusia, on the East with Murcia
and the Mediteranean, on the North with New Castile, on the South only with the
Midland Sea.

This Kingdom was a Limb of the Kingdom of Corduba, being still wrapped up in
the Fate of that, having still the same Inhabitants cultivating its earth, and
the same Conquests retrenching its Liberty, so that it was sacrificed as an
oblation to the Sword of the invading Moors and Sarazens. But when the
Castilians by many signal Encounters had so dissipated and rent asunder the
great Kingdom of Corduba, that it appeared to be split into Parcels, this was
seized on by Mahomet ben Alhamar or Alcamir, who so vigorously asserted the
Interest of the Moors, even in their declining Fortune, that he made this
Province part of his own Endowment and Patrimony, and* was by those persons
whom he had so gallantly shadowed with his protection, advanced to be the
first King of Granada, though he was the last of Corduba; of all the Kings
subsequent to him, the Spanish Records affords us so dim a Beam that we wander
in the dark, when we endeavor to trace out a just and successive Series of
them; for Civil Contentions and intestine Animosities like a private Moth did
so fret into the Title, that it was no longer stable than the power of the
Sword did support it, nor indeed could it be but expected that the Foundation
of a Monarchy fixed on so great a Ruin, and whose Fabric was cimented with so
much blood, must be crazy, brittle, and unsafe, so that the ^^own devolving to
Mahomet Boad delin (who did not expect his Fathers death, but hastened it) with
all these imperfections debauching its luster, it is no wonder if it was
snatched from his head by Ferdinand and Isabella, who having by a noble and a
Christian Conquest knit it to the Demeasn of Castile and Arragon, it is now by
successive right brought down to confess Philip the Fourth, now King of Spain
for its Lord and Sovereign.

TOLEDO.
THe Kingdom of Toledo extracts its Appellation from Toledo the principal
City, which in elder times did circumscribe the chiefest part of that Country,
which now falls under the Name of New Castile. The ancient Inhabitants were the
Carpentani, and Gyres^^ni dislodged by the Romans; who again were dispossessed
by the Alani, and they again finally disseised by the Goths, who after they had
many Descents possessed it, and made Toledo their capital Residence (which City
was surrounded and fortified with a Wall by the Care and Expense of Bamba King
of the Goths) were outed and divested by the discomfiture given by Musa
Chieftain of the Moors, to Roderick the last Gothish King, whose incogitant
^^^st gave him and Spain up a prey to the Sword of Barbarous Sarazens. But
afterward, when the great Kingdom of Corduba began to be split asunder, by
its own Disorder and Confusion, it was upon the entrance of Abderamen, into
Spain, ravished away from Galafr^y, who held it as Vassal under the Caliphs of
Da^ascus, but with the Title of King; and this Abderamen left it to his eldest
Son Zuleima, who was disseised not only of this Province, but of Corduba
likewise, by his younger Brother Hizen; after which devestiture it remained
constant to the Interest of Corduba, until the Expiration of the Reign of
Abderamen the second, King of Corduba; from whom it was torn away by Aben Lope;
who again was supplanted by Mahomet Son of Abderamen, about the year 848. and
here it continued fixed and constant until Addalla, a Man of very great
estimate amongst the Moors, taking advantage of the Feud started between
Zuleima and Hizen the second in relation to the Realm, seized on Toledo, and
entitled himself to the Diadem of it; but he dying without Issue, as diverse
old Records intimate, the Crown of Toledo devolved by his Testament and
Donation to Mahomet Almohadi (issued from the Royal Family of Humeia King of
Corduba, to which Diadem though he had an indisputable Title, yet he was
illegally and forcibly discarded from the possession of it by the Violence of
Zuleima and his more prevalent Faction) and from this Mahomet did the Scepter
of Toledo come to adorn the hand of his Son Obeydalla, who had but newly
ascended his Throne, when he fell in an unsuccesseful Encounter a Sacrifice to
the Ambition and Fury of Hizen King of Corduba, about the year 990. After whose
disastrous Tragedy the Diadem of Toledo empailed the Temples of his Kinsman
Hairam; from whom the Devolution of successive Right carried it down to his
great Grandchild to Hiaya, surnamed Alcaduchir or Alcadarbile; who having by
his Tyranny and Exactions disobliged his Subjects and exasperated their Spirits
against him, opened a Gap so wide, that Alfonso the first, King of Castile and
Leon* rushed in at that breach, and by an absolute Conquest annexed this
Province to Castile, to the Dominion of whose succeeding Princes, it has ever
since continued so constant, that it still obeys the Scepter of Philip the
fourth now King of Spain.

MURCIA.
MURCIA is bounded on the West with Granada, on the East with Valentia, on the
North with Valentia and part of Granada, on the South with the Levant or
Mediteranean Sea. This Province being an appendant Limb to Hispania
Carthaginensis, was upon the Eruption of the Alani ravished from the Romans,
who were by Conquest first entitled to it; but the Alani had not been long
resident in their new Atcheivements here, but they were expulsed by the more
powerful Sword of Vallia or Wallia King of the Goths. After this it was so
subservient to the Fate of Spain that it was made part of the Conquests of the
Moors of Africa, when the rest of the Kingdom bowed it self to their yoke and
Scepter: But their Empire in Spain being by their own Divisions and Animosities
so disordered and discomposed, that it was distracted and broken into several
parcells, this upon so general Shipwreck was seized upon by Aben-Hut, extracted
from the Kings of Saragossa, who raised it into a distinct Kingdom about the
year 1228. and afterward stretched out his power to that latitude, that he not
only commanded over this Country, but reduced Granada and part of Andalusia
under his Dominion. But long he had not been in the possession of his new
Conquests, when amidst the Caresses of a drunken Feast, he was traitorously
assassinated by Aben Arramin a per^idious Servant of his own; upon whose
Tragedy, one Aben Hudiel with a successeful hand seized on the Scepter; but
long he had not grasped it, when one Alboaquis wrung it from him; but he being
not able to assert his new achieved Regality against the power of his
Competitor, resigned the Kingdom into the hands of Ferdinand the second King
of Castile, but with this Provisoe, that he should enjoy the Title of King of
Murcia during his Life; upon whose Expiration it was annexed to the Diadem of
Ferdinand abovementioned, and has been so constantly linked ever since to the
Scepter of Castile, that it now acknowledges no other Monarch but Philip the
fourth now King of Spain.

VALENTIA.
VALENTIA is circumscribed on the East with the Mediterranean; on the West with
Castile and Aragon; on the North with Catalonia. It was originally part of that
Division of Spain called Tarraconensis; but afterward that Province being
subdivided by Constantine, it was made a Limb of Hispania Carthaginensis. The
ancient Inhabitants were the Bastitani, the Edotani, the Contestani, and some
part of the Celtiberi. In the waning of the Roman Empire, when the Imperial
Diadem was torn to pieces, by its fatal Distemper within, as well as by the
violent and forcible Eruptions of the Barbarous Nations from without; this*
Province stooped to receive that yoke which was imposed upon it by the
victorious Alani; but this was not long after taken off by the Goths, who
having subdued these new Intruders, cimented this Province by Conquest with the
Residue of Spain; but was again rent off from their Monarchy by the successeful
Sword of the Moors, and knit by this Acquist to their Kingdom erected in
Spain, and in their Do ninion until Mahomet Enasir received that destructive
Blow at the Battle of Sierra Morena, which so diminished the strength of the
Moors, that their Retreat into Africa was an effect of this Defeat; Valentia
was erected into a distinct Kingdom by Zeit Aben Zeit, the Brother of Mahomet
Enasir before mentioned, about the year 1214. but not long after, that is about
the year 1228. it was ravished away from this new Prince by Zaen, a Prince of
the Moors in Spain; and the pretense upon which he established this Violence,
was, that this dethroned Potentate had an Intention to revolt to Christianity;
but this Zaen had not been long seated in his new Conquests; but he was
supplanted and subdued by James King of Aragon, about the year 1238. and this
Province annexed as an Appendage to the Kingdom of Aragon; to which it has
ever since been so constantly fastened, that both its Title and Propriety is at
this instant linked to the Scepter of Philip the fourth, now King of Spain.

MAJORCA.
THe Kingdom of Majorca contained the Islands of Majorca, Minorca, Fbusa,
Frumentaria in the Levant, and the Land of Roussillon, which was added to Spain
in the time of the Goths, being accounted a Limb before of Gallia Narbonensis.
On the Decease of Gerrard the last Proprietary Earl, it was added to the Crown
of Aragon by Alfonso the second; by James the first it was annexed to the
Diadem of Majorca; but being torn from that Scepter by Pedro the fourth, it was
once more linked to the Patrimony of that Crown. After that it was transmitted
as a pawn by John the second, to Lewis the eleventh King of France, to secure
the reimbursement of 300000 Crowns, lent in the year 1462. and freely
surrendered to Ferdinand the second, surnamed the Catholic, with a Release
from all encumbrances by Charles the Eighth his Son, in the year 1493. with
this Provisoe annexed, that he should not impede or intercept him in those
Designs which had an Aspect on the Conquest of Naples; from whom the continued
Flux of Descent carried it down to Philip the fourth King of Spain, in whose
Patrimony it lay couched until the late Defection of Catalonia; and then it was
totally lopped off from the Interest of the Spaniard by the successeful Sword
of the French, and is by the conditions of the last Treaty of Peace to remain
during the truce wrapped up in the Demeasnes of the Gallican Diadem. Adjoining
to this Province, as part of the Kingdom^ of Majorca, is that Country, which
by the Spaniard is styled Cerdagne, and it is probable borrowed this
Appellation (now stiv'd into a lesser Volume) from the Cerretani, who were the
ancient Inhabitants. This Province lying in those Valleys which are linked to
the Pyrenean Hills, was judged meet to be annexed to the County of Roussillon,
for the farther improvement of that Province, to whose paramount Fortune, its
appendant Fate has been constantly ever since so subservient, that when it and
Roussillon was pawned to the French, it was part of the Mortgage, and was also
wrapped up in the Restitution.

The Earldome of Montpellier was some hundreds of years since, by Mary the only
Daughter of William the last Earl thereof, united to the Dominion and Patrimony
of Peter the second King of Aragon; and by her he had issue James King of
Aragon and Majorca, of that Name the Third, who conveyed it by Sale to Philip
of Valois King of France, in the patrimony of whose Successors it has ever
since been resident.

Majorca with the circumambient Islands of Minorca, Ebusa, now called Yuica,
Frumentera styled by the Greeks Ophiusa and Colubraria by the Latins, from the
multitude of Serpents which anciently infested it, Drag^nera, Cabraria, Vedra,
Co^^rello, Moncolibre, Alfaques, and Scombraria, so called from a contemptible
Fish named Scombrus, attaqued in the time of the Romans in numerous Shoals on
this Coast, and thence transported to Rome; though more anciently, as diverse
eminent Records testify, it obtained the Denomination of the Island of
Hercules.

These Islands were first planted by the Tyrians or Phaenicians, to whose
industrious care most of their Cities owed their first Institution and
Erection, there being one erected in the Island of Ebusa, which to enforce a
grateful acknowledge meant to posterity of their expense, had the name Phaenissa
anciently lodged upon it. And from these Phaenicians the future Inhabitants
derived the Art of Slinging, which they improved to so great advantage and
Dexterity, that the Name of Baleares in subsequent Ages was imposed upon them,
which word some do assert was extracted from the Phaenician word Baal-Jarre,
which in the Punick Dialect imports as much as a Master in the Art of Slinging,
though others with more probability deduce it from the Greek word (...), which
signifies to cast forth or throw. But to proceed. These Islands first bowed to
the yoke of the Carthaginians, whose Affairs here were successefully managed by
the prudent conduct of Hanno and Himilco, Anno M. 5500. At what time the City
of Rome lay gasping under the Tyranny of the Decemviri, under the Dominion of
that State they remained subject until the Conclusion of the second Punick War,
when the Carthaginians being no longer able to shelter them with their
protection they abandoned them to themselves, who immediately molded
themselves into the Constitution of a Commonwealth, whose Contexture was
quickly supplanted by Metellus Brother to him who subdued Crete, and united it
to the Roman Patrimony, who from this submission of theirs to that Empire, was
recompensed with the glorious Trophies of a triumph. Afterward being
incorporated into Spain, and made a Limb of that great Body, the same Fortune,
either prosperous or adverse, which waited on that, attended likewise on this.
In those Distractions which retailed out the Empire of the Moors in Spain to a
various Ruin, they were knit into an entire Kingdom, under the notion of the
Kingdom of Majorca; from the Moors it was rent away by the Conduct and Prowess
of Raymond Earl of Barcelona, assisted in that undertaking by the concurrent
Supply of the Genoese, about the year 1102, but I know not upon what grounds;
not long after the Genoese made a tame Surrender of it to the Moors again,
which was not long resident in their possession, for James King of Aragon about
the year 1228. wrung it from them by a second Conquest, and he settled it on his
second Son James, and from him the Diadem devolved to his Son and Heir Sancho,
who dying without Issue, James Son of Ferdinand, Brother to James the first
King of Majorca, entered upon it by the Name of James the second; on whose
decease James the Third ascended the Throne, who suddenly after was dislodged,
being subdued and slain in a disastrous Encounter by Pedro the fourth King of
Aragon about the year 1348. After whose Tragedy this was annexed to Aragon, and
has continued ever since so closely interwoven with the Interest of this
Kingdom that it still obeys the Scepter of Philip the Fourth now King of Spain.

CATALONIA.
CATALONIA is shut in on the North with the County of Roussillon and the
Pyrenian Mountains, on the East with the Mediterranean, on the South with
Valentia, on the North and North-West with Aragon.

The Name (as some probable Conjectures seem to affirm) is derived from the
Castellani, who in elder times were the ancient Inhabitants of some part of it,
though others upon as possible Grounds assert it was extracted from the
Catalauni, an ancient People of Languedoc, a Province of France, divided by no
considerable distance from this Province. But the Affirmation of those, is
certainly the most proportionate to Reason, who deduce it from Gotholonia,
which, by depravation of Dialect, and a more easy pronunciation, was melted
into Catalonia. This Province having been adopted into the Name of Gotholonia
by the Goths, as having been one of the first Provinces of Spain on which that
Nation made their violent and successeful Eruptions.

The ancient Inhabitants of this Province were the Castellani, Auxitani,
Indigites, Cosetani, with part of the Ilercones and Jaccetani, all of them
Possessors of that distribution of Spain which was styled Hispania
Tarraconensis; but when the Glory of the Roman Empire began to suffer her
Eclipse and umbrages, and wand into a visible Declension, this was rent from
that great Body by the Alani, who not long after were subdued and disseised by
the Goths; but when a general ruin was super-induc'd on Spain by the power of
the Moors, this sunk in that general Shipwreck, and was forced to stoop to
receive a yoke from the Hands of Infidelity; from them, after many signal
struglings, it was rescued by the Magnanimity of Charles the Great, who having
reduced the City of Barcelona about the Year 801. settled it on one Bernard a
Frenchman, with the Title of Earl, and he managed the Affairs of this Province
for that Emperor, as Gothofredus his Successor did for Lewis the Godly. But
Gothofredus Son to this Godfred, having acted some exemplary Service which
obliged Charles the Gr^^ to some grateful acknowledgement, he to expiate this
Engagement made him Proprietary of it, with this Limitation reserved, that the
Year of the Kings of France as was accustomed to be performed by his
Predecessors should be Inscribed and used in all Records and Instruments of
public Cognizance; and from him it was transported to his Grandchild
Gothofred the Second, who dying without Issue, his Uncle Borellus entered upon
the Possession of this Earldome, and in his Line was it so successively fixed
until by an even Clew it descended to Raymond the Fifth, who by Matching with
Petronilla Daughter of Raymir the Second, King of Aragon, was by the Authority
of that Alliance invested with the Diadem of that Kingdom, and knit by a
future Combination this Earldom to the Patrimony of that Scepter, whose
Successor was James the First, King of Aragon and Lord of Catalonia, (for so
the Records of Spain seem to insinuate, his Style was used in Coins and other
Inscriptions) to whom St. Lewis King of France, by Resignation and Surrender
released that Vassalage and acknowledgement which was due from his Predecessors
to the Diadem of France in the Year 1260. and this King James to balance and
poize the Merit of so great an Obligation by a proportionate Compensation, at
the same time divested himself by a general Release of all his Right and Title
to Carcassan, B^ziers, Nismes and some other considerable pieces in France, in
Tim^^ of el^er Inscription relating as Appendages to the Revenue of that Crown.
Thus have I represented in Landscape, how Catalonia became twisted into the
Demeasne and Royalty of Aragon, where it constantly reposed it self until the
Year 1638. and then that Defection from the Crown of Spain, which was
occasioned by the Invasion of the Liberties of the Catalans, as was pretended
by the Spaniard, though those pretenses were improved, inflamed and aggravated
by the Arts and cloudy Stratagems of Cardinal Richelieu, having torn it off
from that Scepter, it was by the Inhabitants modelled and fashioned into the
shape of a Commonwealth, but with a Reservation that it should still be under
the Patronage and shelter of the Crown of France, and in this Capacity it
remained until the sucbesseful Sword of Don John of Austria, the Marquess of
Cerra, and the Marquess of Mortara so vigorously asserted the Interest of
Spain, that they wrung all Catalonia from the hands of the French; and although
this Nation by the concurrent Aid of the Catalans did retrive Puycerda,
Castiglione, and some other pieces from the Spaniard, yet the more principal
part of Catalonia doe^ ^et after all these vast Concussions acknowledge no
other Scepter but that which is swayed by the Hand of Philip the Fourth King of
Spain.

ARAGON.
ARAGON is fettered in on the East with the Land of Roussillon and the Pyrenean
Hills, on the West the two Castiles, on the North Navarre, on the South and
South-East Catalonia and some part of Vanlentia. The ancient Inhabitants were
the Celtiberi, who spread themselves over a very considerable part of Spain,
styled Hispania Tarraconensis, but originally had their Rise and Extraction
from the Celtae an ancient People of France, who being clogged and surcharged
with superfluity of People, advanced over the Pyrenean Hills, and mingled with
the Iberi, the old Possessors of Aragon; yet there were other Inhabitants of
less importance, as namely, the Jaccetani, the Lacetani with some part of the
Editani, and Ilergetes or Ilurcones, that had their Concernment in this
Province, and thrived under the protection and shadow of the Nobler Colonies.
And in this posture it remained until the Carthaginians endeavoring to enlarge
their Territories made it bow to their Government; but here it had not long
been resident, when the power of the Romans growing paramount to theirs, it was
forced to submit to the more predominant strength of that Empire, and to their
Interest it was subservient, until it was ravished away by the prevailing Arms
of the Goths, whose Acquists here attended the Fate of Spain, and was
surrendered to the Moors in that public Calamity which was complicated with
their Conquest. But about that time when the Foundations of the Kingdoms of
Leon and Navarre were established, one Aznarius a Person of an unbroken
Courage, disdaining any longer to lie panting under that load of Slavery which
the Moors had cast upon him, disengaged himself of the pressure, and by many
generous Conflicts with the Moors, wherein he exhibited many Symptoms of an
inexpugnable Courage, he invested himself in the Possession of some Lands on
the Banks of the River of Aragon; but because he found his Power was too infirm
and crazie to support his new Acquists without some collateral supply, he put
himself under the Protection of the King of Navarre about the Year 775. And
that Monarch, both to excite and cherish so worthy a Virtue with some exemplary
Guerdon, dignified him with the Title of Earl of Aragon; and from him it
devolved by Descent to his Lineal Successor Fortunio Ximines, in whom the Male
Line determined, so that Fortunio the Second King of Navarre, in Right of his
Mother Urraca who was his Sister and Heir, was entitled to Aragon supported by
this Alliance, annexed this Province to Navarre; and from him the Clew of
Descent transmitted it to Sancho the Great King of Navarre, who gave it to his
Son Raymir begotten in unlawful Embraces, to the prejudice of his Lawful Son
Garcia, who indeed justly merited this Disherision, because he had by an
unnatural Accusation endeavored to blast the Reputation of his Mother Queen
Elvira Wife to his Father, by besmearing her with the Calumnious Aspersion of
Adultery, from which black tincture she was assoil'd by the Noble and generous
Assistance of Raymir above mentioned, who offered to assert her Innocence by
the solemn Decision of a mutual Combat with this Garcia, which obliged his
Father King Sancho to reflect with so benign an eye on so great a Virtue, that
he thought the Earldome of Aragon a proportionate Guerdon to his Merit and
Courage, and translated the Coronet of this Province into a Diadem, that the
Reward designed him might swell into a more considerable Dimension, and with
more Luster adorn his Temples; and from this Raymir did there Issue out a
Series of Kings that was never interrupted, disturbed, or ravel'd in the Clew
of Descent, but in an even order went along until the Line of Succession
brought the Crown of Aragon to empale the Temples of Ferdinand surnamed the
Catholic, who by Matching with Isabella the Heir of Castile, linked and
incorporated these two Kingdoms into one Body, whose divided Interest being
thus combined, has ever since continued fastened and tied up in so strict a
Union, that the Propriety of both these Kingdoms does now support and enforce
the Grandeur of that Diadem which invests the Head of Philip the Fourth the
instant Monarch of Spain.

SPAIN.
SPAIN in Times of an elder Complexion was the Stage where the Scene of much
Contention and Bloodshed was established, the Romans attempting with much
eagerness and Animosity to ravish away the Spanish Liberty, and impose that
yoke of Servitude on their Necks they had burdened and loaded the shoulders of
other captived Nations with, and the Spanish Inhabitants, again endeavoring
with a generous vigor to assert their Native Franchises against their
Eruptions, and so to secure their Liberties, that they might not be offered up
an Oblation to the rapatious Tallons of the Roman Eagles; but after many
Conflicts commenced, and the bloody Umpirage of several Battles, the Spanish
Body having exhaled its most active and vigorous Spirits at those breaches and
wounds the successeful Swords of the Romans had torn and discomposed the Bulk
of their Empire withal, fell a cheap Sacrifice to their Success and Ambition,
and by a tame Submission put on those Fetters the Hands of these new Victors
had designed to load them with; and the Romans, the better to manage and
fortify their new Acquists with a cautious improvement, scattered several
Colonies and Forts on those several Provinces which were circumscribed within
the Continent of Spain; a subsequent List of which I shall now represent to the
Reader, as likewise an exact Register of those Cities and Towns which in times
of a more modern Inscription have like so many Phaenix's ascended into shape
and order out of their antiquated Ruins.

A
ALCE a City of the Celtiberians, was razed by Gracchus. Abdera now called
Almeria, and according to the Conjectures of some, the place where now the City
of Vera ^s situated. Abula, now denominated Avila. Acci, likely to be Guadix in
Granada. Agra, it is under Controversy whether it were placed in Spain or in
Africa Arcobrica, now styled Calataiub, or else separated by no great distance
from it. Assindon, the place where now Medina Sidonia or Xeres in Andalusia is
fixed. Astapa, a Colony of the Carthaginians was destroyed by Martius, a Roman
Commander under Scipio. Astigia, reputed to be Eccia in Andalusia. Asturica or
Astorga, retains its primitive Appellation, and continues a Bishopric until
this day. Ategua, how this City is denominated now is represented by Ferrarius,
who asserts that it is now called Tebalaveia or Teiveila in Granada. Augusta, a
Name Common to many Towns in Spain, yet when it is simply rehearsed or
Registered without being yoked with any additional Denomination, it is taken to
signify Bracar or Braga. Auriensis, or Aquae Calidae, now taken for the
Bishopric of Orenza or Orense in Gallicia. Auringa was an eminent City in
Andalusia, di^^antled and overturned by Scipio. A^s^^^a or Auxima, at this
present styled Vic d'Ossone, an obscure Town circumscribed within Catalonia.
Auca, an ancient City out of whose ruins Burgos is now started. Axenium, where
that was situated, or what City was extracted from its Ashes is uncertain.
B
Barcina or Rubicata, now called Barcelona, the Capital City of Catalonia.
Bastitania now known by the Name of Baza, in the Province of Murcia. Bregetium,
in old Records denominated likewise Lucus Astu^um is now the City of Ovi^do in
Leon. Biaria, now called Barra, is in the Kingdom of Toledo. Bigastrensis
Civitas, or Urbs Bistargensis, was a Bishopric situated in the Province of
Carthagena. Bigerra, now styled Beijar, is contiguous in its position to
Valentia. Britolensis Urbs, was a Town near Tuy in Gallicia.
C
Cauca, was a City in the Territory of the Vacceni, and situated in Portugal,
ruined by Lucullus the Roman General. Carmona was a Town near Cordova,
demolished by the Goths. Cauria, at this day denominated Coria, and is placed
near Merida. Caesarea Augusta, or Salduba, now Sarragossa, the Metrapolis of
Arragon. Calaguris, now represented under the Name of Calahorra, in Navarre.
Colimbrica or Conimbrica, now Coimbra, an eminent University in Portugal.
Carthago Nova, or Carthagena, which still retains its pristine Name and though
now fallen under some Umbrage and obscurity, was in elder Times one of the most
eminent Cities of Spain. Castulo, at this day styled Castona, and is situated
near Sevill. Centobrica in Celtiberia, was reduced to the Roman obedience by
Metellus, since crumbled into Rubbish. Complutum, out of w^ose Rubbish, the
noted and Illustrious Unive sity of Alcala de Henarez in C^stile, is now risen
forth. Conistorgis was a Colony in Portugal, long since mouldred into a
neglected heap. Colenda was a City of the Celtiberians. Corduba gave Name to
the whole Province wherein it was placed, and preserves the ancient
Appellation, and continues a Bishopric until this day.
D
Dertosa, now called Tortosa, and is situated upon the River of Ebro, which
separates Catalonia and Valentia. Di^ni^m, now styled Denia, is placed in the
Kingdom of Toledo.
E
CIvitas Egarensis, was the Residence of a People called Egur^^, out of whose
Ashes sprang a town in Toledo, styled Medina del Rio Secco. Egedita, now a
little ^ourg in Portugal called Edania. Egosa or Egiba, is a Town which still
continues its ancient Appellation, and is situated near Girona in Catalonia.
Ebora, now is known by the Name of Euora, and is placed in Portugal, and is at
this instant ascended to that Eminence that it is become the Residence of the
Kings of Portugal. Elib^^is, was in Ages of an higher step, a populous and
spacious City, though in Times of a lower Descent, it shrunk into the narrow
Bulk of a Castle; but it is conjectured that Granado, not far distant, owes
part of its Dimension and Grandeur to its superannuated Ruins. Eliocrota, was
situated betwixt Carthagena and Cas^ona, but was by the Fury and frequent
Onsets of the Vandalls, rendered so inconsiderable an heap, that it is now
entombed in its own Rubbish. Elna, was placed in Gallia-Narbonensis, and is now
shrunk into Decay and Oblivion. Emirita, at this instant called Merida, is
placed in Castile, and has nothing singular to ennoble it, but only some
venerable Ruins. Eminium or Euminium, is placed in Portugal, betwixt Coimbra
and Porto; but it is now crumbl'd away into such a narrow heap, that it has at
present, found a forgotten Sepulcher. Ergavica, now a Town in Aragon, called
Alcanez. Escadia, was a City situated in Lusitania, reduced to Ruins by the
Roman Conquests.
F
FLaviobriga, a City in Biscay, which mouldering away by the injurious
Impressions of Time, and the Assaults of Enemies, fell into decay and Rubbish.
Bilbao, the Capital City of that Province, was extracted from its Sepulcher.
Flavium Brigantium now passes under the Notion of Corvina, in Gallicia.
Flavinavia, was situated in Asturia, and has now achieved the name of St.
Andero.
G
GAdes, an ancient Town of Spain, in more modern Orthographie written Cadez.
Gerunda, in Catalonia, is now marshaled under the Name of Girona. Gerabrica or
Jeraabrica, is placed in Portugal, betwixt Lisbon and St. Irene, but is now by
the rude hand of Time, crushed into so disordered a Mass, that it is removed
but a small preferment from the notion of a Village. Gemella, was a Fortress
in Portugal, what Name it has since been habituated to, is uncertain. Girniza,
a City of the Vacceans, demolished by Titus Didius.
H
HIspalis, in Andalusia, is now listed under the Name of Sevil, and is the
Metrapolis of that Track.
I
IAcca was the principal City of the Jaccetani, in Aragon, and still preserves
its name. Ilerda, was situated in Catalonia, and is now styled Lerida. Ilice,
in the Kingdom of Valentia respecting the Islands Pitieuses, and adopted that
eminent Bay called Sinus Ilicitanus into its own Surname, but where this Town
or the Rags and Skeleton of it, have found their Enterment, no Beam extracted
from public Record, can direct to a Discovery. Ilipa was a City situated in
the Straight of Boetica, It is supposed to be Niebla in Portugal. Illiturgis,
was situated in Andalusia, and was put into Flame and Ashes by Scipio. Julio
Briga, an antiquated Colony, is now Logrogno in Aragon. Illiberis, was a City
in Roussillon, divided by no great distance from the Pyrenean Hills, out of
whose Rubbish Coliure or Colibre, a City now extant, had its original
Institution. Civitas Imotinensis, is by some Conjectures now asserted to be
Montanches not far distant from Merida. Imopyreneus or Rhoda is at this day
called Roses and is a City of Eminence in Catalonia, it was built by the
Rhodians. Empuria Urbs Impuritana or Emporitana, though languish'd into Decay
has from its Skeleton afforded a Town called Empuria now placed in Catalonia.
Julia Libica is now that City we style Sardona or Cardona, a City existent in
Catalonia, or as some conjecture Linca. Jugastria or Juncaria was Situated in
Catalonia and is in more modern Appellation styled Junquera. Intercatia was
placed amongst the Astures, but what Denomination it has acquired now no
Record does exhibit. Iria Flavia is at this instant styled Padron and has its
Situation near Terrae Finis in Gallicia. Italica an ancient City in Andaluzia,
is now entombed in its own Ruins and wild Dispersion.
L
LAmbria was no far Distance divided from the Margent of the River of Limia in
Portugal, but what name it has obtained now is uncertain. Lacobrica there
were two Towns which bore this Denomination, the one at Cape St. Vincent, the
second near Palenza it is now conjectured to be Lagos. Lameca now passes under
the Denomination of Lamega, and is a noted City in Portugal. Luci Tarum is now
styled St. Lucar di Barameda in Andalusia. Lancia was in elder times the
Metrapolis of Asturia, though now wholly divested both of Bulk and Beauty.
Laurona was an ancient City made an heap of Flame and Ruins by Sertorius even
in the presence of Pompey. Legio is at this instant styled Leon, and is the
Capital City of that province. Lucia or Urbs Lucensis was an ancient Colony now
known by the Name of Lugo in Gallicia.
M
MAlaca at present called Malaga, one of the most eminent Cities of the
Kingdom of Granada. Mentesa now Monteio or else Jaen in Andalusia. Munda was a
City of the Vacceans Eminent for the Battle between the two Pompeys and Caesar,
it is now obscure in its own Ruins unless Ronda be started from it.
N
NOvi^m in Gallicia is now fallen under the Name of Noya. Numantia after a tough
Seige buried in its own Ruins, by Scipio.
O
OBoliola was a City upon the Verge of Portugal, which was demolished and
destroyed by Quintus Fabius Maximus Servilianus in his War commenced against
Viriatus. Occi or Acci is now involved in Guadix, Situated in Valentia. Ocilis
or Ocelona was a City near Merida, now so wrapped up in its own disordred and
confused dispersions that it its difficult to trace out its rubbish even amidst
its ruins. Olisipo now known by the Name of Lisbon the Metrapolis of Portugal.
Orcelis whose Bishop was at the Council of Arles, it was fixed in Valentia. It
is now Denominated Origu^la. Or^tana now styled Calatrava, the Seminary of
Knights of that Order, was in the Kingdom of Toledo. Osca that is Huesea in
Aragon a Bishopric and a University. Ossobona was in Algarbe not far divided
from Faro which by the Moors was named Exuba. Oxovia in the Kingdom of Toledo
styled by Plyny Uxania at this instant it is known by the Appellation of Osona,
and is honored by being the Sea of Bishop. Oxthraca a City of eminent note in
the ancient Lusitania destroyed by Atilius or Acilius Balbus one of the Roman
Commanders.
P
PAx Augusta an Eminent Roman Colony in Extremadura now stilled Badaisos and by
the Moors in elder times named Baxang^. Palentia or Palantia in the Kingdom of
Toledo, continues listed under that Name and remains a Bishopric at this Day.
Pampelona continues still espoused to its ancient Name, and is at this instant
the Capital City of Navarre. Placentia is Situated in Castile and preserves
its ancient Denomination at this instant. Porto or Portogallo, is placed in
Lusitania, and is that City which at present is named Portoport.
S
SAguntum was destroyed by Hannibal out of whose Ashes Morviedro in Valentia is
now descended. Sanuessa is now Sanguessa in Navarre. Salmantica or Elmantica is
circumscribed within the Limits of Castile, and has now assumed the
Denomination of Salamanca, being both a Bishopric, and an eminent University.
Segobia or Secobia is Situated likewise in Castile, and with a small variation
from the ancient name is now styled Segovia. Segobrica is the Town called
Segorbia in Aragon. Seguntia or Saguntia, now named Siguenza is placed between
Castile and Aragon, and is made eminent by being the Sea of a Bishop. Senga in
Aragon, has now contracted the name of Balbastro. Segissama has now atcheived
the name of Tordede^illas. Sediga was a noted City of the Arevaces, and was
extinguished and dismantel'd in the Conflicts and Contentions between Spain and
the Romans. Setabis is the Town Xat^va now a Limb of the Kingdom of Aragon.
Septimantia now styled Simanca, is a Town which is Situated in Castile..
Scalabis was an eminent Roman Colony in Portugal, how it is styled now is
uncertain. Sarabris or Sentilla was Situated in Castile, and is now Marshalled
under the name of Zamora or Toro. Sitia was erected in the Province of Corduba,
but what Name it has assumed at this instant no Record does discover. Sitale
o^ Sitiale was established in the Track of Andalusia, what Denomination it has
now put on we cannot at present trace out.
T
TArracona was Situated in Catalonia, and at present is styled Tarragona,
being an Archbishops Seat and the Second City for Eminence and Populacy in
that Province. Talabriga has now obtained the appellation of Talavera and is
circumscribed in Portugal. Tartessus, now styled Carteia, is Situated in
Andaluzia, and gave the Name to the whole Track. Trebia and Tribola were two
eminent Cities in Castile and the Old Lusitania both cast into a heap of
Rubbish in the Wars of the Romans waged with the people of that Province.
Thermissa was in times of an elder Complexion a City of the Vacceans or
Arevaces, and was demolished by the Consul Titus Didius. Thermantia was an
ancient City of Spain not far distant from Numantia now by the Injuries of time
shrunk into Decay and Oblivion, only it is supposed Nuestra Sennora de Tiermas
in Aragon is now extracted from its Tomb. Toletum is that eminent City, we now
style Toledo being an Archbishopric and the Metropolis of Castile. Turiasso
now the Town Tarrasso which had its position near the Limits of Navarr. Tucca
was Situated in Betica near Castulo, what name is fixed upon it now I cannot
discover. Tuda or Tyda is now adopted into the name of Tuy in Gallicia and is
adorned with the Title of a Bishop. Tullica was placed in Cantabria or Biscay,
but what denomination it has borrowed since no Beam of Antiquity does exhibit
to us. Turris Julia is now compacted into the more modern Name of Trugillo in
Portugal.
V
VAlentia or Valence, is at this instant an eminent Archbishopric* and
affords a Name to the whole Province where it is situated, preserving both its
Name and Antiquity. Valeria, had its first erection in the Province of Arragon,
and has at this instant got the Appellation of Co^cia or Cuenca. Vasco Baso,
was an eminent City of the Vascones now languished into an obscure Town in
Navarre, called Basconton. Veila, was an ancient City in Cantabria, now
languished into neglected Ruins. Vesci, is now styled Viseo, and is a noted
Town in Portugal. Urci, was an ancient Roman Colony, not far removed from
Almeria in Castile, now shrunk by Decay into an inconsiderable Obscurity.
Urgela, called likewise Bergidum, is now Urgel, a City, and a Bishops See in
Catalonia. Urbicua, a Town of the Celtiberians, put into Ruins by Q. Fulvius
Flaccus, a Roman Commander. Ucubis, a Town in farther Spain, now entombed not
only in its own Rubbish, but in oblivion likewise; only it is conjectured
Ucubi in Granada, is a child of its production. Uxama, an ancient Colony of the
Romans, is fallen into so obscure a Decay that it has lost both its Name and
the place of its abode, so that it is now extant only in Record and Annals.
Vellica, was in Navarre, whose dispersed Rubbish was in the Year 1181. by
Sancho the fourth, King of Navarre, Collected into a City, whose Denomination
in Memory of some Success upon its first Institution was Victoria. Viminacium,
was placed in Castile, but what Town is now descended from its Ruins, the
testimony of History does not exhibit to us. Virovesca in Old Castile, has now
put on the Name of Briviesca, or Birviesca. Voluce, or Veluca, has from its
Ashes given us Cannatanazor, now in Valentia, Urso, has from its Ruins been
productive of Ossuna, now placed in Andalusia.
There are other Ancient Towns in Spain, and its Circumabient Provinces, which
are Registered in Mela, Strabo, Ptolomie, Pliny and Antoninus; which because
they have put on other Names, I shall represent the first as they are Recorded
in those Venerable Authors, and exhibit the last as they lie enrolled in the
Spanish Histories; as namely,

A
ASta, in Pliny is now Xeres, in the Kingdom of Granada. Augusta Forma,
mentioned by the former Author, is now Eccia in Andalusia. Aquae Calidae,
enrolled in the Pages of Ptolomie, is now Oreus or Orenza, in Gallicia. Aspavia
by Corduba, mentioned by Ptolomy, is styled Espeio. Alba in Antonnius, is now
Viana in Navarre, which formerly afforded a Title to the King of Navarr's
eldest Son, who was styled Prince of Viana. Avia or Livia, Registered likewise
by Antoninus, is now Villalon in Castile. Alaba in Celtiberia or Biscay, called
so by Ptolomy, has now in more modern Appellation assumed the Name of Alava.
B
BAlaria in Antoninus, has now assumed the name of Bara or Vera, and is fixed
in Castile. Baetulo or Betullo styled so by Mela is now named Badelona.
C
CErtima in Ptolemy is now Carthama in Castile. Caetobrix or Cetobrica,
recorded by Pliny and Antoninus, is now either situated in Portugal, or else
Almadas on the Mouth of the Tagus. Calpe or Heraclia in Antoninus, is now
Gibraltar in Andalusia. Carmela in Antoninus is now Carmon in Portugal. Cex
mentioned in Ptolomy, and Sexicanum registered in Antoninus, is now Velez
Malaga, in the Province of Granada. Condabora in Ptolomy is now Siguenza in
Castile. Cecillia Gemellina in Antoninus, is now St. Mary of Guadalupe. Clunia
remembered by Pliny and Livy, was a Colony of the Arevaces, and is now styled
Corunna del Conde, or Cividad del Castro, both situated in Castile. Cauca
registered by Ptolomy, is now that Coca which is situated in Old Castile.
Contestania mentioned by Ptolomy and Clusius, is now shrunk into Concentayna in
Valentia.
E
ELna in Roussillon, mentioned by Antoninus, was erected by the Celtae, and
still deserves its ancient Denomination.
G
GRacu^is was a Colony in Hispania Baetica, instituted by Gracchus, whose
Memory is preserved in the Pages of Ptolomy and Antoninus, and is now called
Agreda, being seated in Castile.
I
I Lorci recorded by Pl^ny, is now that Town we call Lorca in Murcia. Illusias
or Illusia, so it is written in Ptolomy, is now d^nominated ^ucena, and is
placed in Valentia. Illarco situated in New Castile, and styled so by Pliny,
has now obtained the name of Alarco. Illuro or Diluron, styled so in the
Registers of Ptolomy, is now called Alora, being a Village in Catalonia.
Ilarcuris, named so by Ptolomy, is placed on the Margin of New-Castile, and is
now called Caros de los Infantes Ildum. has obtained that Name in the
Itinerary of Antoninus, and was seated in Valentia, where it is now known by
the name of Salsadella.
L
LAcuris or Larcuris, whose remembrance is treasured up in Ptolomy, and Surita
is circumscribed within Castile, and is now styled Loquera or Alarcos. Lebrisia
in Ptolomy, has now from its Ruins given us Nebrissa in Andaluzia.
M
MAntua whose Appellation survives amongst the Leaves of Ptolomy, is now
supposed to be Madrid in Castile, the eminent Residence of the King of Spain.
Marcia offered up to our Remembrance by Pliny and Strabo, is now Marchena in
Andaluzia. Margis, preserved from Oblivion by the Industry of Ptolomy, is now
conjectured to be Maxacra in Granada. Menralia, whose name is enrolled in the
Volume of the abovesaid Author, is now the eminent City of Murcia.
N
NOrba Caesarea, though ^^bverted and demolished by Petreius and Afranius, two
of Pompey's Commanders, yet it lives still in the Volumes of Ptolomy, and
Antoninus, and has contributed a Being to Alcantara in Portugal. Nemetobriga
or Nemetobrica, a ^own plac^d by Ptolomy in Old Casti^e, is now called Val^de
Nebro. Nebrissa so styled by Ptolomy, but called Veneria in the Records of
Pliny, has now contracted the Appellation o^ ^ebrixa. Naebis is placed by
^^ra^o near Viana in Portugal, and is now called Neiva. Nagara is by Ptolomy
represented to be a Town of Hispania Tarraconensis, and has acquired the name
of Naira.
P
PInta registered by Ptolomy, has now transplanted its name into Valladolid.
Porta Augusta is by Ptolomy likewise asserted to be a Town of Hispania or Old
Caestile, and has now purchased the modern name of Torquemada. Portus Calensis
was seated in Portugal, and is named now Porto Port.
R
RUseino or Ruscino, mentioned by Pliny, is conjectured by some to be the
Castle of Roussillon, and by others to be Perpignan in that County. Rusticiana
was placed by the Itinerary of Antoninus in Old Castile, and is now as some
contend named Castileo though others assert Cividad Roderigo, was extracted
originally out of its Ruins.
S
SAcili or Sacilis, affirmed by the Registers of Pliny and Ptolomy, to have
been a Town of Hispania Baetica, is now known by the Name of Alcorrucen in
Granada. Salaria in Ptolomy's Time, has from its Remains afforded Siruela in
New Castile or as some from very ancient Records do assert, another Town styled
Cazorlo. Salsulae in Roussillon nominated so by Stra^o, is now fallen under the
Denomination of Salses, Selsona, or Celsona, for so they are promiscuously
written in Ptolomy and other venerable Monuments of Antiquity, has from its
Ashes contributed a new Production to Salsona in Catalonia. Segisama mentioned
by Ptolomy and Orosius, is now involved in Veyzama seated in Biscay. Segortia
Lacta or Lata, which owes for its Remembrance to Ptolomy, is now wrapped up in
Sepulveda, situated in Castile. Segobriga, whose name occurs in Strabo and
Pliny, has now assumed another Appellation, and is styled Cabezza del Griego,
being situated in Valentia.
T
TUcci denominated likewise Augusta Gemella, and Gemella Tuccitana, as the
Pages of Pliny and Ptolomy do abundantly testify, is now shrunk into a little
Town in Andaluzia called Martos.
V
VIrgao, whose Memory is improved by the Pen of Pliny, is now called Vera in
Granada.
Z
ZAcantha was an ancient City in Spain, entombed in its own Ruins, by the
successeful fury of Hanniball.
There were other ancient Towns wrapped up within the limits of the Continent
of Spain and Portugal; as namely Al^hea, Aronda, Athanasia, Arsa, Anitorgis,
Cusibis, Cunes, Contrebia, Evandria, Hippo, Ituca, and Serezola, which often
occur in the Annalls of Spain, which were so dismantled and defaced in the Wars
commenced by the Romans with the Carthaginians, and the Native Inhabitants of
Spain, and there memory now entombed in such inhospitable Ruins, that it is a
work of more perplexed Difficulty to trace out their Fragments and Remains,
which now lie treasured up in untractable Rubbish, then it was for the Roman
Generals first to subdue them.

HAving taken a prospect of the Continent of Spain, let us now lanch out into
the Ocean, and make a reflection on that Interest or concernment, the Spanish
Scepter is entitled to, either in Africa, Asia or America; and the first of
these new Acquists which does obviate our discovery are the Canaries, which are
in number seven, and have contracted this Denomination from Canaria the
principal Island. In ancient Records they are adorned with the Epithete of the
Fortunate Islands; and in the Arithmetic of Pliny and Ptolomy are computed but
six, but though they consent in their Number they disagree in their names. By
Pliny they are said to be 1 Ombrio, 2 Junonia Major, 3 Junonia Minor, 4
Capraria, 5 Nivaria, and 6 Canaria: But upon Ptolomies catalogue and account
they are thus reckoned, 1 Aprositus, 2 Hera or Junonia, 3 Pluitania, 4
Casperia, 5 Canaria and Pincuria. But more modern discoveries h^ving rectifyed
former Surveys, have improved the account to Seven, now better known by the new
Names of 1 Canaria, 2 Palma, 3 Teneriffa, 4 Gomero, 5 Ferro, 6 Lanserotte, and
7 Fuerte Ventura.

The ancient Inhabitants of these Islands were the Guanches, who were (as
ancient Relations discover to us) both rude and barbarously ignorant, for their
food was raw flesh, for want either of the use or knowledge of Fire; their
earth they turned up with the Horns of Oxen, being destitute of Ploughs or
Instruments of Iron; their Beards they shaved with a sharp Flint, and
transmitted the care of their Children to the Nursery of Goats. The Slaughter
of Beasts was in their estimate the most ^ordid and de^picable employment, and
therefore was imposed on Prisoners and persons devoted and conden ned to the
Ignominy of a common execution, who being the common Slaughtermen, were to live
separated from public intercourse and Society; yet notwithstanding this
Barbarity, the light of nature, though it shined in them with a faint and
sickly Beam, yet was it not so extinguished but that it still did send forth
those rays, which did guide them to resign themselves up to a Kingly
Government; for each Island was ruled by a single person, whose power and
authority held some Proportion and Analogy to the Rule and Dominion of a King:
but yet was their Government not so purely regal, but that it was retrenched
with the Dictates and Prescriptions of a comm^n Council collected out of all
the Islands, and consisting of an 130. who did not only guide in Civil
matters, but direct and steer in Sacred also, the People being by them
conducted both in their Interest of State and that of conscience, and obeyed
their Prescripts, which had an aspect on their faith and worship, as well as an
Influence on their Civil obedience.

The knowledge of these Islands being lost with the Roman Empire, they lay
conce^led until about the year 1330. when an English, or as some affirm, a
French Ship, did in the disorder of a Tempest fall upon them. Notice thereof
being given to Alfonso the Fourth King of Portugal, Lewis de Ordo was by that
Prince designed to the conquest of them, who being repulsed at Gomera Anno
1334. abandoned the enterprise, and only left some foundation for the
Portuguese to establish a future Claim upon. But the News of this new discovery
successively extending it self to the Court of Rome, Pope Clement the sixth
esteemed it convenient by a new Donation, to transmit the Right and Title of
them to Prince Lewis, Son to Alfonso de la Cerda, the indisputable Heir of
Castile; But nothing being effected by Lewis abovesaid in relation to the Popes
concession, some Adventurers of Biscay about the year 1393. furnishing out some
Ships from Sevill to recruit their ebbing Fortunes at Sea, fell amongst these
Islands, and having observed the number, greatness and situation of them,
after their Pillaging of Lanserote, returned into Spain with a considerable
Cargo of Wax, Hides, and other Commodities, which did ennoble the Riches and
Fertility of these Islands, and did so excite the appetite of Henry, at that
Instant King of Castile, that for the future he did resolve toinvest himself in
the Possession of them; but though his Design was by death made abortive, yet
Katharine his Queen Dowager during the Minority of her Son King John the
Second, pursued the enterprise, and employed John de Betancourt an active
daring Frenchman in the conquest of them (with a condition annexed to hold them
under the Sovereignty of the Crown of Spain) and he so well managed the
undertaking that four of them were subdued, but attempting to attaque the
remainder, he perished in the Action. In the year 1417. young Betancourt the
Son finding his Power not proportionate to the Conquest and reduction of
Canaria the chief Island, whither most of the Islanders had retired for
Sanctuary, fortified himself in Lanserote and assumed the Title of King, which
he transmitted to one Menault, under whose Rule, these Islands were reduced to
the knowledge of Christianity, having a Sea Episcopal established in the Isle
of Lanserote. But this new Commander having ravel'd and disordered the
Government of these Islands by many irregular excesses, by the clamorous
Importunity of the Inhabitants in the Court of Castile, Pedro Barva de Campos
with three Ships of War was employed against him, with whom Menault abovesaid
being unable to grapple, he with the approbation of the Crown of Castile,
conveyed his Interest in these Islands to Fernando Perez a Knight of vast
wealth in Sevill; from whom the Title and Propriety streamed down to his
Successors, but the posterity of this Perez were entitled to the possession of
the four Lesser Islands only, for Canaria it self, Teneriffa and la Palma,
continued under the Scepter of their own Kings, and so remained until the rule
of Ferdinand the Catholic; who in the year 1483. under the conduct of Alfonso
de Muxica and Pedro de Vera two eminent and prosperous Leaders, obtained the
Empire and Dominion of them, and translated the Episcopal See from Lanserote
to Canaria. But as these Islands before this total Conquest, were by
separation broken into two estates, so do they remain at this Day, though now
one be subordinate to the other, for Gomera, Lanserote, and Hierra, or Ferro,
are resident in private hands, but Canaria (where the prime Seat of Justice is
fixed, to which all the residue resort as their occasions oblige them) Palma,
Teneriffa, and Fuerte Ventura, are at this instant a Limb of that Demeasne
which makes up the Patrimony of the Crown of Spain.

AMERICA is the next Subject of our Discourse, which if you measure it by parts
and proportions, as to the principal Territory of it both for Wealth and
Dimension, it is now subservient to the Dominion of the Crown of Spain.

I shall now represent the first Discovery of those parts in the West Indies,
that are now interwoven with the Demeasne of that Crown; and first Cuba exacts
our Consideration.

It was one of the first Islands which was discovered by Columbus, who having
almost tired and tortured the Expectation of the Spaniards with increasing
hopes, first fell upon Guahanani by Florida one of the Lucaios, to which he
gave the name of St. Saviors; and from thence ^ailed to Baracoa on the North
of the Island, which he styled Fernandina in Honor of Ferainand the Catholic
King of Castile and Arragon. The Inhabitants he found rude and ignorant, not
knowing the use of Money, nor understanding the nice Intrigues of Meum and
Tuum, being Tenants in Common to those Blessings the Earth by a cheap and easy
Birth produced, and Coheirs of Nature: After this about the year 1514. this
Island was reviewed by Don Diego de Valasques, by whose prudent conduct the
Spaniards got such footing in it, and made that footing good by so many
Colonies, that their Title and Possession was beyond dispute, and so continues
until this day.

Hispaniola was first Discovered by Columbus, being conducted hither by some of
the Natives of Cuba, and having by his civil Compliance endeared the Affections
of the Islanders, he obtained license of one of the Kings or Caciques to erect
a Fortress here, which he styled Natividad, which he Garrisoned with 36.
Spaniards, who upon his departure were butchered by the per^idious Natives, and
the Fort dismantled. But on his return, being better furnished for a second
Plantation, he erected the Town Isabella (styled so in honor of Isabella Queen
of Castile) near the Mines of Cibao; which afterward was also abandoned and
the Colony transplanted to St. Domingo, which was first built by Bartholomew
Columbus, Anno 1494. on the East bank of the Ozama; and afterward in the Year
1502. removed by Nicholas de Obando then Governor of the Island, to the
opposite shore. After this the Spaniards so secured this Island with surplusage
of Colonies, and so immured and chained it up with Fortifications, that
notwithstanding the various Attempts of Foreigners, it is still wrapped in the
Patrimony of the Crown of Spain.

Porto Rico was first touched upon by Christopher Columbus in his second
Voyage, in the Year 1493. But being deserted by him, it was first Planted and
Inhabited by John Ponce de Leon in the Year 1510. who* having by a fair
deportment obliged Aiguabana the Chief Prince thereof, established a Colony of
Spaniards in the North part of the Island, called Caparra; from whence some ten
years after, the Colony was transplanted to Guarica; and from thence drawn off
to St. Germans; nor did it fix here, for it was carried away to Porto Rico,
now become the Chief Town, placed in a little Island, on the North-side the
greater, which having been Fortified with two Castles, by the Command and
Influence of Philip the first, Anno 1514. it ever since maugre the Assaults and
Saccage of the English, has been rolled up in the Income of the King of Spain.

Jamaica lies on the South of Cuba, from which it is divided by a distance of
fifteen Leagues. It was Discovered in the second Voyage of Columbus, who not
only entitled the Island St. Jago, but likewise Instituted here a Spanish
Colony, which he styled St. Jago de la Vega, which in some years after was
enhaunsed to a higher Reputation and Estimate, when it gave the Title of Dukes
to Christopher Columbus, and his Brother Bartholomew. But in Ages subsequent to
this, the Possession of this Island was not so secured to the Spaniard, but
that it was Invaded and Conquered in the Year 1596, by Sir Anthony Shirley; but
being again abandoned, it remained under the Spanish Obedience; until late
years, it was again subdued and quitted by Capt. Jackson, so that it again
returned to confess the Interest of the Spanish Scepter, and continued
subservient to that Dominion, until lately it was snatched away by the
English, under the Command and Conduct of Colonel Doiley.

Margarita and Cubagna are two little Islands opposite to Cumana. The first of
which was discovered by Columbus in his third Voyage, which was about the Year
1498. And not long after Cubagna, where the Spaniards erected a Colony, which
they adopted into the Name of New-Cadiz^ But in the Year 1521. the Convent of
Franciscans on the opposite shore being destroyed by the Savages of Cumana,
infused so much Terror and Astonishment into the Spaniards, that they
abandoned the Island, and fled to Hispaniola; but were Commanded back again by
the Council there under the Command of James de Castellon, by whom the Town was
adorned with more Beauty, and improved to more strength than it enjoyed since
the first Plantation. Both these Islands were under a signal Repute, and much
frequented, whilst the charms and Magic of the Pearl-Fishing did invite the
Spaniards hither; but that being decayed, the flourishing condition of these
two Islands is shrunk into Neglect, and languished away with it; and the
Mid-land parts of these two Islands being destitute of Grass and Water, and by
Consequence, of Cattle, and there being nothing kept up in Reserve which might
attract either new Resort or Commerce, they quickly grew overgrown with
Solitude and Desolation; so that these two Islands have been compared to some
profuse Gallants, who spend all upon the Back, but nothing upon the Belly,
having their outsides laced with Pearl, but within nothing but Want and Hunger.

The Spanish Interest on the Continent of AMERICA.
PARIA is the first which exacts our Notice. It is bounded on the East with
Guiana, and the Islands in the Mouth of the River of Orenoque, on the West with
the Gulf or Bay of Venezuela, and part of the new Realm of Granada, on the
North with the Atlantic Ocean, or Mare del Noort; the Countries on the South
being hitherto not discovered. It is called Paria from its eminent situation,
Paria in the American Dialect importing high Hills or Mountains, (for here
begins that Chain of Hills which are from thence continued to the Straights of
Magellan for the distance of 3600. Miles) Cumana, and Venezuela are Limbs or
Provinces of this Paria.

Cumana has on the East the Gulf of Paria, and the River of Orenoque, on the
West Venezuela, on the North and South it is circumscribed as before. It was
first Discovered in the third Voyage of Columbus, but the Possession was first
taken by two Dominicans, who out of a zeal to disperse the Mists of Infidelity
in Paria, by the Irradiation of the Gospel, established a little Cell in the
place, where after in the Year 1513. the Borough of Cumana was erected; and
certainly their Religious Intentions had been reduced to perfection, had not
the Avarice and Treachery of some Spaniards subverted it, who having brought
the Chief of one of their Tribes with his Wife and Train into Captivity, so
enraged the Natives, that nothing but the Death of the two Monks could expiate
this Affront; But their Death was recompensed with revenge by Alfonso de Oieda
in the Year 1520. but he himself not long after fell a Sacrifice to the Fury of
the Savages; and with him perished two Convents of Dominican and Franciscan
Friars, which had been established here in the Year 1518. To repair these
prejudices, and piece up the Colony, a second Supply is employed hither under
the Conduct of Gonsalvo de Ocampo, who beheads one of their Kings, hangs some
of the People and depopulates the Country. But this Force being likewise
dissipated and broken, Diego de Castellon is Commanded by the Council resident
in Hispaniola, to secure the Possession of the Country; by whom the Castle
first, and secondly the Borough of Cumana was both built and planted.
Afterward the Castle St. Michael de Neueri was erected by Hierome de Ortal,
which Fo^tifications and Strengths have so asserted the Interest of the
Spaniard in this Province, that it is yet under the signory and Scepter of that
Monarch.

Venezuela* the second Province of Paria, is shut in on the East with Cumana,
and on the West it is chained in with the Bay of Venezuela, the Lake of
Maracaybo, and the New Realm of Granada. It was first Discovered by Columbus,
but first Discoveries being like the Designs of Chemists in their Quest of
^old, much in projection but little in perfection; It was afterward perfected
and brought to some accomplishment by Alfonso de Oieda, who having found a
Borough of Savages to which there was no passage feasible but by a Boat, being
circumscribed with Waters, he styled it Venezuela, the Word importing as much
as Little Venice. Afterward John de Anpuez was in the Year 1527. by the
Council of Hispaniola employed to secure this Province thus Discovered, with
Forts and Colonies, to the Dominion of the the Crown of Spain; and thus it
remained until Charles the fifth, being obliged by his Necessities, had taken
up vast Sums of Money of the Velsers, a wealthy Family of Augspurg, mortgaged
this Province to them as their Security until they were reimburs'd, and by
them was Ambrose Alfinger employed with 400 Foot and 80. Horse, to take
Possession; but he and his Sucessors* filling the whole Country with Rapine and
Devastation, the Council of Domingo being zealous in the Reduction of this
Province to perfect Obedience and Civility, designed one John de Caravayall in
the Year 1545. for that employment, who having out-vied his predecessor in all
excess and disorder, was supplanted and outed by one John Pe^ez de Tolosa,
sent over likewise by the Council of Hispaniola, by whose Prudence and Conduct
this Province was brought to conform to Order and Government. In the Year 1550.
the Negroe, being transported out of Africa in great Multitudes into this
Province, endeavored a Mutiny, but their Treasonable designs being discovered,
they were for the most part offered up to the Sword of Justice; after these
distempers and concussions the Country was in short time so thoroughly planted,
and the Natives in their several Tribes so exemplarily encouraged by exempting
them from Taxes and other pressures, that Peace, Plenty, and Contentment have
ever since waited upon this Province, under the Government of the King of Spain.

Guiana is bounded on the East with the main Atlantic Ocean, on the West it is
hemmed in with the Mountains of Peru, or rather some undiscovered Countries
interposed betwixt them; on the North with the River of Orenoque, and on the
South with that of the Amazons; it is assirmed by Authors of approved Esteem
that it is called Wiana from the River Wia, and by the Dutch who cannot melt
the W into A, in their Dialect Guiana, the G. being more naturally proportioned
and shaped to the Genius of their pro^^nciation.

Rio^e ^as Amazones, called likewise Orellana, was first discovered by Orellana
Lieutenant to Gonzales Pizarro, from whom it extracted its Name: This Pizarro
moved with the noise of some rich Countries beyond the Andes, he collected a
considerable Force and passed those Mountains (where being necessitated by the
want of Provisions (they framed a Boat* and employed Orellana abovesaid to
bring in Provisions; but the River he engaged in was of that course, that being
debarred of Return, he obeyed his Fate, and followed the Stream from the
beginning of January to the end of August 1540. and at last descended into the
Sea, and arriving in the Isle of Cubagna sailed into Spain; in his passage some
Masculine Women showed themselves active to oppose his Landing, inter-mixt with
Men, and in some places he found Men with long Hair like women; either of which
relations might foment that report which affirmed these parts to be held by
Amazons. But to return, in the Year 1549. he obtained a Commission from the
Court of Spain for the Conquest of these Countries, and immediately undertook
the Employment; But though he found one of the Mouths of the River, yet he
could never attaque that Channel, though often attempted, which conducted him
before to the Sea. This ill success, waited on with the loss of his Fame and
Fortune, filled him with that Regret and discomposure, that the Lord of Sorrow
sunk him into his Sepulcher, having bequeathed to Posterity the Honor of the
first Discovery. This Enterprise was prosecuted with the same fruitless
success, by one Pedro de Orsna in the Year 1560. since which the Spanish Hopes
being blasted with these Discouragements, they have abandoned the design and
given it over.

The Coast and River of Orenoque with the several Nations that dwell on the
Margin and Fringes of it, as namely, the Capuri, and Macureos, with the
Tivitivas, Assawy, Saymae, Wikeri, Aroras, and Ar^ac^, were first Discovered by
Diego de Ordas, Anno Do^. 1531. furnished with a Patent for the Conquest of
this Track, by Charles the fifth, but missing the true Channel, and being not
able to level those Difficulties which did intercept his Design, he returned
into Spain, effecting nothing, but opening the way to others. Followed herein
by Hierome de Ortal, Anno 1533. and after Anno 1536. by Herrera, who advanced
his progress farther then the others, and finally by Gonsalvo Ximenes de
Quesada: and Antonio Berreo, with more auspicious Fortune waiting upon their
designs, who commencing their Journey from the new Realm of Granada in the
search of Guiana, sell casually into this great River, as Orellana did before
into that of the Amazons. But yet not perfectly Discovered until the Year
1595. in which Sir Walter Raleigh having taken Prisoner this Antonio Berreo,
and taking an Account of him of his Expedition, resolved upon the undertaking,
and searched so far into the Country, by the course and Conduct of this River,
that some have since imposed the Name of Raliana upon it. The business next
year was prosecuted by Capt. Lawrence Ke^is, who by the Influence and
employment of Sir Walter Raleigh embarked himself in that Attempt, but the
Spaniard, having unravel'd his Design, dispersed and scattered the Natives
which favored the English, and made good their Interest here with such vigorous
opposition, that he was forced to return without any other effect of his Journey
then the finding out the true Mouth of the River of Orenoque, which owes it
self to his Discovery. After this the Spaniards the more to secure their
Concernment here, erected St. Thome, situate on the main Channel of the River,
a Town consisting in the Bulk of it but of 140. Houses, stretched out in extent
(though meanly built) the distance of half a mile, which in the Year 1617. was
sacked by Sir Walter Raleigh, not without the loss of his Son and a
considerable part of his Forces, who at his return into England, to expiate
this Affront offered to the Spaniurd, was excuted upon a former Attainder
October. 29. 1618. though some Lawyers of that Age did assert, that the investing
him by Commission with the power of General, did absolve him from all former
guilt of High Treason, upon whose Tomb stone the Character dropped upon his
Memory by the learned Cambde^ in his Annals may be endorsed as an eternal
Epitaph; Vir erat nunquam sat is Laudato Studio, and Regiones remot as
detegendi, and navalem Gloriam promovendi: And so having opened the Sepulcher
of this great Man, I again close it up and leave him in his bed of Rest, and
proceed. In the Year 1629. the Town of St. Thome abovementioned was again
Invaded and ransacked by the Hollander, but being abandoned not long after, it
was repossessed by the Spaniard, and remains in obedience with the Country
adjacent at this instant under the Crown of Spain,

There is an Island at the Mouth of the River of Orenoque called Trinidado, or
Insula Trinitatis, being situated opposite to Paria, from which it is divided
by a Frith or Straight by Columbus, who in his third Voyage Anno 1497. first
discovered this Island called Boca del Drago, or the Dragons mouth, from the
Difficulty and danger of the passage of it, the Frith or Straight is but three
miles over, yet made more narrow by the Interposition of four or five little
Islands, which the Sea breaks thorough with great impetuousnesse, leaving only
two entrances for Shipping into the Gulf, called the Gulf of Paria. There is
nothing more memorable in the story and fortunes of this Island, but that it
abounds with Maiz, Sugarcanes, Cottenwooll, excellent Tobacco, sufficiency of
Fruit and Cattle for the use of the Natives, and some Veins of Gold and other
Metals, as likewise such abundance of Pitch that innumerable Ships might be
laden with it, but that it is conceived to be unfit for the Calking of Ships,
because it ^oftens in the Sun: The principal Town of the Island is St.
Joseph's, patched up of forty Houses, yet the Spanish Governor who has here
his Residence, besides this Island, stretches his Command (as is intimated by
his Titles) over the two Provinces of El Dorado and Guiana.

Paraguay is bounded on the South with Magellanica, on the East with the main
Atlantic, on the North with Brasil, on the West it is shut in with some
unknown Countries that interpose between it and Chile. It has borrowed this
Appellation from Paraguay one of the greatest Rivers in the World which runs
through this Province, which with the adjacent Country is by the Spaniards
christened by the Name of Rio de Plata, from the great abundance of Silver they
expected from it.

It is divided into the three Provinces of Rio de Plata, Tucuman, and S. Crux
de Sierra. The Soil is productive of Maiz, Wine, Sugarcanes, and other
American Fruits; blessed with an increase of Cattle, especially of Kine and
Horses brought out of Spain, multiplying here to a strange Improvement: Not
unfurnished of Mines of Brass and Iron, some Veins of Gold and Silver, and
great plenty of Amethists. It contains likewise great plenty of Stags, and of
Monkeys incredible numbers; not to say any thing of Lions, Tigers, and other
such destructive Animals, a few of this noxious Register being thought too many.

These Provinces were first Discovered by John Diaz de Solis, Anno 1515.
Afterward the Discovery was reduced to a more eminent Perfection by a farther
prosecution by Sebastian Cabot, in the Year 1526. but wanting that happy
Conclusion that a Design of this nature did seem to exact, its Discovery was
reassumed by Pedro de Mendosa in the Year 1535. but still his undertakings were
not so matur'd and digested but that they were left to be brought to a final
period by Alvarez Nonnez, who in the Year 1540. having fully perfected the
Discovery and Conquest of these Territories, has left the Possession ever
since to be enjoyed by the succeeding Kings of Spain.

Chile is shut in on the North with the Desert of Alacama extended 90. Leagues
in length, interposing betwixt it and Peru, on the West with Mare del Zur, on
the South with the Straights of Magellan, and on the East as far as to Rio de
la Plata, with the main Atlantic Ocean.

The Soil hereof toward the Midland is Mountainous and unfruitful, toward
the Seaside level and fertile, made so by Rivers distilling from the
Mountains, productive of Maiz, Wheat, and excellent Pasturage, not defective in
plenty of Gold, abundance of Honey, store of Cattle, and Wine enough for the use
of the people; the Vines and all other Plants which are transported hither out
of Spain, enriching the Industry of the Inhabitants with a thriving and
successful Fertility. The People are of a white Complexion, but shaggy Hair'd
like the rest of the Savages, of a tall and Gigantick stature, well conditioned
and qualified unless provoked, they are Armed with Bows and Arrows, and are
attired with the Skins of Beasts, the Climate exacting it; this Country being
called Chile from the word Chill, which in more Tongues than ours, does
signify Cold; indeed the Air of this Territory is so exposed to the violence
of Frosts, that many times both Horses and Men are congealed, and hardened like
a piece of Marble.

It is divided into Chile, properly so called, and Magellanica. The first
Province was discovered by Almagro de Alvarado, but Conquered by Baldivia, Anno
1544. And he with the concurrent Assistance of Garcias de Mendoza, the more to
secure the Spanish Acquists in this Track, about the Year 1551. strewed it with
the Colonies of Serena, St. Jago Delos Confines, Imperiale (so styled by the
Spaniards, because they found on the Doors of some Houses an Eagle insculped in
wood, the Relic perchance of some German Shipwreck) Villa Rica, Baldivia
Osor^o, Castro, St. Juan de la Frontera, and other Colonies; and though the
Savages (worried by some Affronts of the Spaniards) flew to Arms, and not only
in a successful Encounter slew Baldivia, but about the Years 1599. and 1604.
being better furnished with Military provisions, Sacked the Town of Baldivia,
forced Imperial^ to surrender without Conditions, and reduced Osorno by Famine,
yet in Times subsequent to this, the Spaniards so vindicated their Interest
here, that a considerable part of this Province is yet held in Obedience to the
Spanish Scepter.

Magellanica is a Province which for the most part is not only interlaced and
bunch'd out with Mountains, but condemned to Cold and Barrenness, abounding
with Men of a huge proportion and Gigantick Stature. It was styled so from the
dangerous Gulf or Straight which washes the South parts of it, and was
Discovered by Ferdinand Magellan 1520. But the first discovery being imperfect,
it was endeavored to be improved by Don Pedro de Sarmiento, who entered the
Gulf 1584. and planted two Colonies on the most convenient parts of that
Straight which he named Nombre de Jesus, and Cividad del Roy Philip, which he
resolved to fortify and store with Canon. But Winter approaching, he left his
Men, promising to supply them upon his return with a Recruit of necessary
Provisions to enforce their increasing hopes; but after struggling with many
Storms, Shipwrecks, and disappointments, his unhappy Fate cast him into
Captivity under Sir Walter Raleigh, so that his two Plantations shrunk into
Ruin, the men either mouldering away with Diseases, or else being destroyed by
the Savages; so that the Design of Planting this Province has ever since been
abandoned.

Peru is bounded on the Fast with that vast Chain of Mountains they call the
Andes on the West with Mare del Zur, on the North with some part of the Realm
of New Granada, on the South with Chile. It has extracted its Name from the
River Peru, which being one of the first of Note the Spaniards met with in
their pursuit of this Country, invited them to impose this Name upon the whole.

It is divided into the Plains, the Mountainous Countries, and the Andes; all
of so different a Nature one from the other, as if they were far distant, both
in sight and soil; the Plains extended on the Seashore are in all places
level without Hills, the Andes a continual Ridge of Hills without any valleys,
the Hill-Countryes are composed of both. In the Plains it seldom raines; on the
Andes almost continually; on the Hill Countries rain distills from September to
April, and then is ushered in a constant Fair Weather. In the Hill Countries
the Summer begins in April and concludes in September. In the Plains their
Summer Commences from October and Determines in April. The Andes are clothed
with Woods and Forests, but the Hill-Countries are bare and naked; the Plains
though refreshed with store of Rivers, are yet dry, barren and sandy. In some
parts of the Hill-Countries though there is a destitution of Rivers and Rain
but seldom, there is a copious production of Roots, Maiz-fruit, and all other
necessaries: In the Plains there never blows any but the Southern Wind, though
it is the harbinger to no Rain; In the Hills the Winds breath from every
quarter and Coast, and of every Nature, some ushering in rain, some snow, some
claps of Thunder, and some again being the parent of fair weather. As for the
Country it self though it be productive of a narrow Increase of Wheat, yet is
it of a large plenty of Roots (the principal food of the Inhabitants) some
proportion of Maiz, and plenty of Cocas, the Leaves whereof being dried and
formed into Lozenges, are exceeding useful in a journey, for melting in the
mouth they appease both hunger and thirst, and preserve a man in his strength,
and his Spirits in vigor; and though the Cattle of Europe brought hither in a
considerable quantity, are not multiplied to any great increase, yet is that
defect supplied by Beasts called Vicagues, in Resemblance somewhat like a wild
Goat, which in infinite numbers graze in their woods and pastures; and great
store of Sheep by the Natives called Pacos, profitable for Fleece and Burden,
as big as a small breed of Horses, but in relish as pleasing as our Mutton, and
no less conducing to nutriment. A Creature so well acquainted with his own
abilities, that when he is over-pressed with a burden, no force or violence
shall engage him to move forward until his load be abated; and of so cheap a
Diet, that very little suffices him, passing sometimes for the continuance of
three days without any water.

Nor is the Peruvian Fig Tree to be forgoten, the North-part of which
respecting the Mountains produces its Fruits in Summer only; the Southern part
having an aspect upon the Sea, is fruitful only in Winter: and secondly that
Beast called the Huanacu, exacts our Remembrance, of that regard to their
Females that the Males stand sentinel on the hills, whilst they are feeding in
the valleys, and if any men approach, they by some clamorous notice intimate to
them the invasion, and if they are pursued they descend to bring up the rear,
that by interposing their own bodies, they may secure their retreat from
danger. Another plant the Relations of Peru inform us of, but do not discover
the name, which being placed in the hand of a sick man will by some Symptoms
give testimony whether he shall live or die, for if on the pressing of it his
Visage be Cheerful, it is an assured sign of his recovery; as otherwise, if sad
and troubled, a certain index of ensuing death. Nor is Peru defective in
Rarities of Nature even in things inanimate, for here is affirmed to be a Lake
near the Mines of Pot^si, whose water is so hot, though the circumabient Region
be exceeding cold, that they who bath themselves are not able to sustain its
Heat if they depart and wade some distance from the Bank, there being a Boiling
in the midst of above twenty Foot square; a Lake which never does decrease
though they have drawn a considerable stream to be subservient to their Mines
of Silver.

As for the Inhabitants, they are people of no great knowledge, yet great
Dissemblers, being never drawn to discover their conceptions freely. They are
ignorant of Letters, but bold in War, and dexterous in the managery of those
Weapons they have been accustomed to, nor do they resent Death with any Fear,
being prompted to this Confidence by an Opinion that after Death they shall
eat, drink, and make their Love and addresses to Women. At the Funeral of any
eminent person they offer up one or two of his Servants as an Oblation to his
Sepulcher (being egged on to this inhumanity by the former opinion) to attend
him in the world to come. In their Habit they are conformable to other Savages,
only those attire their upper parts with some decent Garment, but expose the
other Members to public view, being bare and naked. But this is only near
the Equator, both Sexes else wearing Mantles pendulous to their feet, Habited
generally in one Fashion, unless in the Attire of their Heads, wherein they
almost all disagree from each other, each retaining his mode to himself. The
Women here are treated as Slaves, and sometimes upon trivial Accidents cruelly
beaten, the Men being prompted to this Barbaritie by being given up to Sodomie,
and other unnatural uncleanness.

Peru is divided into Quito, a Province of a fertile Soil well stored with
Cattle, plentifully furnished with Fish and Fowl, great quantity of Nitre, and
replenished with Rivers, some of which have their sand enamelled with veins of
Gold; the people are strong and healthy, industrious in the making of Cottens
almost proportionate to Silk in finenesse, but given to dissembling, the
disorders of drink, and other vices, which renders it difficult to reclaim them
from their ancient Barbarism, and makes them unapt for any Tincture or
impression of the Christian Faith. Secondly, Los Quix^s, somewhat more barren
then Quit^, whose people have distinct a Tongue of their own, though they both
understand and speak the common Per^vian Language. Thirdly, Lima or Los Reys,
ennobled with the Mines of Castro Verreyna, from whence is extracted Silver of
the purest Complexion. Fourthly, Cusco, a Province blessed with a calm and
temperate Air, not fretted or over-scalded with the scorching reflections of
the Sun, nor made drowsy and dull with the distempers of Evening Mists, and
whose Soil is full of Rivers and Pasturage, which makes it to be furnished
with Deer and other Herds of Cattle; nor is it wanting in Coca which is here
gathered in some abundance, or defective in Mines of Gold or Quicksilver, very
subservient to the easy extraction and purifying of the former noble Metal;
the first being discovered at St. Juan del Ore in the Valley of Carravayan, and
the second being traced out in the year 1566 near the Town of Guancabelica.
Fifthly, Callao, a Country well stored with fertile Pastures, and those
pastures furnished with Herds of Cattle, but barren of Corn, and not well
furnished with Maiz, whose defect is supplied by Bread composed of a Root
called Ropa, dried in the Sun bruised to powder; Its Inhabitants are of a more
clear and solid Judgment then the rest of Peru, and so dextrous in the
observations of the Course of the Moon, that the Spaniards upon their first
Discovery of this Province, found the Year distinguished into Months, Days, and
Years, for each of which they had a proper and significant Name. In this
Province is the so much famed Lake of Titicaca, in which twelve Rivers are
reported to lose themselves, in compass 80. Leagues, and usually Navigable
with Barks and Ships; the waters are not so salt as that of the Sea, but so
thick that they are in no capacity to be drank. By a fair watercourse or River
i^ glides into a less Lake called Aulaga, and thence most probably by some
indistinguishable recesses empties it self into the Sea. Sixthly, Los Ch^rc^s,
a Province not very plentiful in Corn or Cattle, though in many places
furnished with excellent Pasturage; but its eminence arises from the
inexhaustible Mines of Porco and P^tosi, which makes it to be unparrallel'd
with any Province in Peru. The Mine of Potosi is two hundred Fathom deep, to
which they do descend with Ladders made of raw Hides eight hundred steps, some
of the Workmen not seeing the Sun many months together. For the refining of
this Silver there are 52. Engines or Silver-mills upon a River near unto it,
22. more in the Valley of Tarapia near adjoining, besides many which they turn
with Horses; and from these Peruvian Mines as from some bottomless Exchequer
does the King of Spain load that Fleet whence he extracts so much Income and
profit.

Peru and the Provinces circumscribed within the Limits of it were discovered
and conquered from Arabaliba the Inga or Emperor of Peru by Pizarr^ and his
Complice Diego de Almagr^ 1528. first of which (more to secure his Conquests)
erected Lima, Truxillo (named so from Truxillo a Village in Navarre where
Pizarr^ was born and educated) Arned^ and other Colonies, but yet the Conquest
was not so perfected by these two Commanders abovementioned, but that Gil^s
Ramirez first in the Year 1559* and Don Francis de Toledo afterward in the
Year 1565. by Building of Oropes^ in Charra^, and establishing Colonies in the
other Provinces, brought this vast Kingdom to the full Obedience of the
Spanish Scepter.

Nova Granada, or the new Realm of Granada is shut in on the North with
Castella Aurea, on the West with Mare del Zur, on the East with Venezuela, on
the South with the Hills and unpassible Mountains and Countries not yet
discovered. It is divided into Granada, properly so called, and Popayna.

Granada has an Air well tempered, the Country is full of Woods, amongst which
Guia^um so medicinable for the Malady of France, grows in great abundance; the
soil is of great fertility, well stored with Corn and Pasturage, which affords
a Feeding to many Herds of Cattle; it is enriched likewise with some veins of
Gold and other Metals, and that part which is called Tunia exhibits plenty of
Emeralds. The People are tall and strong of Constitution, but not very
industrious, they wholly devoting their time to Songs and Dances. The Women are
of a white and more clear Complexion than their Neighbors, and more handsomely
attired, being apparelled in Black or party-colored Mantles girt about their
middles, their Hair ^ied up and covered with Chaplets artificially composed and
intermixed with Flowers.

Popayna is a Country which being over-cloid with rain produces little Maiz,
less Wheat, and almost no Cattle. The People were anciently Man-eaters and as
rude as any, now more industrious and accostable than the other Americans,
especially about Popayana where the Soil is better tempered then in other
places.

Both these Provinces were reduced to the Signorie of Spain by Gonsalvo Ximines
de Quesada and Sebastian de Betalcasar, the first sub^ued Granada 1536. and the
last mastered Popayana not long after, and styled it so from the Name of a King
which then Governed it at the Conquest by the Command and Influence of Francis
Pizarro Governor of Peru.

Castilia del Oro is bounded on the East and North with Mare del Noort, on the
West with Mare del Zur, and some part of Veragua, on the South with the New
Realm of Granada. It is divided into Panama Darie^e, Nova Andalusia, St
Martha, and Rio de la Hach.

Panama has an Air foggy but exceeding hot, and consequently, the Soil is
either Mountainous and barren, or Low and mirey; naturally incapable of Grain,
and productive only of Maiz, and that but sparingly; more devoted to pasturage
and the goodness of it: upon the first approach of the Spaniard, the Country
was almost overrun with Swine, but being destroyed, that Nation now complains
as much of their defect, as they did before of their abundance. As for the
Inhabitants, most of the old stock being almost rooted out by the Spanish
Massacres, and no new ones planted in their room, the Country in all parts,
except toward the Sea, is almost desolate and forsaken.

Darie^e has an Air well tempered and a fruitful Soil, very happy in the
production of Melons and other Fruits, ripening here in twenty Days after they
are sown, and with the same felicity does it yield an increase of Grapes,
either congenial hereunto, or else transported from Europe. A Tree here is
called Hov^ whose Shade is reputed so wholesome that the Spaniards covet to
sleep under the shadow; out of the Blossoms they distill a perfumed water; out
of the Bark they compose a Bath prevalent to open the pores and redress
weariness; and out of the Roots they extract a Liquor fit for Beverage; of
Beasts and Fowl both wild and tame, there is exceeding plenty, and some of
them not discoverable in other places.

Nova Andalusia is Mountainous and full of Woods, but those woods abound with
great store of Rosin-gums, and ^ome kind of Balsams. Here is said to be a Tree
which whosoever touches is in danger to contract a Ruin by poison. Our
Europian Fruits transplanted hither prosper not, because the Soil being
obnoxious to abundance of Rain, becomes moist and soggie. This Province is
interlaced with few veins of Gold, only in that part of it which is called
Zena; the Spaniards at their first Arrival found much Treasure not dug out
of the Entrails of the Earth, but deposited in the Tombs and Repositories of
the Dead, such being the reputed Sanctity of this Region, that the bordering
Nations brought their Dead to be Enterred here, with great quantity of Gold,
Jewels, and other Riches. The Natives were fierce and bold whilst they were a
People, but being wasted in those Contests which intervened between them and
the Spaniards, the populacy of this Province is now thin and empty, and their
Courage much broken and debased.

St. Martha has a Soil barren and unfruitful not capable of Pasturage or
Tillage, it being made knotty by a long Ridge of Mountains, called by the
Spaniards, La^ Sierras Nievadas, or the Snowy Hills; yet notwithstanding the
Air which hovers on the Seacoast is in its temper Hot and Scalding, though it
be again fanned and qualified with the Breezes of the Mid-land parts which are
Cold and Freezing; which combination of Heat and Cold, peradventure renders the
Soil productive of Limons, Oringes, Pomgranates, and such other fruits as are
transplanted or transported out of Spain. The Inhabitants are affirmed to be of
a rough and Arrogant Nature, some of whom by the advantage of the Mountains of
Tairona, called so from a Neighboring Valley of that name, have preserved
their Liberty against the Spaniard; the residue, though they retain their
several Kings are yet in subjection to the Spaniard; whose Government they
submit to with much unwillingnesse and Regret.

Rio de la Hacha is a fifth Province which summons our Notice. It is a
Territory of a small circuit, confining on the North-east of St. Martha,
environed on two sides with the main Ocean, and on the third, which is that of
the East, shut in with the spacious Arm of the Sea called Golfo de Venezuela,
the extremities hereof North west, have borrowed the Denomination of Cabo la
Vela, and those on the North-East the Appellation of Cabodi Coqui Boccoa.

The whole Province borrowed its Name from the Town and River of La Hacha,
which though it be but narrow in its Dimension and Estimate, yet is it big
enough to afford a Title to so small a Province. The Soil which embraces the
Town is exceeding rich, giving Increase to all such Plants as are transported
from Spain, being enamelled with Veins of Gold, studded with some Gems of much
worth, value, and virtue, and likewise well replenished with Wiches which are
fitted and proportioned to the production of excellent Salt: The Inh^bitants
both in the Dimension of Body and Quality of nature differ not much from those
of St. Martha, from which this Province is divorced by no great distance.
Panama, Nova Andalusia, and Dariena, now annexed to Panama, were first
Discovered on the North-side by Columbus about the Year 1508. Dariena and
Panama were afterward imperfectly Conquered by Didaco Ni^uesa; and Nova
Andalusia as lamely subdued by Alfonso Oreda: But the Complete and perfect
Reduction of these Provinces to the Obedience of the Crown of Spain, in whose
Patrimony they have been ever since resident, was reserved to the Victories of
Eucisus, Balboa, and Pedro d'Avila.

The two Praefectures of St. Martha, and Rio de la Hacha, were brought under
the Dominion of the Spanish Scepter by the Successful managery of the Arms of
that Nation by Francisco Vasquez; and being thus reduced, have been ever since
constantly subservient to the Commands and Interest of the Successive Monarchs
of Spain.

Guatimala is environed on the North with Jucutan and the Gulf of Honduras, on
the South with Mare del Zur, on the East with Castilia del Oro, on the West
with New Spain. It is resolved into six more subordinate Provinces, namely,
Chiapa, Verapaz, Guatimala properly so called, Honduras, Nicaragua, and lastly
Veragu^.

Chiapa has a Soil not very productive of Corn or Fruit, though that Valley
which is contiguous to the Town of Chiapa is well replenished with Pears,
Apples, Wheat, and Maiz; Herbs, Beans, and Lentils transported from Spain
thrive here to a plentiful increase, yet Vines seldom arrive here to any
maturity, though Wood-vines there are besides, which afford a pleasant Pulpe,
and if they were well managed might repay the Laborers Industry with a nobler
profit. Their Trees, as Pines, Oaks, Cedars, and the Cypress are of greater
dimension then in other places; here are entire Woods of Walnut-trees, but the
nut is not of that quantity as those of Europe; some Trees distill Rosin, some
such Balsamick-gums as in other parts are not Customary, and some there are
whole leaves being dried into powder, contribute a sovereign Plaster against
inveterate Ulcers: And indeed this Country being stored with Snakes and other
venomous Creatures, does often exact such defensatives against their poison
which is fatally deadly. Here is a considerable production of Cochineele.

The Inhabitants are more devoted to Music, and become more exact in Painting
than the rest of the Natives.

Verapaz is a Province distinguished into eminent Hills and deep Valleys, but
defective in Fruitful Valleys. It is generally overspread with Woods very
large and thick, which so disturb the free passage of the Winds, that the air
is much exposed to showers, insomuch that Nine months in the year are moist
with continual Rain, nor are the other three altogether secure from it; which
excess of moisture engenders many Mesqueto's injurious and destructive to
Fruit, with which, and with Fish and other necessaries this Province is
redundant. In stead of Mines of Gold and Silver not yet discovered, some Trees
here pour out a kind of Amber, which the Natives style Liquid Amber; some
Mastick and other Gums; nor is here any defect of Medicinal woods, as
Sarsa-parilla, China, and many others of the like Nature.

The Natives are tractable in their Conformity to the Spanish Discipline,
unless the Le^andones and Pachuteci, being some broken remains of the Ancient
Salvages, who immuring themselves in the craggy Fastnesses of this Country,
have at once asserted their Native Freedom against the onsets of the Spaniards,
and retained their ancient Idolatry, there being but fourteen Villages in all
this Province in which the Spaniards have mingled with the Old Inhabitants.

Guatimala properly so called, is a Province not only embost with Mountains,
but likewise interlaced with many Rive^s, which renders the Country commodious
both for Fishing and Hunting. Productive it is of Wheat, Maiz, and other
Provisions not durable; it is not so much exposed to Rain, as the neighboring
Provin^e of Verapaz, but more infested with winds. It contains plenty of rich
and fertile Pastures, and those covered with great Herds of Cattle. It
contributes store of Cotten-wooll, some Balsam and other medicinable Liquors;
it transmits the best Sulphur, and other healthful Drugs, whose Register I am
ignorant of. The People are full of Fear and Pusilanimity, yet seem greater
poficients in Christianity and Civility then the Residue of the Salvages, yet
very prone to relapse again to Paganism and Infidelity, and as propense to
revive again their old Barbarous Customs, if the curb of Power and bridle of
Authority, did not with an awful Fear restrain this Apostasy. The Men are
affirmed to be dextrous in Archerie, and the Women skilful in Spinning.

Honduras is a fourth Province of Guatimala, a Country so swollen with Hills or
depressed with Valleys, that it affords little Champaigne, yet is productive of
Maiz and Wheat, and of rich Pasturage, improved to that Fertility by the
constant over-flowings of their Rivers about Michaelmas. Some Mines of Gold are
affirmed to be wrapped up in the Entrails of the Earth not yet discovered; the
Inhabitants being made so unactive with Sloth and Idleness, that they had
rather subsist by Roots, the common stock of Nature, then by the more
industrious design of Tillage, and therefore not easily charmed to toil for
others, that will not Labor for their own necessities.

Nicaragua is a fifth Province which claims our consideration. It is a Country
destitute of Rivers unless where it is linked to Costa Ric^, which is it self
marshalled under the Notion of a Province. The defect of which is supplied by a
great Lake called the Lake of Nicaragua, one hundred and twenty Leagues in
compass, ebbing and flowing like the Sea. It is not much enriched with Corn,
but abounding in Herds of Cattle, who have a Soil to graze on Level and
champaign, but cooled with the shadow of frequent Trees; one amongst the
residue is of that nice Constitution, that a man cannot touch it in any part
but it pre^ently withers. Vulgar relations assert this Province to be as well
replenished with Parrots as England with Crows; It is stored with plenty of
Cotten-wooll, and a numerous product of Sugarcanes. Indeed the Country is so
ennobled with all things that may either improve Delight or contribute to
Necessity, that the Spaniards have imposed upon it the Title of Mahomet's
Paradise. The Inhabitants are generally knowing in the Spanish Dialect, to the
Garb, Behavior and Apparel of which Nation they willingly conform themselves;
well retriv'd from their old Barbarous Customs, which are still retained by
those Mountainers, they call Cho^tales. They are all of a considerable Stature,
and of a Complexion indifferently white. Before their reduction to
Christianity, they were knit together by a politic Form of Government, only
as the Romans had no determined Law or punishment for a man that destroyed his
Father, so had these none for the Killer of a King, both of them judging that
men could not be so unnatural as to act either Parricide or Regicide. A Theif
they condemned not to Death, but decreed he should be Slave to that person he
had injured, till by his Service his crime was expiated with just satisfaction:
A course both prudential and merciful.

Veragua is the last Province in Guatimala which extracts our Inspection. The
Name which was imposed upon it, was extracted from Veragua, the most
considerable River in it at the first Discovery. This Country is knotted with
Mountains, and has a Soil condemned to Barrenness, in no capacity for Tillage,
and less useful for the feeding of Cattle, yet is sufficiently productive of
Maiz and Herbage, but else very thrifty in other necessaries which conduce to
the Life of Man; but to recompense this Ungrateful Indigencie and penury of
Soil, the Bowels of the Earth treasure up in their Cells and gloomy
Repositories, as in some inexhaustible Exchequer, never perishing Mines of Gold
and Silver.

The Inhabitants are of a Warlike and Irrefragable spirit, sufficiently
testified by their undaunted Courage in bearing the Spanish Yoke with that
Regret and reluctance as they do at this instant; it being observable, that the
most untameable and untractable Nations have been the Inhabitants of Woody and
Mountainous Countries; the last being Bulwarks cast up at Gods own charges to
secure them from the onsets of any foreign violence.

This Country entitles its Discovery to diverse men, according to the several
Members and Divisions of it; Veragua, though the last of these Provinces which
were conquered, had the Honor to be first visited by Columbus, who in the Year
1502. driving up and down on these Coasts was cast on the Entrances of that
River on which he afterward imposed the Name of ^elen, where (hearing that
there was Golden Treasures in the Mines of Hurira not far distant) he intended
to fortify; But his Designs being superseded by a Defect of provisions to to
sustain his followers, the further discovery of Guatimala was abandoned, being
reserved to the fortunate and vigorous undertaking of Ferdinand Corte^, who
having fully settled and composed the Affairs of Mexico, determined to make the
residue of America bow to the Commands of the Spanish Scepter. And to reduce
these Intentions of his to perfection, he employed his Officers and Commanders
into several parts, Guatimala was discovered and reduced by Pedr^ de Alvarado;
Honduras was Conquered by Christopher de Olid; Nicaragua and Verag^a were
subdued by Gonsalvo de Corduba; and lastly, Vera Paz was won to Christianity,
and the Spanish Obedience together, by the Preaching of some D^minican Friars
of that Nation. But Cortez distrusting that some new Revolt or Defection might
tear these Provinces from the Spanish Dominion, resolved to secure his new
Concernments by a personal Visit; and to fortify, and second this Design in
the Year 1524. he collected a Body of fifteen hundred Horse, and as many
Spanish Foot, with an Addition of Three thousand Mexicans, and advancing into
Guatimala, he continued his progress as far as Truxillo, where finding that
Gonsalvo de Cordova had so composed Affairs, that there was no farther need of
his Conduct or Assistance, he with his little Army in the Year 1526. retreated
to Mexico, leaving these Provinces before recited, firmly fastened and annexed
by an happy Conquest (as they have continued ever since) to the Dominion and
Command of the Diadem of Spain.

Nova Hispania.
NOva Hispania is circumscribed on the East with a spacious Arm of the Sea
called the Bay of New Spain, and the Gulf of Mexico; on the West it is shut in
with some parts of Nova Gallicia and Mare del Zur; on the North with another
part of Nova Gallicia, some part of Florida and the Gulf; on the South with
Mar^ del Zur, or the South Sea; from the Discovery of these new Acquists, the
Kings of Spain style themselves Reges Hispaniarum, in the Plural number.

The Air of this whole Continent, as to the generality or principal part of
it, is temperate enough, though placed under the Torrid Zone, the Heat being
much qualified by the Fannings of those continual Breezes which breath upon it
from three Confines of the Sea; this Refrigerium or abatement of Heat being
much enforced by that continual Flux of Rain which distills upon the Earth in
those hotter months of June, July and August. The entrails of this Soil
treasure up in themselves Mines of Gold and Silver, and some of Brass and
Iron; Nor is the Surface of it more ungrateful to the Industry of the
Inhabitants, here being a copious plenty of Wheat, Barley, Pulse of all sorts,
and of such plants and roots as are nourished for the use of the Kitchen, Maiz
in a fertile quantity; nor is the production less of other plants unknown to
Europe; Pomgranats, Oringes, Limons, Citrons, Malacatons, Figs and Cherries, do
here enrich their owners even with superfluous increase; Apples and Pears are
more thrifty in their fertility, and Grapes no less, and those which arrive to
Maturity are unfit for the Composition of Wine. Of Beasts and Birds both wild
and ^ame, there is a fruitful Account: but that which most ennobles it is the
plenty of Coco-nuts, the abundance of Cassia, and the wonderful Increase of
Cochineel, which has been improved to that quantity, that Five thousand six
hundred and seventy Arroba's of it (each Arroba comprehending Twenty five
Bushels of our English measure) have been transported into Europe, ^ Drug of a
very inconsiderable Extraction, for it grows upon a small Tree or Shrub
shadowed with thick Leaves called a Tuna, in their Institution planted and
ordered as the French do their Vines, out of the Seed hereof issues a Worm, in
its bulk, when extended to the greatest proportion not exceeding our Lady-cows,
whom they much resemble; which receiving their food from the Leaves, and
over-spreading the ground with their number, are collected into heaps twice in
the Year by the Natives, stifled with Ashes, or mortified with Water, and after
this Tragedy, being dried and reduced into powder, make up that Cargo which is
transported into Europe. Nova Hispania is distinguished into six Provinces, the
Register of which follows, namely Panuco, Mexicana, Mechoacan, Tlascala,
Guaxata, and Jucutan.

All which are not alike in all places as to the Constitution of the Soil and
Air, which is so different in these Provinces, that in such* parts of them as
are hot and dry, their Seed time is in April or May, their Harvest in October;
but in that Division of this Continent as is low and moist, they entrust their
Corn to the Earth in October, and reap its product in April or May; thus two*
Harvests in a year, (and yet but one if we consider their alternate and
successive Vicessitudes) in this Region are the Result of the Husband-mans
industrious Tillage.

The Ancient and Original Inhabitants of this Track were the Chichimeca's and
Ottomies, who were disseised by the Navatlacos, resolved and digested into
seven Tribes, which are thus Registered in their Catalogue, the Sachimilci, ^he
Chalchae, the Tepenecae, the Culvae, the Tla^uici, the Tlascaltecae; all of
which were settled ^n this Track, and five of them upon the Mar^in of the Lake
of Mexico, before the Eruption of the Mexicans, so styled from Mexi their
prin^ipal Leader, who much charmed with the Con^eniences and situation of
Temistitan, a City then ^n^ombed in a Heap of ruins, caused it to be ^eedified
and adopted it into his own Family, ^tyling it Mexico, which afterward grew
the Metrapolis of this Commonwealth; the Chiefs of six of the Tribes managing
the public affairs ^n common after the fashion and mould of an Aristocratical
Commonwealth, but the Ty^annical prevalency of some Tribes having by ^n
over-poize made the Power unequal, the Mexicans, one of the most inconsiderable
Tribes, ^eing grated upon by the unjust and uneven pressures of the rest,
separated themselves from the main Body, and resigned up the Administration and
sway of their Affairs to a King of their own, at first elected by themselves;
but when the prosperity of their prevailing Arms had cast all these Tribes but
Tlas^alla, under the Scepters of Acamapitzli, Vitzovitzli, Hulzi^ihuiel, Chimal
Pupuca, Iscoalt, Motezuma, and others of their succeeding Kings, the choice of
the Mexican Monarchs was entrusted unto Six, who as a Common Council or Senate
represented the six Tribes abovementioned, and they still lodged the Election
upon the most Active and Magnanimous, and who were chiefly fitted for Military
Designs and undertakings.

Although this spacious Province be not barren in Rarities, as namely, two
Mountains, one in the Province of Mexico, which vomits out Fire, the second in
that of Guaxata, which disgo^ges from its heated Entrails two Burning Streams,
one of Red Pitch, the other of Black; yet the principal which exacts our
Notice, is that which they call Magney or Meto, a Tree which they both plant
and dress as we do our Vines; it has on it forty several distinctions of
Leaves, which when tender, they compose into Conserves, Paper, Flax, Mantles,
Mats, Shoes, Girdles and Cordage; and these Leaves are armed with prickles so
strong and pungent, that the people use them in stead of Saws. From the Top of
the Tree issues a Juice in consistence like a Syrrup, which upon Decoction puts
on the shape of an Honey; and if purified, the form of Sugar, out of which they
extract both Wine and Vinegar. Out of the Bark, being roasted, is drawn a
convenient Plaster for wounds, bruises and sores; and from the highest of the
Bows distills an unctuous Juice like a Gum, which is a Sovereign Antidote to
chastise the malignity of Poison. But I have digressed, I now return to the
description of those Provinces above mentioned; and first Panuco obviates our
discovery, so called from Panuco the Chief River of it, which bubling out of
the Hills of Tepecsuan, bordering upon Cinoloa and Couliacan, and dividing New
Biscay from the Province of Zocotecas, glides through the middle of this
Province, and so at last after many traverses disembogues it self into the Gulf
of Mexico.

It is divided into three lesser Provinces called Aiotuxetlan, Chila, and a
Third whose Name is not yet discovered. The Soil is in some parts fruitful and
productive of Mines of Gold, in others again less pregnant, and in the last
Provinces dry and unpleasant, being condemned to Barrenness and infertility not
from any intrinsique defect in the Soil, but rather (as its thought) from a
want of Inhabitants to cultivate the Earth, who being active and courageous,
rather than they would bow their necks to a Foreign Servitude, have been
almost rooted out in those Contests and Encounters which were waged between
them and Cortez the Spanish General.

Mechoacan, the second Province, has extracted its Name from that plenty of
Fish their abundance of Rivers and Lakes afford them, the word importing in the
Native Idiome Locus Piscosus or a Country of Fish. It is ennobled with an Air
so sweet and salubrious, that Diseased people repair thither from distant
Countries to retrive their Health, which is likewise promoted and enforced by
the use of those medicinable hot Baths which issue from Rocks and other craggy
Repositories. The Soil is plentifully productive of Grain even to admiration.
It is well Wooded and full of excellent Pastures, which are improved by the
multiplicity of Springs and Rivers, nor does it yield to any part of America
for Herbs and Plants of an active and Medicinal nature in the Conquest and
expulsion of Diseases. It is likewise redundant with Amber, Mulbery-trees, Wax,
Honey, and such other things as are subservient both to Pomp and Pleasure. The
Inhabitants are tall, strong, and active, of no contemptible Ingenuity, as
being dextro^s in the Contexture of many Manufactures, more pliant to the
manners and Habit of the Spanish Nation than any of the Natives of New Spain,
the Mexicans only excepted, and of so propense an inclination to Christianity,
that by planting many Parishes, and establishing many Convents of Dominican and
Augustine Friars amongst them they are almost rescued from their old habituated
Idolatry.

Mexicana is the third Province which obliges our consideration. The Soil
abundantly supplies not only the Inhabitants, but likewise numerous Herds of
Cattle, with plenty of Aliment; nor is it defective in Fruits, of which there
is a liberal production. The Inhabitants are industrious as to the care of
their common Subsistence, which commonly is supported by their copious Stock of
Cattle, of which some private persons abound to such store, that their Register
amounts to Forty thousand Kine and Oxen: Nor are they less dextrous in
extracting a livelihood from Fish, of which last they draw out such plenty from
the Lake of Mexico alone, that the profits arising from this Trade swell to a
volume of Twenty thousand Crowns paid yearly into the King of Spain's
Exchequer: They are ingenious likewise in those Mechanical Arts which here are
professed, growing good Handycraftsmen, if they stoop so low as to Trades;
becoming rich Merchants, if they apply themselves to a more noble and
profitable Commerce; and waxing hardy and valiant Soldiers, if they are
disciplined and employed in Service, having in Times of more high ascent, very
well managed the Sling and Arrows their ancient Arms, and in these modern Ages
as vigorously (being enured to it by their Spanish Conquerours) weild the
Harcubuize and Pike which are their new. But the greatest Glory and Fame which
both now and anciently did accrue to them, was their exquisite perfection in
composing their Feather Pictures, turning every feather to the Light every way,
upwards and downwards, to discover in what posture it will best fit the place
intended for; secondly, their most accomplished expertnesse in Refining their
Metals; and thirdly, their curious designs in Painting upon Cotton, whatsoever
was represented to the Eye. But these Virtues and perfections were stained and
debauched with so Barbarous a Cruelty, that they thought no victime so fit
could be offered up to appease the Fury of their gods, as an Oblation of humane
Sacrifices, so that it is no wonder if God permitted the Spanish Sword to ^ake
such bloody Ravage upon this People, as ^ reward proportioned to recompense
their inhumane Butcheries, it being still very equal that the Artificers of
Death should be caught in their own impious and injurious Artifices. But
Ignorance and Barbarity are still complicated and entwined, and so it was
manifested here, for upon the first Eruption of the Spaniards, their misguided
Apprehensions esteemed Them and their Horses to be one piece, and when they
neighed they demanded what they spoke, ignorantly placing no Distinction
between neighing and speaking.

Guaxaca is a fourth Province which falls under our Cognizance. It has assumed
this Name from Guaxaca the principal Town of these parts, now styled Antequera.
The Air hereof is sound and salubrious, which hovers over a Soil as fruitful,
productive not only of those Commodities which it enjoyes in common with other
Provinces of this Continent, but likewise blessed with such plenty of
Mulberry-trees, that from thence is extracted such a quantity of Silk, that if
the Natives paid their Tithes (as they do not) the Income which issued from
thence, would afford a Revenue competent enough to support five Bishoprics.
Rivers are here very numerous, whose Shores for the most part are enamelled
with Golden Sand, nor is there here any deficiency of Cochineele, Cassia,
Silver, and other Metals; so that if the Industry of the People were but
correspondent to the Fertility of the Soil and Wealth of the Country, it might
become as opulent as any Province in America: But the natural sloth of the
Inhabitants makes them impatient of Labor, and consequently intercepts all
opportunities which may suggest an occasion of ama^^ing together any
considerable Estate; yet notwithstanding this, they are of a tractable and
docile Capacity in relation to the Impressions of the Catholic Faith, which
has encouraged the Spaniard to establish here an Hundred and twenty Covents of
Dominican Friars, and many other Schools and Seminaries of Learning, that by
their Influence and concurrent assistance they might better improve the growth
of Christianity in this Province.

Jucutan is a fifth Province which calls for our remembrance. It has borrowed
this Name from Jucutan, which in the Idiome or Dialect of the Country imports
as much as What say you? For when the Spaniards at their first arrival demanded
the Name of the place, the Natives answered, Jucutan. The Air which hovers over
this Country is hot, whose fervors are enforced from the Destitution or want of
Rivers in this Track, whose defect is supplied by the conservatories of
artificial Pits and Channels. The Soil is generally condemned to Barrenne^s,
not producing wheat, or any European Fruits; nor many of those which are of the
natural Extraction of America in other places. Nor are its bowels more pregnant
in Mines of Gold and Silver or any other Metalls, so that the general
subsistence of this People, is principally supported by Trades and Mechanic
Operations. But that which makes this Country most remarkable, is, that the
Spaniards upon their first approach discovered here some symptoms or glimpses
of Christianity, the people generally observing a constant Form of Baptism,
which in the Native Dialect is styled a second Birth, expressing by that word a
Regeneration; nor is any one permitted, to Marry until he has the Symboll of
this Initiation, which probably was some Vestigium or Relic of the Christian
Religion left here behind by Mad^c^ap Owen, or some other Christians by the
Disaster of some Shipwreck cast upon this unfortunate shore.

Tlascalla is that eminent Province, which being one of the Seven Tribes, which
having supplanted the Ancient Natives, the Chichimechas, could never be reduced
to the Tyranny and Usurpation of the Kings of Mexico, but still preserved
themselves, notwithstanding their frequent Eruptions in the Liberty of a
Democracie or Free State, and erected here the City of Tlascalla, which as it
gave Name to, so it became the Metrapolis of this Province, and in this
Capacity they remained until the Invasion of Cortez made upon Mexico, to whose
assistance out of Animosity to the Mexicans, they and the Inhabitants of
Zempoallan, another City of this Province, contributed such large supplies both
of Men and other Necessaries, that by their concurrence Mexico was reduced and
the Scepter of that Kingdom broken to pieces; and though they were forced
afterward to bow to the successful Sword of the Spaniard, yet do they preserve
still some shadow of ancient Liberty, being exempt from all kind of Tribute, as
a Recompense of their former Services, except it be an handful of Wheat for
every person, and permitted to live under the protection of the former
Government.

This Province is abundantly stored with Corn and Cattle, every where strewed
with rich Pastures, and abundantly productive of Mai^. It is level and beaten
out into an even Champaigne, unless where it confines on the Sea, where it is
made Gibbous and rugged with a Chain of craggy Mountains; but indeed the
Fertility of the Earth is very much enforced and multiplied by those many
Rivers which stream almost through every vein of it.

If we please to trace out those Eminent persons to whose Industry and
Navigation these Provinces which lie clasped up within the Verge of Nova
Hispania do attribute their first Discovery, we shall find that Panuco and
Mechoacan were first attempted by Francisco Garaio, but their Conquest was
perfected by Ferdinand Cortez in the Year 1522.

Jucutan was first Discovered by Ferdinand Cordova in the Year 1517. which
Discovery was in the Year 1518. reinforced by John de Grijalua, and persued
likewise by the Industrious Designs of Cortez, who about Tabasco obtained over
the Natives a signal Victory; but the final reduction of this Province to the
Obedience and Sovereignty of the Crown of Spain, is entitled to the Successful
Sword of Francisco Monteio, who in the Year 1527. achieved a full and absolute
Conquest over it.

Mexico and Guaxata followed the Fate of Panuco and Mechoacan, and by their
Conquest and Subjection augmented the Triumphs of the Victorious Cortez, about
the Years 1521, and 1522. Tlascalan was first Discovered by John Grijalua, but
received under the Protection of the Spanish Scepter by Cortez in the Year 1521.

Nova Gallicia is circumscribed on the East and South with Nova Hispania, on
the West with the River of Buena Guia, and the Gulf of Califormia, the
Countries which abutt on the Northern parts of it are not yet exposed to a
Discovery. It has assumed this Name from some resemblance or proportion it
holds with the Province of Old Gallicia in Spain.

The Air generally is of a temperate Constitution, yet more inclinable to heat
than cold, yet often discomposed with Thunders and Storms, and Cataracts of
Rain; the ground is much obnoxious to dryness, if not mollified by the Morning
Dewes which here distill frequently, but whether the Temperature of the Air or
Soil do contain in it some impure Seminalities is uncertain; sure it is, that
here is a production of Gnats (it is possible they may proceed from a
complicated putrefaction) affirmed to be in bulk equal to a Bean, which by
their stings afflict the People, and raise Blisters on their Bodies
proportionate in their dimension to a Walnut.

The Country in general is more knotted with Hills then level with Plains, and
in most parts Sandy. Quarryes of stone are here in abundance, but there is a
deficiency of Marble, or any other Stone of value. Plenty here is of Mines of
Silver, but few of Gold or Iron; yet is their Silver not free from a mixture of
Lead. The Soil is so Fertile that for one Measure of Wheat it pays back its
Interest in Sixty, and for one of Maiz it refunds Two hundred. The Rivers
abound in Fish, and the Woods in Beasts; Swarms here are of Bees without
stings, which have no other Hive but the Forest to compose their Honey in.
Apples, Pears, Citrons, Figs, Malacotons, and other European Fruits transported
from Spain, thrive better here than in their Native soil, only the Cherry and
Olive arrive at no perfection; of which the first has her nourishment
purloin'd from her by Emmots, and the last thrusts forth such clouds of Leaves,
(occasioned by the rankness of the circumambient earth) that the Fruit seldom
ascends to just maturity.

The People are of an inconstant volatile Nature, apt upon any Disgust to
abandon their Houses, and take Sanctuary in Woods and other Fastnesses; nay, to
return to their ancient Barbarism. Tractable and docile enough even in Matters
which relate to Religion; but lazy and impatient of Labor, to which they
hardly are enured either with Stripes or Wages, yet they are of vigorous and
healthful temper, contagious Diseases seldom breaking in upon them, which is
occasioned by the sound Constitution of the Air. Much given they are to
Dancing, Singing, and sometimes to Drinking. Their stature is reasonably tall,
their Vesture generally is a Shirt of Cotton, with a Mantle cast over it,
fastened with two Buckles about their shoulders. They Inhabit in Villages, which
swell in their Dimension, according to the greatness of those several Tribes
they are to receive, which Tribes are under the Command of their respective
Chiefs, who succeed hereditarily, yet notwithstanding are all subservient to
the Sway and Regiment of the Judges, and other Ministers of the King of Spain.
Plenty here is of Sugarcanes and Cochineele; but the Spaniards being concerned
in more gainful Merchandise, and eager in the persuit and search of Metals,
neglect to refine the one, and are not very sedulous to attend the ordering of
the other.

If you will Survey the Anatomy of this Region, you will find it to be
dissected into seven subordinate Provinces; namely, 1 Cinaloa. 2 Couliacan. 3
Xalisco. 4 Guadalaira; and on the Western shores, 5 Zacot^cas 6 New B^scay; and
lastly, Nova Mexicana, locked up within the Land.

Cinaloa the first Province in the Register above mentioned, is made happy by
an Air generally clear and healthy, and enriched with a Soil fat and Fruitful,
productive of Maiz, Pulse, and a certain long Pease, equivalent to those in
proportion the Latins anciently called Phaseoli, of which it contributes to
the industry of the Inhabitants a large Abundance; and this plenty is much
enhaunsed by the multiplicity of Rivers with which this Province is very well
watered.

The Inhabitants are generally of an eminent Stature, which much exceeds that
of the Spaniards; Warlike they are, vigorous and Active, and not reduced to the
obedience of the Spaniard without the expense of much Blood and Treasure,
though their Furniture either for offensive or defensive War, consisted in a
narrow Inventory, being only a massy Club, a Bow and some poisoned Arrows.
Those Garments which both Sexes attire themselves with, are made out of
Cotton-wooll, of which this Province yields a plentiful increase; The Hair of
both Sexes is nourished a considerable length, which the Men wind up in a
knot, but the Women permit to shoot out into a wide Diffusion. Both Sexes at
the first approach of the Spaniards, had nothing to veil their Nakedness,
only their Pudenda were obscured, being both indigent and ignorant, adoring
the Sun, and making their Diet out of Humane Butcheries.

Couliacan is the second Province which exacts our Notice; It enjoys a Soil
plentiful of Fruits, and yiedling to none in its production of all sorts of
provisions; and not defective in Mines of Silver, which owe their first
Discovery to the Ingenuity of the Spaniard.

The Inhabitants are not much different from the residue of Gallicia, only the
Beauty, Personage, and Dress of the Women is more obliging; yet the Men were
not secure from sordid and unnatural uncleanness. The Vesture which both Sexes
were habited in at the first Discovery of the Spaniards, was framed out of
Cotton-wooll. Their Houses are neatly thatched with straw, but the Lintells of
the Doors are embellished with paintings full of impudence and impure
obscenity. They are ignorant of Gold, of which this Province is defective, but
the Spaniards having discovered some Silver Mines, made them by a costly
experience know the Value of that Metal, compelling them both to Dig and
Refine it, that it might be more ministerial to the ends of their Avarice and
Luxury.

Xalisco or Galesco is a third Province of account. It enjoyes a Soil very
capable of the production of Maiz, with which it plentifully rewards the
Industry of the Inhabitants, only the scorchings of the Sun have introduced a
penury of Herbage, which is the greatest defect, only the Northern parts
styled Chiatnetla, are endued with more fertility and people, being enriched
with store of Wax, plenty of Honey, and some Mines of Silver. The People were
formerly embarked in perpetual Feuds and mutual Contests amongst themselves,
and dieted themselves with Man's flesh; which barbarous Customs, their
conversion to Christianity has extinguished, only one of their Ancient
Customs they yet adhere to* which is, to sustain the smallest Burdens on their
Shoulders, and not carry them under their Arms, as thinking the last indecent
and mis-becoming.

Guadalaira is a fourth Province which obliges our Discourse. The Character
which we have in general propotioned to the Natives of Nova Gallicia, may be
fitted and shaped in particular to the Inhabitants of this Province. The Soil
being moistened with the kind refreshments of the River Barania which cuts
through the midst of it, becomes fortunate in the production of Herbage, Maiz,
Wheat, and other Fruits which owe their first Extraction to Europe; nor are
they destitute of Silver Mines, whose bowels here cast out their Treasure in
some plenty.

Zacatecas is a fifth Province, circumscribed within the Pale of Gallicia,
whose Inhabitants whether by the conduct and Instinct of Nature, or the impulse
of external Force, are more industrious than the rest of the Gallician Natives.
The Soil is in its entrails enriched with Silver Mines, but its surface is
naked and barren, being destitute of Maiz, Wheat, Water, and all other
provisions which should contribute to the support of humane nature, as if it
were designed to be the residence of some greedy Miser, who delighted to glut
his Eyes more than his Appetite. The Northern parts styled Uxitipa, have
nothing wanting which may give a supply either to necessity or pleasure; and
though they are defective in Silver, yet are they plentifully stored with Corn
and Fruit, whilst their Woods are liberally replenished with Deer, whose
several Trees afford such entertainment to Quires of Birds, that they may be
deemed the constant Repository of those feathered Choristers.

Nova Biscaia is a sixth Province which does summon us to a Description. The
Bowels of the Earth are the Excheque^s from whence much Silver is extracted; as
for its Margin it is abundantly productive of all necessary provisions, though
much exposed in the Winter to the injurious inclemency of Frost and Snow; no^
are they likewise defective in Mines of Lead, which fitly contributes to the
melting and Refining their Silver, not only here, but in New Spain and Peru
also. The Inhabitants are generally of a Vigorous Constitution, and of a
Resolute and active Spirit, not bowing their necks to the Yoke of Conquest upon
the first Impression, being rather reduced by the calmnesse of persuasion, then
subdued by the rougher Attempts of violence and Force.

Nova Mexicana is the seventh Province which calls for our Notice; But those
Relations which have an Aspect on this Territory, are disordered with so much
Fiction and Improbab^lity, that, that Beam of Truth which should direct us to a
just and regular Description of it, is mu^^led up in the darkness of uncertain
and imperfect Informations, so that until clearer Discoveries do dissipate
that Cloud which invelopes this Province, I shall deliver nothing for positive
or certain, either in relation to the Natives, or the Commodities emergent from
the Soil.

Cinaloa and Guadalaria in Nova Gallicia, were first Discovered and entered
into by Non^^^ de Gu^man, 1542. whose Conquest was accomplished and completed
by Francisco Tharra about the Year 1554.

Couliacan was reduced to submit to the Scepter of Spain, by the auspicious
Conduct of Nonnez de Guzman about the Year 1531.

Xalisco or Galesco was forced to resign it self to the Spanish Obedience, by
the Arms of Nonnez de Guzman 1530. but its Conquest received its perfection
from the Successes of Francis Tharra, about the Year 1554.

Uxitipa was made to increase the Register of the Spanish Acquists in America,
by the fortunate Sword of Lopez de Mendoza, employed in this Design by Nonnez
de Guzman about the Year 1529.

Zocotecas and Nova Biscaia, were made to stoop to the Diadem of Spain, by the
happy Conduct of Francisco Tharra, in the Year 1554

Nova Mexicana was first offered up to the Discovery of Augustine Royaz a
Friar, in the Year 1580. But its Conquest was afterward attempted by Antonio
Espeio a Citizen of Mexico; but his Designs being by their own Disorder rendered
lame and imperfect, its final Reduction, as to that part which is now folded up
in the Spanish Patrimony, acknowledges the happy Valor of John de Onnate to be
solely Instrumental in it, who in the year 1599, by the vigorous Assistance of
Five thousand men linked it to the Demeasn of his Master the King of Spain.

Califormia circumscribes all those Provinces of Mexicana, which lie on the
West Side of that Northern Peninsula which is seated beyond Gallicia and New
Spain, though in the stricter acceptance of its Chorography, it is confined to
that Province which is placed on the other side of a long and spacious ^ulf
styled M^rvirmigl^o or the Pay, and Califormia, and limited to an Island (so
generally conceived to be) extended in a full length from North to South
thereof. The Continent is distinguished into the two Provinces of Cibola and
Quivira, and the Island is sub-divided into Califormia, properly so called, and
Nova Albion.

The Inhabitants generally of these Provinces make their Food out of the flesh
of Beasts, which they feed on raw, and swallow down in great morsels without
chewing; The Men from head to feet are attired in Bulls skins, but the Women
have no other Garment to secure them from the Cold (which here is keen and
eager) but their Hair, which they nourish to that extent, that like a Veil it
rescues their Nakedness from the public view. Their Habitations are volatile
and unsettled, wandering in Companies, and living in Hoords like the ancient
Nomades, and the present Cathay Tartars, from whom they are removed by no great
distance, and by whom, some probable Conjectures assert, they were at first
peopled. The Inhabitants of Cibola are well propotioned and rall, and of a more
pregnant Ingenuity than other Salvages of Califor^ia, securing their Nakedness
with Mantles wrought in variety of Colors, which with those painted skins,
they with much industry import from ^icuique or some Northern Country, and that
quantity of Cotton they have amongst them (none of it growing upon their Soil)
are demonstrations of their Ingenuity, in managing a course of Traffic with
their neighbors.

The Natives of Califor^ia are numerous and of Thick proportion, resolved (as
some Reports testify) into Twenty three several Nations, all of different
Languages and Dresses, inhabiting the Banks of Bona Gui^. Some stain their
Faces wholly with paint, and some half way, and others supply the use of
Painting with Vizors; they bore Holes in their No^thrills and Ears for their
Pendants, the tips of which last, they even over-load with the pendulous Bones
of Fishes; each of their Wastes are surrounded with a Girdle, to which they
fasten a bunch of Feathers which hangs down behind them like some excrescence,
which the Women use also, but upon them they are visible before. The Diety to
which these Califor^ians offer up their Devotions, is the Sun; and the god to
which the Natives of Cibola consecrate theirs, is the W^ter; both which are by
these Salvages affectionately adored, because they are the Causes to which they
entitle the Increase of the Earth multiplied into Corn, Fruit, and Herbage.

The Soil of Quivira is plain, level and full of Herbage, giving nourishment to
Cattle, differing not much in bulk and dimension from those of Europe, only
that there is a gibbous Excrescence or Bunch placed between their shoulders,
they are Bristled upon the back like Bores, with somewhat which resembles the
Mane in Horses, and the Beard in Goats; their Legs are short, but attired with
something proportioned in similitude to Fetlocks, their Horns are sharp but
short; the whole Beast is of an Aspect so full of Terror, that no Horse upon
the first Access or Intercourse will approach him. The Hides of these yield
the Natives either Houses, or the Covering of them; their Bones are composed
into Bodkins, their Hair into Thread, their Sinews into Ropes, their Horns,
Maw^ and Bladders, are framed into Vessels; their Dung supplies Pi^e, their
Skins are shaped into Bougets to preserve Water, their Blood affords Drink, and
their Flesh Meat.

The Soil of Cibola is generally level, but in some parts made rugged with
Rocky Mountains. It is shadowed but with few Trees, and those destitute of
Fruit; but to recompense this, they have a Wood like Cedar, which abundantly
supplies them with fuel and Timber. Here is a plentiful stock of Maiz and white
Pease, which gives them a supply of Bread. Here are numerous Herds of Deer,
which they chase and destroy for their Skins. And a considerable production of
Sheep, known to be so only by the Analogy of their Fleece, being in Bulk and
Dimension equivalent to an Horse, or Ox, and having Horns that poyse in
Balance the Weight of Fifty pounds.

But though Cibola enjoy but a narrow stock of those Creatures which are of
profitable intercourse, yet of Bears, Tigers, and other noxious Animals, there
is an unprofitable Redundance.

The Island of Califormia, properly so called, is indifferently even, only here
and there the Champaigne swells with Mountains, and some of those from their
Sulpherous Entrails vomit out Flame, which has caused the Spaniards to impose
the Title of Cacofogo upon them; the Waves which wash the Shore of this Island,
afford the Natives plenty of Fish, which are found upon weeds amassed into
Heaps, and which like so many floating Islands invest the Surface of the Sea.
But the only Rarity which ennobles this Country, is a Beast which is Hairy like
a Goat, but has Teats like a Cow. The Air both of Cibola and Califormia, is of
an Indifferent Temper, only it is sometimes discomposed with the unkind
Distributions of Frost and Snow.

Cibola and Quivira were Discovered by the diligence of Antonio Mendoza, who
employed Marco de Nisa a Friar, to perfect the Discovery; but the more absolute
and accomplished Conquest was reserved to the Valor and Conduct of Francisco
Vasques de Coronado, about the Year 1540. Califormia was Discovered at the
expense of Ferdinand Cortez, who set out two ships 1534. but the Design
languishing away, it was renewed and reinforced by Francisco de Ulloa 1539.
After him, Fernando de Alarcon, Discovered many Leagues up the River Bu^na
Guia, where Naguacatus one of the Cheifs, surrendered himself to obedience.
Finally, Roderigo Cabrillo 1642. by a new Discovery attaqued two small Islands
called S. Lukes, and Possession, on the Western Shore. But these Countries
affording no Gold or other Attractives which might charm the Spaniards to an
abode, they abandoned them to that poverty the Inclemency of the Air, and
thriftinesse of the Soil, had long before Condemned them to.

Florida is circumscribed on the North-East with Virginia, on the East with
Mare del No^rt, on the South and some part of the West with the Gulf of Mexico,
on the residue of the West with part of New Gallicia, and some Countries not
yet expofed to a full Discovery.

The Country is parallel to Castile in Spain, which renders the Air and Soil to
be almost adequate to that in their Temper and Constitution, but the last
infinitely out-vies Castile in its Fertility and plenty, the earth being not
here so harrassed with the Impressions o^ continual Tillage as in the other.
Productive it is of abundance of Maiz the natural Bread of the Country, which
they sow both in March and June, which the third Month after repayes the
Plow-man's toil with a plentiful Crop, which they deposite in public
Granaries, and employ as the necessities of persons exact its Destribution. Not
is it defective in Fruit, which here are Registered under the particular names
of Mulberries, Cherryes, Chestnuts, Grapes, and Plums, of excellent taste and
color. It is likewise eminent for its store of Foul, and its Herds of Beasts,
both wild and tame. The Woods and Forests are shadowed with spreading Oaks
and very tall Cedars; as likewise Cypress^ and Bay-trees of a large Dime^sion.
Nor is their plenty inconfiderable, which they yield of that Wood the Natives
style P^v^^e, and the French Sassafras; and of the Tree named Esqui^e, the Bark
of the first, and the Wood of the last, are both asserted to be sovereign
against the incursions of the Malady of France. It is affirmed also, that the
Entrails of the Florida^ Earth are enriched with some Mines of Gold and Silver,
and studded with Turquoises, Pearls, and Emeralds of much estimate and beauty,
and the probability of the first is supported and enforced by the relations of
the Natives, who report that in the Hills called Apalatei, there are discovered
Veins of a reddish Metal, which the French concluded to be Gold, but wanted
Time and Opportunity to improve their search.

The People are of an Olive Color, large Stature, and cast into a fair
proportion, naked, only their privities excepted, which they obscure with the
skins of Stags. Their Arms and Knees are stained with variety of Paintings, not
to be forced off with frequent Ablution. Their Hair is by Complexion Black,
which they nourish to that extent and length, that it diffuses and shoots it
self even to their thighs. Apt they are to wrap up their Actions in an affected
veil of Dissimulation, whose Contexture is made more specious by an Artificial
cunning. They are naturally revengeful, which engages them in continual Feuds
and Animosities, whose effects are visible by those bloody Contests frequently
commenced amongst themselves. Generally they are subtle and Ingenious, and in a
Capacity to be reduced to a tamer subserviency, by compliance and nobler
Usages; but then they are like Tigers, who when they appear reclaimed by the
intercourse and calmnesse of civil Correspondencies, yet upon the first draught
of Blood they are apt to leap into their former Cruelty, and devour those
Hands who gave them Food and Discipline.

The Women upon their Husbands Decease (as a symptom of Sorrow) cut their Hair
close to their Ears, and afterward to make their Grief appear more signal and
solemn, strew it on their Husban^s Sepu^chres; nor are they permitted again to
entertain a second Marriage, until their Hair be improved to that growth as to
cove^ their shoulder. Hermaphrodites, that is, persons of a twisted or
complicated Sex, Nature has here yeilde plenty, who only are designed to the
sustaining of Luggage, and the being ministerial to the cheaper and more
ignoble works of Drudgery. Some imperfect Notions o^ Conceptions the Natives
have of the Immortality of the Soul, but otherwise their knowledge, in relation
to a Deity, is so gloomy, that it is enwrapped and muffled up in a gross and
dark Idolatry.

This Continent, as to those parts of it which border on the Sea, has in Times
of a more modern Inscription been the Stage whereon the Scene has been laid
that has represented to our view those sad Contentions which have been waged
between the French and Spaniard, concerning the Dominion of this Province,
which drew so much blood, that the purple effusion bedewed almost every Turfe
on which those fatal Tragedies were acted; but the French being at last utterly
supplanted, and their Forts which they erected here, namely Arx Carolina, Fort
Chastilion and others, were dismantled or diserted. But in these Contests the
Spanish strength was so much broken and impaired, and its noblest Spirits
evapourated at those Wounds the French Sword had inflicted, that wanting
Recruits to manage their Conquests, they abandoned their new Acquists and
retired to St. Jago, St. Matthew, and St. Augustines, the only places they
preserved in Florida, where they Planted and Fortified, but not long after the
Fate of War cast the new Colony of St. Augustines under some umbrage, for in
the Year 1585. Sir Francis Drake having by a vigorous Assault mastered the Fort
of St. John's which had a powerful Aspect upon the Town, he reduced this
likewise, and enriched himself and his Partisans with a Booty of Twenty
thousand Florens; but though this new Plantation was almost sunk by these
Disasters, yet not long after, it buoyed up out of these Ruins, and being
reinforced with a Supplement of additional Fortifications, this with St. Jago,
St. Philip, and St Matthew, have been ever since so firmly twisted with the
Spanish Interest, that they are at this Instant under the Dominion and Seignory
of that Crown and Scepter.

The first who engaged himself in the Discovery of Florida, was John P^nce of
Leon, who sailed thither about the Year 1512. but his Survey being left
imperfect, it was attempted to be reduced to perfection by the Diligence of
Vasques de Aillon, who made an Invasion on Florida in the Year 1524. but such a
complication of cross Accidents encountered his Endeavors that they were
rendered unsuccessful. To repair the Dishonor of this Expedition, Pamphilu^ de
N^rva^z makes an Eruption on Florida, about the Year 1528. being seconded with
a strength of Four hundred Foot and Eighty Horse. And lastly, Hernandes a Soto,
embarques in this Expedition, and did endeavor with a Supply of Three hundred
and fifty Horse, and Ninety Foot, to accomplish the Conquest of Florida, that
by the addition of this Province he might enhance both the Luster and Patrimony
of the Spanish Diadem, and pursued and managed this Enterprise with a various
Success and Conduct from the Year 1538, to the Year 1543. But it is disputable
whether the Storm with Reason, or the Storm without, was more Destructive and
prejudicial to the double Expedition of these two last Undertakers: For
Diseases, Tempests and Shipwracks, combining with the Treacherous Ambushes of
the Natives, so disordered their Affairs, and discomposed the Contexture of the
whole Design, that the Spaniards ever since, have abandoned any Attempt which
had any tendency to the Reduction of this Province to the Spanish Scepter;
since the Enterprises of those Commanders before named, which seemed at first
to sprout out with such specious Hope, were at Last so infortunately Blasted,
only they preserved St. Augustines and the other Colonies above recited, to
remain as In-lets, to open for the future both an Opportunity and Passage to
any new Invasion which might fortify and confirm the Spanish Interest in this
Province of Florida.

Having taken a full prospect of those Additions of Empire the Spaniard is now
possessed of in America, I shall now hoist sail, and make my Application to the
East Indies, and view what new Accessions have made an Improvement both of
Revenue and Power of that Estate which relates to the Spanish Dominion in these
Territories: And first the Malacca Islands do call for our Consideration: They
are Seven in number, Ternata, Tidor, Macir, Bacha, Machian, Botona and Siana;
the first Discovery entitles itself to Americus Vesputius, whose first Attempts
were perfected by the Endeavors and successful Navigation of Ferdinand
Mag^llan, encouraged to embarque himself in this Expedition, by the expense and
at the Command of Charles the Fifth, about the Year 1519. But though the Title
of these Islands might seem at first so firmly engrasfed upon the Spanish
Scepter, that no external Force could almost ravish it away; yet have the
Hollanders by some modern Successes, so shaken the Spanish Interests in these
their new Acquists, that a considerable part of these Islands is plucked away,
and annexed to the Patrimony of the United Provinces.

Next the Philippina Islands oblige us to a Discourse; If you consult the
Original Register, upon the Account you will find but four in the Catalogue,
namely, 1 Luzon. 2 Mindanao. 3 Tandair. 4 Pall^han. They were discovered
originally by Lagaspi a Spanish Captain, by the Concurrence, Procurement, and
Assistance of Lewis de Velasco Viceroy of New-Spain, in the Year 1564. and in
memory of Philip the Second (in whose Reign they were Discovered) they were
called Philippinae. But since these Islands were knit to the Spanish Demeasn,
the Hollanders by the Assistance of Fleets, and support of Armies, have
endeavored to ravish away these Islands from the Patrimony of Spain, to
incorporate them into their own; but yet maugre these attempts, the title of
them has been so firmly inoculated upon the Spanish Scepter, that it is still
subservient to the Seignorie and Command of Philip the Fourth, the instant King
of Spain.

THE SECOND PART.
The Spanish Interest in BURGUNDY, BELGIUM, or the NETHERLANDS.
The French County and Duchy OF BURGUNDY.
THE French County, or County of Burgundy, is involved and couched in the
Patrimony of the House of Austria, and is thus circumscribed; it has on the
East the Mountain of Jo^r, on the West the Duchy of Burgundy, on the North a
Branch of the Mountain Vange, on the South la Bresse. It is by estimate 90
miles in length, and about 60 in Breadth. The ancient Inhabitants of this
County, were the Sequani, whose power was of that Latitude, that it was once
put into the Balance, when the Contest was between them and the Hedui and
Arverni, for the Sovereignty of Gaul, until this emulous Contention was
superceeded by the Roman Conquest, under whose Government it made up, together
with Switzerland, the Province of Maxima Sequanorum. In the Wane of whose
Empire, it grew a Limb of the Burgundian Kingdom, the first of whose Monarchs
who conducted the Burgundians into Gaul was Tibica, whose Successor Gundomar
Son of Sigismund was in a Successeful War dislodged, and cast out from his
Kingdom by Childebert and Clotaire Kings of Paris and Soisson, in Revenge of
their Brother Clodomire, who fell by the Sword of this Sigismund. And thus was
Burgundy annexed to the Demeasne of the French, after it had continued about an
Hundred and twenty years entire, without any subserviency; Guntram the Son of
Clotaire, and Clovis one of the Sons of Dagobert the First, bring both in their
respective times ennobled with the Burgundian Diadem. But the subsequent
Succession of the Kings of Burgundy, was emergent from the partage of the
Patrimony and Empire of Cherlemaigne, amongst the Children of Lodovicus Pius
the first, of which Monarchs which weilded the Burgundian scepter, was Charles
younger Son of Lotharius the Emperor, in which Lotharius likewise, the Title
to this Crown, as being Son to Lewis the Godly, was tacitly lodged; but he
dying without Issue, it devolved to his Brother Lotharius, who likewise
determined without Children; and ^o a second Vicissitude brought it to confess
the Scepter of their Uncle Charles the Bald, King of France, and Emperor of
Germany, who conferred the Seignory with the Title of Earl, on Boson Earl of
Ardenne, who had Matched with his Sister Judith; which Boson was advanced not
long after, by Charles the Gross, to the Title of Monarch, and was styled King
of Arles and Burgundy, in which last this Province was rolled up; from whom by
several Traverses it came down to Rodolph the first, who had the Title of Duke
of Burgundy beyond the Jour; and from him the Devolution of successive
Interest, carried it to Boson the second Brother to this Rodolph the first, by
whom the Dukedom of Burgundy beyond Jour, was united to the Kingdom of Arles
and Burgundy; And from him the Thread of Descent transported it along to his
Grandchild Rodolph the second; who concluding without Issue, gave this and many
other Provinces to Conrade the second Emperor of Germany, who had Espoused
Gisela Sister and Heir General of this Rodolph. After this it was so couched in
the Caesarean Patrimony, that it was esteemed as a Limb of the German Empire,
and was managed and Governed by such Earls and Provincial Officers, as those
Emperors transmitted hither, to sway and regulate the Affairs of this Province.

Otho of Flanders, Son of a Sister of the Emperor Conrade, by the Aid and
Concurrence of Robert King of France, was the first who was invested in it as
Proprietary, those others whom the French Registers and Records represent to us
to have held it, being Official rather than Hereditary. This Otho above
mentioned, determined without Issue; so that Reinald his Cousin and Kinsman,
became Heir to the Earldome of Burgundy; but here the Title was very
transitory, for he concluded in a female Inheritrix called Beatrix, who was
Matched to the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, by which Alliance it was annexed
to his Patrimony, and from him it devolved to his youngest Son Otho; but here
likewise the Possession was as transient, for he expired in a Daughter and Heir
styled Beatrix, who by Matching with Otho Duke of Meranis, which was part of
the Province of Tyroll, brought it to confess him for Earl of Burgundy, and by
her he had Issue Alice, his only Daughter and Heir, who was violently
dispossessed by Stephen de Chalons and his Accomplices, who was next Heir to
Garrard de Vienne and Joan his Wife, second Daughter to Otho the first, and
Sister of Beatrix, acknowledged by his Faction there for Earl of Burgundy, even
in the Life Time of Otho; and from him did the Title glide down to his
Grandchild Hugh, who finding his new acquitted Dignity was established upon a
crazy Foundation, to fortify his Claim, he Matched with Alice the Heir of
Otho, the second abovementioned, and so by twisting their Titles together,
became indisputable Heir to this Earldome; and he had Issue Othelin, who going
out in a Daughter and Heir known by the Name of Joan, she by Matching with
Philip the Long King of France, annexed it as an Appendage to his Scepter, and
he settled it on Joan his eldest Daughter issuing from this Match, on Eudes Duke
of Burgundy; but his Grandchild Philip dying young and without Issue, this upon
his Decease by right of Inheritance devolved to Margaret second Daughter of
King Philip the Long, and Joan his Wife above mentioned, who was Wedded to
Lewis de Malain Earl of Flanders; and he had Issue by her Lewis de Malain, who
in her Right incorporated this Earldom into his Patrimony; but here it was not
long resident, for he found his Sepulcher in a Female Heir called Margaret, who
by Espousing Philip the Hardy, second Son of John King of France, linked this
and the Title and Interest of many other eminent Seignories to his Paternal
Demeasne.

Having thus in Landscape discovered the Fate of the French County, I shall
represent in a Compendious Prospect those Vicissitudes and Revolutions that
rolled about the Title of the Duchy of Burgundy, until it came finally to
accknowledge the Dominion of Philip the Hardy abovementioned.

The Dukedom of Burgundy has on the East the French County, and ^o ^e part of
the Savoy; on the West Burbonnis; on the North Champaigne; on the South Bresse,
Lionnois, and and some part of Peau jeulois. The Ancient Inhabitants of this
Dukedom, were the People in Ancient Reco^ds, so Eminent for their Warlike
Disposition, called the Hedui. In times of a more mode^n Inscription, that is,
about the Division of the French Kingdom of Burgundy, made by Charles the
Bald, that part of it which was called the Dukedom of Burgundy on this side of
the Soasne, was Cantoned into the Five Earldoms of Dijons, Chalons, Autun,
Lions, and Mascon; whereof the three first being laid and amassed together, by
Eudes King of France, during the Minority of Charles the Simple, were given
unto his Brother Richard, embellished with the Title and Style of Duke of
Burgundy: But the common Fate which attends upon all humane Frailty,
transported this Province, upon the Decease of Gilbert Son of this Richard who
made his Exit without Issue Male, to Otho (Son of Hugh Capet Earl of Paris,
surnamed the Great) in Right of his Wife, who was Daughter and Heir General of
this Gilbert; in whose Patrimony it had not long resided, when he dying without
Issue, this Duchy which he had been entitled to, by the Authority of this
Alliance, came over to his Brother Henry, who likewise expiring without
Children, the Thread of Desent wafted it along to Robert King of France Son to
Hugh Capet, who was Nephew to Otho and Henry above mentioned; and from him did
the Clew of Succession guide it down to Robert the third, who had Issue Hugh
the fifth of that Name Duke of Burgundy, and Eudes, who upon the Decease of his
Brother Hugh the fifth, without Issue, entered upon this Duchy as his Heir;
and from him again did it come down to his Grandchild Philip; who dying young
and sans Issue, this Province with all its Perquisites, augmented the Revenue
of John King of France, to whom it accrued in right of his Mother Joan Wife to
his Father Philip de Valois, who was one of the Daughters of Robert the Third
above mentioned, and by Consequence upon defailance of Issue in Philip
abovesaid, became entitled as his Heir General to the Propriety of this Duchy;
But this was pretended only, for his Title was better supported by a violent
Detention of this Duchy, upon which he had entered as an Escheat, to the
prejudice and supplantation of the Earls of Eureux, by an illegal Inroad upon
their Interest; since those Earls extracted their Descent and Claim from the
Daughter and Heir of Lewis de Hutin K. of France, before Philip de Valois,
which Lewis Matched with Margaret eldest Daughter to Robert the Third above
mentioned, and Mother to the Heir General. But to proceed, K. John being thus
invested in the Possession, settled it on his second Son Philip the Hardy, from
whom by the steps of some Descents, it came down to Charles the Hardy, who
finding an untimely Sepulcher in the Feilds of Nancy, left the Propriety of
Burgundy to be enjoyed by Mary his sole Inheretrix; upon the Decease of which
Charles, Lewis the Eleventh King of France, seized upon the Duchy of Burgundy,
as an Appendage to the Crown of France, pretending it was by the Fundamental
Customs of that Kingdom to return to that Scepter, in case there were a
defailance of Issue Male; but the French County being an Imperial Isle, was
permitted to remain united to the Patrimony of his Daughter Mary abovesaid, in
whose Right Maximilian the Emperor her Husband, was invested in the Fee; and
from him is the Seignory and Demeasne of this Province, by the transmission of
Successive Descent, guided down to own the Scepter and Dominion of Philip the
fourth, the instant King of Spain.

Flanders and Artois.
THese two though since since separated, were Originally knit together in the
Interest of one Estate, yet after the Interval of five or six Descents were
again twisted together, and remained thus incorporated ever since.

Flanders is bound in on the East with Hai^alt and Brabant; on the West with
the German Ocean; on the North with the Seas of Zealand, and a Branch of the
Scheld; and on the South with Picardy and Graveling, interposing betwixt Callis
and Graveling. Antiquity has extracted its Name from several Conjectures, as
first from Flando, because it lies upon the winds; others again assert that it
was imposed upon it, from Flandbert the Son of Blesinda Daughter of Cl^dion the
second King of France; some fetch it from a Town of that Name situated in that
part of the Country where now Ardenbourg stands, so long since languished and
shrunk into Ruin, that the least Symptom or Representation being wanting to
inform us that there was once such a place in being, that we now with
difficulty trace out its Rubbish amidst its Ruins; therefore the Conjectures
of more rational heads extract the Appellation from Flandrina the Wife of
Lideric the second, the first who managed the Government of these parts as
Forrester. It was in elder Times resolved into three Divisions, that is,
Flandria Imperialis, called so because it was long in its obedience subservient
to the Emperors of Germany; Flandria Gallica, so styled from the French
Dialect there spoken; and Flandria Teutonica, because within its precinct the
Dutch Language was properly used.

Artois is limited on the East with Flanders Gallicant, and the County of
Cambray; on the South and West it is bounded with Picardy; on the North with
Flanders Flammegant, and the River of Lis. The Name is extracted from the
Atrebates the old Inhabitants thereof; the Air is temperate, and the Soil so
pregnant and ^ertile that it may very well have the Denomination of the Granary
of Flanders and Brabant.

These Countries of Flanders and Artois were anciently, if not a part, yet much
of the same Nature and Condition with the great Forest of Ardenne, nothing but
the Solitudes of continual Woods and De^arts, making the Aspect of it rude and
desolate; The ancient Inhabitants of the first were the Nervii and Morini, who
were supplanted by the Romans, and these again by the French, who having
established the great Earldome of Ardenne, made these Provinces in part subject
to the Dominion and power of its Governors, whilst that Track of Earth which
confined on the Sea, was so exposed to Rapine, Pyracies, and Depredations of
the Danes, that it was neglected, uncultivated, and almost unpeopled; the
Inland Countries* something contributing to the general Calamity by being
meanly planted, from a Deficiency of those Necessaries which should support the
Life of Man. But when Brunulph Earl of Ardenne was secured by Dagobert King of
France, this Wild and disordered Country, extending as far as the River of
Some, and enwrapping besides Artois and Flanders, a considerable part of
Pi^ardy about the Year 621. was given to Lideri^ le Beuque, with the Title of
Forrester, to be held under Homage to that Crown. In whose Posterity this Title
sojourned, until the time of Baldwin the first, the Son of Odoacer the seventh
of the Forresters, whose Names are Recorded in the Registers of Flanders, there
being a Gap or Parenthesis which ravels their Memories during the Ravage of the
Danes and Normans. This Baldwin having by a violent Onset ravished away, and
after Wedded Judith Sister to Charles the Bald King of France, and Emperor,
was by him created Earl of Flanders about the Year 864. the Sovereignty
reserved as before it was; in whose Issue the Interest of these Provinces
remained combined and entire, until Philip the first surnamed of Elsas, Son of
Theodorick the first, surnamed likewise of Elsas, to which Theodorick the
Seignory both of Flanders and Artois accrued, as being Heir General of
Heltrude, Daughter and Heir General likewise of Robert the first, Earl of
Flanders and Artois, after the Decease of her Brother Robert the second,
Charles Son of Canutus King of Denmark, who had Matched with her Sister
Adeliza, and of William, Grandchild of William the Bastard Duke of Normandy
(who had Espoused Mawde Daughter of Baldwin the Fifth Earl of Flanders and
Artois) gave unto Philip Augustus King of France, the Province of Artois with
the Earldome of Veramandois, with Isabel his Neice, Daughter of Baldwin the
eighth Earl of Hainault, which Baldwin had Wedded Margaret Daughter of
Theodorick abovementioned, and Sister and Heir of this Philip. By Lewis the
Eighth Son and Successor to this King Philip, Artois was given as a Portion to
swell the Patrimony of his youngest Son Robert, who was adorned with the Title
of Earl of Artois by King Lewis the Ninth Anno 1234. This Robert had Issue
Robert the second, in whom the Male Line failed, so that Mawde his sole
Daughter, being Matched to Othelin Earl of Burgundy, he in her right became
Earl of Artois: But in him the Title was as volatile and unfixed as in the
former; for he Deceased without Issue Male, and so Joan his Daughter and Heir
by Espousing Philip the Long, King of France, united this Earldome to his
Scepter, and the Estate to his Patrimony, and gave it in Marriage with the
County of Burgundy, with Joan his Eldest Daughter, to Eudes Duke of Burgundy;
and from him the right of Descent wafted it along to his Grandchild Philip the
Third, who expiring without Issue, Margaret second Daughter of King Philip the
Long above mentioned, who was Matched to Lewis Earl of Flanders, entered upon
this Earldome as his Heir General, and transmitted it and both the Burgundies
to his Son Lewis de Malain; and from him again did Margaret his sole Heir carry
the united Titles and Interest of all these Provinces to Philip the Hardy, to
whom she was solemnly Wedded at Gaunt, in the Year 1369.

Having thus in a Compendious Discovery represented those Revolutions which
annexed Artois to the Burgundian Stem, I shall now in as narrow a Volume pursue
and trace out the Fate of Flanders; and it stood thus: Theodorick of Elsas Earl
of Flanders above mentioned, had Issue Philip surnamed of Elsas, and Earl of
Flanders likewise, who dying without Issue, Baldwin the eighth Earl of Hanault,
who had Espoused Margaret his Sister and Heir, in her Right was entitled to
the Earldome of Flanders, and left his new Acquists to his Son and Heir Baldwin
the Ninth, a man of that Latitude of Power in the Age he lived in, that he was
not only Earl of Flanders and Hainault, but Emperor of Constantinople also;
but he and his Greatness found one Sepulcher together in two Daughters and
Coheirs, Joan the eldest was first Matched to Ferdinand Son of Sancho King of
Portugal, and secondly to Thomas third Son of Thomas Earl of Savoy, by whom
having no Issue surviving, Margaret her second Sister Wedded to William of
Dampiere, became Heir to her Concernment in Flanders and Hainalt; by her
Husband abovementioed she had Issue William of Dampiere, whom even in her Life
Time she admitted to the Title of Earl, which he continued until his Death,
which was diverse years before her own Decease; and Guy of Dampier^ who was not
only Dignified with the Title of Earl on the Death of his Brother, but invested
also in the Estate, on the Exit of his Mother, and from him did the steps of
several Descents conduct it down to his great Grandchild Lewis de Malain Earl
of Flanders, Hainault, Artois, and both the Burgundies; but expiring without
Issue Male, Margaret his sole Inheritrix by Matching with Philip the Hardy,
fourth Son of John King of France, brought them not only to improve the
Grandeur of his Family, but likewise to swell and enforce his Patrimony, and
from him did the Title of these Provinces flow down to his great Grandchild
Charles Duke of Burgundy, surnamed the Warlike, who being unfortunately cut off
at the Battle of Granson, and expiring without Issue Male, his Interest in
Flanders, Burgundy, and many other Provinces, came to be enjoyed by Maximilian
the Emperor, and his Son Philip having Wedded Joan Daughter of Ferdinand and
Isabella, Monarchs of Spain, so twisted the Title of Flanders and Burgundy with
that of Spain, that it is still subservient to the Dominion and Empire of
Philip the fourth, who now weilds the Scepter of the Spanish Monarchy.

Hainault.
HAIN AULT is bounded on the East with Namur, on the West with Flanders, on the
North with Brabant, on the South with Picardy and Champaigne. It was in elder
times called Saltus Carbonatius, by some Writers the Lower Picardy; In Latin
Records of a more modern Inscription Hannonia. It borrows this Name from the
River Haine or Hania, which glides through it, and the Word Holt which imports
a Wood; this Province being almost clouded and overspread with Forests, so
that the Etymology will be Hainault quasi Hain-holt, a Country replenished
with Woods on the River of Haine. Thus it is represented in French, but in
Dutch it is best known by the Name of Henegou, that is, a Country consining on
the River Haine, as the signification in that Language does intimate.

The ancient Inhabitants of this Province were the Nervii, so eminent in
History for their Valor and Prudence, who after Bloody Contests were
supplanted by the Romans; but they again being dislodged by the Prench, it
became a Limb of the great Earldome of Ardenne, and remained so until the Death
of Brunulph, who was subdued and slain in Battle by Dagobert K. of France;
which Brunulph his Father in his Life Time had invested with the Title of Duke
of Ardenne, and designed unto the Conquest of it; but the Fury of War being
allayed, and the parts of Flanders and Brabant which were parcels of that
Duchy being enstated on other Houses, this by the Indulgent Magnificence of
Sigebert King of Metz or Austrasia, was settled on Alberic surnamed the Orphelin
one of the younger Sons of Brunulph, and was likewise adorned with the Name and
Title of Earl of Hainalt; and from him did both the Title and Estate by the
Thread of Descent come down to Walter the third; by whose eldest Daughter it
was brought to confess Albon both for Earl and Proprietary; and from him the
Clew of Paternal Descent transported the Title to his Successor Reigner the
third, who determined in a Daughter and Heir called Richild, who by Matching
with Baldwin the Fifth of that Name, Earl of Flanders, added so strong a Right
to this Alliance, that he became Earl of Hainalt by the Name of Baldwin the
first, and left it to his Son Arnulph, who was Barbarously robbed of his estate
by his unnatural Uncle Robert; who not glutted with this Ruin, ravished away
likewise the Earldome of Flanders by an unjust and Usurped Surprizal, into
which he succeeded, though his Nephew Baldwin, Brother to the unfortunate
Arnulph, was repossest of Hainault, by the Name of Baldwin the second, and
styled himself likewise Earl of Flanders; and from him by a continued Channel
of worthy Successors, did the Title of this Earldom flow down to Baldwin the
eighth of that Name in Hainault, and the Ninth in Flanders, who went out in two
Daughters and Coheirs, Joan who dyed without Issue though twice married; and
Margaret who being entrusted to the care and Tuition of Buschart her Guardian,
he by ill Arts and worse Stratagems so seduced and charmed her Affections, that
she was made a prostitute to his Lust, and by those unlawful Embraces had a
Natural Son called John de Avesnes, Prior of St. Peter's in L'isle, who by the
Designs of Force and Fraud, by an unjust intrusion extorted Hainault from his
two Brothers William and Guy of Dampierre, both being Sons of William of
Bourbon Lord of Dampierre and this Margaret, and both the Issue of Lawful
Sheets; and this John being thus swollen with an Increase of Patrimony, and made
tall in Title, Matched with Aleida Daughter and Heir of Florence the fourth
Earl of Holland, and so by the Authority of this Alliance, was not only Earl of
Hainault: but of that Territory also of whose Descendants, and how both
Hainault and Holland came to devolve to the House of Burgundy, I shall discover
when I come to treat of Holland.

Namur.
NAMUR has on the East Hainault, on the West the Bishopric of Leigh, on the
North Brabant, and on the South Luxenbourg. The ancient Inhabitants of this
Country were the Nervii. It was first erected into an Earldom by some of the
Descendants of the Sons of Clodion second King of the French, who being by a
violent Usurpation divested of their Fathers Diadem, by Meroveus Master of his
Horse, to whose ungrateful and unworthy Tuition they had been entrusted by
their confident (but unwa^y) Father, were forced to seek shelter in the most
desencible places of the great Forest of Ardenne, where they established the
great Earldomes of Ardenne and Mosell. Divided in succeeding Generations into
many parcels, of which this was one. Who the first Earls were, because Ancient
Records are dim in that particular, is uncertain. Albert who was Co-temporary
to Hugh Capet, and Matched with Irmingrade Daughter of Charles of France, and
first Duke of Lorraine, is represent in very old Registers to have been Earl of
this Province; and he was Grandfather (and as some Authors assert) Father to
^eter Earl of Namur, in whom the Male Line determined, so that his Daughter and
Heir by Espousang Henry the second Son of Baldwin the eighth Earl of Flanders
and Hainault (which Henry was Emperor of Constantinople likewise, after the
death of his elder Brother Baldwin the ninth Earl of Flanders and Hainault)
brought this Earldom into that Family; and from him it descended to Yoland his
Daughter, who Wedded Peter Earl of Auxerre (who also succeeded his Father in
Law Henry in the Empire of Constantinople) and he supported by a Right derived
from Her, was entitled to this Earldome; and upon his Decease Philip his
younger Son, as being then in the Netherlands, entered upon it as Earl; but he
dying without Issue, John his elder Brother, who at his Fathers Decease was at
Constantinople and there made his Claim, was entitled to it; but he likewise
making his Exit without Issue, it devolved to Philip the second, Brother to
Henry the Emperor above mentioned; and the likewise determining without
Children, it was transmitted to Margaret one of the two Daughters and Coheirs
of Baldwin the ninth, as Heir General to this Philip, and she settled it on her
third Son John surnamed of Dampierre, upon whose Decease his elder Brother Guy
of Dampierre entered upon the Earldome, and left it to his Son by his second
Wife, by the Name of John the third; upon whose Exit, his Brother who was one
of the Sons of Guy de Dampierre above mentioned, by his first Wife, was
invested in the Earldome by the Style of John the fourth; but he expi^ing
without Issue, his Brother by the whole Blood entered upon the Possession, by
the Name of Guy the second; and from him it Descended to his Grandchild John
the sixth, who in the Year 1429. passed away his Estate here in Reversion to
Philip the Good, to be enjoyed by him, on the Decease of his next Heir
Theodore, who being Infirm, and going out without Issue, it accordingly
augmented the Revenue of Philip the Good; and from him has the steps of
several Descents carried down the Title and Propriety to Philip the fourth, now
King of Spain.

Luxenbourg.
LUXNBOURG is environed on the East with the Moselle and the Land of Triers on
the West with the Maes and the Forest of Ardenne, on the North with
Luick-land, Namur, and a part of Hainault, and on the South with the Duchy of
Lorraine. It has borrowed this Name from the Castle near the Town of
Luxenbourg, selected by Sigifride the first Earl hereof for his Seat and
Residence. The whole Duchy is resolved into two parts, that on the East having
borrowed the Name of Famenne, that on the West having the Appellation of
Ardenne imposed upon it.

This Province was at first a Limb of the great Earldome of Ardenne, rent from
it in the Reign of Otho the first by Sigifride the Son of Ric^inus Prince
thereof, who in the breaking the Estate by Division into pa^cels, had this
consigned for his Portion with the Title of Earl. Of his Successors Gilbert,
Godfrey, and Conrade there is little represented to us by ancient Record, in a
constant order of Succession, until the Time of Henry the first, who being
slain in the Cause and Quarrel of Renald Earl of Gueldres* contending with John
Duke of Brabant for the Duchy of Limbourg, this Province descended to his Son
and Heir Henry the second, who by the Influence and procurement of his Brother
Baldwin Elector of Triers, Emperor of Germany; and he had Issue John who
Matched with Elizabeth Daughter of Wenceslaus the Elder, King of Bohemia; the
Respect had to that Alliance was so operative upon that Nation, that he was in
the Life Time of his Father by their Election advanced to the Scepter of that
Nation. And he had Issue Charles who was Emperor of Germany the fourth of that
Name, and likewise King of Bohemia, and Wenceslaus the first, who was created
Duke of Luxenbourg by his Brother Charles the Emperor, to enlarge and multiply
the Grandeur of their Family; but he Deceasing without a Successor, this Duchy
again was united to the Patrimony of Wenceslaus, who was eldest Son to Charles
the fourth, and was Emperor, and King of Bohemia also; and to him Succeeded
his Brother Sigismund who was invested in all his Estates, and adorned with all
h^s Titles, as namely, Emperor, King of Bohemia, and Duke of Luxenbourg; but
grew more considerable when he Matched with Mary Heir of L^wis the first, King
of Hungary; by which Alliance that Diadem likewise encircled his Temples; and
he the better to fortify his own Family with external Butteresses, by a
munificient Donation, enstated this Duchy on Elizabeth Daughter to his younger
Brother John Duke of Gortlitz; which endowment of his fitted her for the Bed of
Anthony of Burgogn Duke of Brabant; after whose Decease she was remarried to
John the third Earl of Hainault and Holland, but having Issue by neither of
them, she by Sale conveyed her Concernment in this Duchy to Philip the Good,
Duke of Burgundy, (...) whom several Descents has conducted the (...) down to
Philip the fourth now King of (...).

Brabant.
BRABANT is bounded on the East with Luickland, on the West with the River
Scheld and a part of Flanders, on the North with the Maes, which separates it
from Holland and Guelderland, and on the South with Hainault, Namur, and a
branch of Guelderland. The ancient Inhabitants of this Province were the
Aduatici, and some part of the Tungri, by the Romans reputed a Limb of that
Province, called Germania Secunda; and by the French, a Province of the
Kingdom of East-France or Austrasia; the Southern parts thereof Confining on
Hainault, were subservient to the Command of the Earls of Ardenne; the Northern
parts extending toward the Sea, were miserably harrassed with the Depredations
of the Danes and Normans, and therefore for their future Indemnity, were
committed to the Custody and Protection of one who had the Title of Lord Warden
of the Marches. But long these Robbers had not laid this Province Desolate with
their wild Depopulations, when their Rapine met with a just Expiation, for
Theodebert Son of Theodorick first King of Austrasia, accompanied with Utilo a
Boiarian Prince, so checked their Insolences, and retrenched their Eruptions
by seve al Defeats, that Theodorick at the request of his Son Theodebert, to
balance the signal performances of Utilo, gave him not only the Command of
these Countries, but the Propriety and possession of a considerable part of
them likewise by the Title of Lord Marquess of Antwerpe, the fourth from whom
called Araulph, was the first Mayor of the Palace to the Kings of France, made
Hereditary to this Family and his ^uccessors. By Dagobert the first ^ole King
of the French, that Branch of this Country which was (...) ^ubjection to the
Earls of Ardenne, was by his Victorious Sword extorted from them, and the whole
Estate con^erred on Ansegisus Son of Arnulph, with the Title of Duke of
Brabant; and from him did the Title and Estate descend to Charles Martell Base
Son of his Son Pepin the first; and this Charles had Issue Pepin the second,
surnamed the Short, who having managed Successfully the Affairs of France, at
last Usurped that Diadem, and solemnly receive the Crown at Soissons from the
Hands of Boniface Archbishop of Mentz in the year 751 The Dukedom of Brabant
was by this means incorporated into the Revenue of the Crown of France, where
it (...) ^^^ch ^^nt^ the partage of the French Empire amongst the ^ons and
Kinsm^n of Lewis the Godly* and (...) ^t was linked as an Appendage to the
Kingdom^ of Lorraine, where it lay wrapped up, until Lotharius the third King
of France, in whose share it was involved conferred it on Charles his younger
B^other with the Title of Duke of Brabant. But this Donation little improved
his Interest, because the principal part of this, and that Moiety of the
Kingdom of Lorraine which obeyed the French, was cut off by the Sucessful
Sword of Otho the second Emperor of Germany, and annexed to the Empire. But
this Otho considering that Charles abovesaid, thus divested, was his Cousin
German, as being Son to Lewis King of France surnamed the Transmarine, who had
Wedded Gerburg Sister to his Father Otho the first, invested him in the great
Dukedom of Lorraine, which in spacious Latitude and extent of it circumscribed
within its Precincts and perambulation, Lorrain, Gulick, Brabant, which had
then the Denomination of Basse or Low Lorrain, and the Lands of Luick. But out
of this spreading Patrimony thus enstated on Charles of France, Otho the second
abovementioned, reserved out of it for his Aunt Gerburg Mother of the said
Charles, the Towns and Territories of Lovain, Bruxells, Antwerpe, and Nivelle
as her Dower; which with Reference to the Ancient Title, he Honored with the
Dignity of Marquisate of the Holy Empire, Ann^ 981. Gerburg the Sister, and
after the Death of Charles her Brother abovesaid without Issue, succeeded in
Lovain, Antwerpe, Bruxells, and Nivelle; by a Right transmitted to her from her
Grandmother the first Gerburg, as well as from him, (though she had injuriously
disseised of Lorrein and the Title to that large Demeasne by the Emperor Henry
the second, the Emperor) which Territories of Lovain and the rest
abovementioned, she conveyed in Marriage to Lambert one of the Sons of Reigner
Earl of Hainault, with the Title of Earl of Lovain, Henry his Son reduced
Antwerpe, which it seems by an unjust Violence was detained from him; and by
this Achievement obtained the whole Marquisate, but still reserved the Title
of Earl of Lovain. Godfrey the sixth Earl, having by several new Acquists much
extended the Bounds and Marches of his Dominions, was by the Emperor Henry the
fifth, to whom he was linked in as near an Obligation of Affinity (having
Matched with his Sister) as in Friendship, in the Year 1108, Created the first
Duke of Brabant; and from him the Title flowed down with an undisturbed Channel
to John the third of that Name Duke of Brabant, by whose Daughter and Coheir
both the Title and Seignory was transported to Wenceslaus the first Duke of
Luxenbourg, by whom though she had no Issue, yet on him and on his Posterity
she enstated this Duchy, and Sigismund his second Son Duke of Luxenbourg
settled it on Elizabeth his Neice, Daughter to John Duke of Gorlitz in Lusatia;
and she by Matching with Anthony of Burgogne, one of the younger Sons of Philip
the Hardy, annexed it to his Inheritance; and being by this Alliance thus
entitled to it, it was transmitted to John the fourth Duke of Brabant, who was
eldest Son by his first Wife (for this his second deceased without Issue) Joan
Daughter of Waleran Earl of S. Paul; but he dying without Issue, it devolved by
Descent to his second Brother Philip, who likewise expiring without Children,
Philip the Good Grandchild to Philip the Hardy, Succeeded in this Duchy as
Heir to his two Kinsmen above mentioned; and from him did the Clew of diverse
Descents guide the Title down to Philip the second, King of Spain, and he lost
a considerable proportion of it in the Fatal Defection of the Netherlands,
occasioned by the Bloody Impression made upon their Invaded and Injured
Liberties by Ferdinand Duke of Alva; though Bruxells, Antwerpe, Machlin, and
other Important pieces, do yet confess the Scepter and Dominion of Philip the
fourth now King of Spain.

The Seignory of Machlin consists only of that City, and some Eight or nine
contiguous Villages; The most eminent of the Villages is styled Lie or Hiest,
situated on the pleasant Knob of a swelling Hill; the residue of the adjacent
Villages confining on the foot thereof. Both Town and Villages were formerly
enwraped in the Patrimony of the powerful Family of the Bertholts; which Name
expi^ing in the person of Gualter de Bertholt, slain in the Battle of Worancan
by John Duke of Brabant, one Moiety of it devolved to the Bishop of Liege, who
again conveyed it by Sale to John the second Duke of Brabant, and the other
proportion accrued to...... Duke of Gueldres, and he in the Year 1333. passed
it away to Lewis de Malain Earl of Flanders, but he conveyed nothing away but a
naked Title which was before denuded of its Revenue, by the Successful Hand of
John the third Duke of Brabant, who tore it away to augment his own Estate,
since which this Seignory of Machlin with all its Perquisites and Appendages,
has so constantly attended the Fate of Brabant and Flanders, that it at this
instant confesses the Interest of the Spanish Scepter.

Limbourg has on the East the Dukedom of Gulick, on the West the Bishopric
of Liege, on the North Brabant, and on the South the Dukedom of Luxenbourg.
The ancient Inhabitants of this Track were the Eburones; when it was first
advanced to the Title of an Earldome, the Light which should be Collected from
Ancient Records is so dim and faint that it cannot conduct us to any clear and
positive discovery, only it is probable, that it was Originally a Limb of the
great Earldome of Ardenne, from which it was rent to institute and make up a
Patrimonial Inheritance for some Cadet or younger Son, as Namur and Luxenbourg
were, or snatched away by the Violent hand of some For aign pretender (as
Gulick was, when Godfrey and Baldwin Dukes of Lorrain, the indisputable Heirs
of* the House of Ardenne, were engaged to a necessary absence by the Holy War.
But when, and by whom it was a^orned with the Title of an Earldome, certain it
is, that of an Earldome it was erected to a Dukedom by the Emperor Frederick
Barbarossa, Anno 1172. Henry one of the Dukes hereof, Matched his Daughter
Margaret to Godfrey the third Duke of Brabant, which suggested to his
Successors some specious Color to pretend unto it, supported with a Title of
more Authority which came in to reinforce the former, on the Decease of another
Henry, the last Duke of Limbourg, whose next Heir Adolph conveyed it to John
Duke, who fortified his Claim and Title to it by a colorable Pretense and
Right derived from the former Match Anno 1293. But Reynald Earl of Guelders,
being blown up with an overweening Conceit that his Title was established and
erected on a better Foundation than that of Adolph, in Right of Ermingrade his
Wife, Daughter to Herman a late Duke thereof, cast in his Challenge to this
Dukedom, and attempted to evict the Title by the power of the Sword, but this
was ruinous and destructive to him, for being subdued and made Captive by the
said Duke John in the Battle of Worancan, he was forced to redeem his Liberty
by no less a price or Ransom than his total Release to all Title or Claim
that he or his Successors might pretend to the Dukedom of Limbourg: after
which it was so folded up in the Interest of the Dukes of Brabant, that it came
over with it to the House of Burgundy; and from that again to own ever since
the Dominion of the Spanish Monarchy.

Guelders, Zutphen, and Groaning.
GUELDERLAND is shut in on the East with Cleve and the Earldome of Zutphen, on
the West with Holland and Utrecht, on the North with Over Issell and the
Zuyder-Sea, and on the South with Brabant and the Land of Gulick.

The ancient Inhabitants of Guelderland were the Menapii and Sicambri, People
very eminent in ancient Record for their Magnanimity and Courage. In Ages of a
more modern Inscription, these Sicambri mingled with the French, and under that
Name and notion were entitled to the spreading Empire of the West. In the
partage thereof by the Posterity of Charles the Great, this Province was knit
to the Kingdom of Austrasia or East-France; and afterward being broken off
was united to the German Empire. At the beginning of its Government the
Public Ast^i^s were swayed and weilded by some who enjoyed no other Title but
Guardians and Protectors, and were advanced to that Dignity by the People in
the Reign of Charles the Bald; the first who were embellished with this Title
were Wickard and Leopold two Brethren, who fixing their Chief Residence in the
Castle of Guelders, gave an occasion to future Ages to impose the Name of
Gueld^rland on the whole Province; but they and their Successors were supported
by a Power of so narrow a circumscription, that in effect their Office was but
Provincial, they themselves being accomptable to the Emperors how they managed
the public Concernments of this Province. The first Prince who disengaged
from the Shackles of these Restraints, was Otho of Nassaw, who Matched with
Aleida Daughter to Wickard the last Guardian, and was by the Emperor Henry the
third made the first Earl of Guelderland; and under this Style and Title his
Successors continued, until the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria improved this Dignity
in the person of Reynold the second, to the Degree of a Duke, about the Year
1339. and from him did it descend to his Son Edward the Offspring of his second
Wife Eleanor Daughter of Edward the third King of England; and he deceasing
without Issue, Mary his Sister by Matching with William ^arl of Gulick, brought
both the Patrimony and Ducal Crown of this Province to be possessed b^ him, and
his two Sons William and Reynold the fourth, successively enjoyed it; but they
dying without Issue, Arnold of Egmond Son of John Lord of Egmond and Mary his
Wife, Daughter of Joan the Sister of William and Raynold the two last Dukes, as
Heir General possessed himself of Guelderland; but in the declension of his Age,
being worried by his unnatural Son Adolph with War and Imprisonment, he was in
this agony supported by Charles the Warlike, Duke of ^urgu^dy, who rescued him
from his Son, and released him from his Fetters; and he to Balance ^o signal a
favor, conveyed his Interest in Guelderland and Zutphen to this Duke, which
Contract was after much Contest and Effusion of Blood ratified to Charles the
fifth, by his second Son Arnold, and accordingly the Provinces of Guelderland
and Zutphen were by a voluntary Resignation surrendered to Charles the fifth,
and from him the Title devolved to his Son Phil^p the second, King of Spain, in
whom it was lodged until the Barbarous Cruelty of the Duke of Alva engaged most
of the Belgic Provinces to a Revolt or defection, and the Prudential Conduct
of Maurice Prince, having much extended the Conquests of the Confederate
States, most of this Province was by his successful Achievements annexed to
their United Patrimony.

Zutphen.
ZUTPHEN was anciently an Earldom of it self without any Connection or
dependence on the Fortune or Seignory of Guelderland, and remained in this
Capacity until it devolved to be the Patrimony of Wickman the last Earl, who
determined in Sophia his sole Daughter and Heir, who by Matching with Otho
first Earl of Guelderland, fastened it to that Province, annd so it continued
after this, subservient to the Command of the Successive Earls and Dukes; and
when Arnold the last Duke of Guelderland conveyed all his Interest to Charles
the fifth, this was wrapped up in the Purchase, and remained under the Dominion
of the Scepter of Spain, until the Defection of Holland and other Provinces
from that Crown; and then about the Year 1590. it was by Prince Maurice, and
the Army of the United States, by Conquest torn from the Spanish Patrimony,
and has ever since remained linked in Confederacy with those Combined
Provinces.

Groining.
GROINING, both City and Province, did in elder Times confess no other
Seignory but of that of the Bishop of Utrecht, but he either by want of Power
of Inadvertency, being remiss in Asserting their Liberties against Foreign
Eruptions, they submitted to the Protection of the Dukes of Guelderland. But
these Princes were disturbed in their new Acquists by the Dukes of Saxony, who
by a pretended Claim entitled themselves to the Propriety of it, during which
disorder and emotion it was surprised by Ezardus the Earl of East-Frizeland,
who about 1514. conveyed his Usurped Interest here to the Duke of Guelders the
just Proprietary of it. Afterwads they resigned themselves up, with a
Reservation of their ancient Liberties, to Charles the fifth; which being
men^ced to be overwhelmed by the Fury of the Sp^niard, they Combined 1594. with
Holland in ^^ion and remain yet wrapped up in that Confederacy.

Holland, Zealand, and Frizeland.
HOLLAND has on the East the Zuyder-Sea, Utrecht and some part of Guelderland;
on the West and North the German-Ocean; on the South the Isles of Zealand, and
some part of Brabant.

Zealand consists of Seven Islands, viz. Walcheren, South Beverlant, North
Beverlant, Wolfers-Dike, Schowen, Duvelant and Tertole^. It is divorced from
Flanders by the Left Branch or Arm of the Scheld; on the East it is divided
from Brabant by the right Branch of the said River, on the North it is
separated from Holland by the Gulf called the Flack, and on the West it is rent
from England by the Ocean.

West-Frizeland has on the East the Land of Groining and a part of Westphalia,
on the South Over-Issell and the Zuyder-Sea, on the North and West the main
Ocean. The ancient Inhabitants of these three Provinces were the Batavi and
Carinefates, Inhabiting that Track of ^arth contracted almost into the
circumambient embraces of the Rhine and Wael, and which now circumscribes
within its precincts and Verge Holland, Utrecht, ^^d a part of the Duchy of
Guelders; the Frisii who were entitled to the Possession of West-Frizeland, and
the Mattiaci who were planted in Zealand. But when the Ravage and Pyracies of
the Normans had by many Bloody Onsets and Impressions acted such a Devastation
here, that these Provinces were almost dispeopled; Charles the Bald to Thierry
Son of Sigebert a Prince of Aquitane; and the more to manage and improve his
increasing Hopes, and enable him to protect these depopulated Countries, he
engraffed on him the Title of Earl, with this Restriction annexed to the
Donation, that he and his Successors should own and confess the Sovereignty of
the Crown of France, which was accordingly performed, until it was by Arnulph
the fourth Earl interrupted and discontinued, who rendered himself Homager to
the Empire; and from this Thierre an undisturbed Channel of Descent transported
it down to John the Son of Florence the fifth, who determining without Issue,
John of Avesnes Earl of Hainault, in Right of the Marriage of his Father John
of Avesnes Earl of Hainault, and his Mother Aleide Sister and Heir of William
the second Earl of Holland, entered into the Possession of these Provinces as
their Heir General; and from him it was wafted down to his Grandchild William
the fourth of that Name Earl of Holland, and the second of Hainault, who being
slain in a War against the Frisons, and leaving no Issue, Margaret his Sister
and Heir brought it to be possessed by Lewis of Bavaria Emperor of Germany,
after whose Decease she was forced to relinquish Holland to her second Son
William, and Hainault to her third Son Albert; but Earl William, the fifth
above mentinoed, deceasing without Issue, Albert his Brother became entitled to
the Earldoms of Holland and Hainault, and had Issue William the sixth, who by a
Right transmitted to him from his Father, wore the Coronet of Holland; and in
him this Family was entombed, for he Deceasing without Issue Male, Jaqueline
his only Daughter became his heir; but it seems she was condemned by nature to
an inexpugnable barrenness, for though she had three Husbands, namely, John the
fourth Duke of Brabant, from whom she was separaed by Divorce, under pretext of
Consanguinity, Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, and John de Borselles, a Gentleman
of a private Orb, yet the Annalls of Holland do assert that she had Children by
neither, so that wanting Posterity to enforce and propagate her Memory to
succeeding Times, she conveyed her Concernment in Holland and Hainault to
Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, Son of John Duke of Burgundy and of Margaret
his Wife, Sister to Earl William the sixth, and Daughter of Albert
abovementioned; from whom by the Traverses and steps of several Descents (the
House of Burgundy* having by the Match of Joan the Heir of Ferdinand and
Isabella, fa^^ned and knit the House of Castile unto it self) the Propriety and
Title of Holland, Zealand, and Frizeland, devolved to Philip the second King of
Spain, (...) Viceroy for the ^ Provinces the Duke (...)va having by his
prodigious Butcheries and ^^^cutions incited the People to a total Defection
from the Crown of Spain, they to Fortify t^^m^^lves against the Bloody
encroachments of the Spamard, Chained their divided Interests together in one
common Union and Co^s^^^^^cy* in which they continue linked at this instant.

Utrecht.
UTRECHT is chained in on the East with Guelderland, and on the West, North and
South with Holland. The City of Utrecht was sometimes the Royal Residence of
Radbold King of the Frizons, after the Romans were dislodged, who had long been
plant ^here in those Cities and Seats, they by an unjust Violence had torn
from the Bructeri, Salii, and Batavi, who were the ancient Inhabitants; but
when Dagobere King of France had dissipated and broken the Strength of the
Frizons, he erected this Province into a Bishopric, and annexed unto it a
Demeasn spreading and opulent, the better to soment the increase of
Christianity, and improve the subsequent Dignity of it. The first Bishop whose
Hand sustained the Crosier, was Willibald an Englishman, who established
Christianity, and dispelled the Mists of Infidelity which had long
over-shadowed these parts; and his Successors multiplied it to that Grandeur
and formidable Power, that they asserted their Patrimony and Intetest in this
Province about Nine hundred year^, with much of Reputation and Courage against
all the encroachments and unjust Incursions of the Invading Earls of Holland,
until it came to be possessed by Henry of Bavaria Bishop hereof, who being
distressed by the Duke of Guelders, and expulied out of Utrecht by his own
mutinous and tumultuous Subjects about the Year 1527. conveyed his Estate here
to Charles the fifth, and he procured an Investiture in it from the Estates of
the Empire (it being an Imperial Fief, and so not to be alienated or imbezelled
without their License) not long after; and from him did it devolve by
Succession to his Son and Heir Philip the second, who having lodged the
Government of the Netherlands upon his Vicegerent Ferdinand de Toledo, Duke
D'Alva, this Duke by his Massacres and Assassinations, having filled the
Inhabitants with a universal Regret and Animosity, this with the rest of the
Provinces, by a pub^ique Revolt, renounced and disclaimed all Alleigeance to
the Crown of Spain; and the better to secure their Liberties from the future
Onsets of that Kingdom, the People of this Province cemented themselves in a
Confederate Union with those of Holland, and continue at this day wound up in
that first Combination.

Cambray.
THE City of Cambray with the Territory annexed, was established and erected
into a Bishopric in the person of St. Diogenes by Birth a Grecian. In Times of
a more recent Aspect, that is, about the Year 1562. it was advanced to the
Dignity of an Archbishopric by Paul the fourth. It was made an Imperial Fief
by the German Emperors, and was given in protection by the Emperor Henry the
fifth, to Robert of Jerusalem Earl of Flanders, which Patronage was ratified
to the Successors of this Robert, by the Indulgent Bounty of the Emperor
Frederick Barbarossa about the Year 1164. so that being under the constant
Tuition of Flanders, it was esteemed a Limb of that Province, yet had the
Bishops a separate Jurisdiction, and were of that Eminence and Latitude of
Power, that the Bishop of Cambray was under the Repute and Notion of a Prince
of the Empire. It was several times, sometimes by Assault, and sometimes by
Stratagem, forced to bow to the Dominion of the French, who having disobliged
the People by their disorders and irregular Exorbitances were expuls'd in the
time of Lewis the eleventh, and then it continued under the Character of a Free
City and Province, though shadowed still with the Protection of Flanders, until
the Year 1543. a Citadel was here established by Charles the fifth, which could
not rescue it from being surprised in a sudden Camisade by the Duke of Alenzon,
but being not long after retrived by the Courage and Virtue of the Spanish
Arms, it has ever since remained annexed to the Patrimonial Inheritance of the
Crown of Spain.

The Spanish Interest in Italy.
SICILY is the first place in Italy which swells the Bulk of the Spanish
Greatness; and made its Interest so considerable to its Enemies, and useful to
its Friends in all its scattered Territories. It is environed with the Lower or
Tyrrhenian Sea, and contains Seven hundred Miles in Compass, and by elder
Conjectures was supposed in Ages of a higher ^limax to have been united to
Italy, being then a Demy-Island or Peninsula, such as Peloponnesus, and joined
to the Continent by some narrow Isthmus. Indeed the Narrowness of the
Straight, thr ^hallownesse of the Water in the Phare, the Brittlenesse of the
Shore on either side, being full of Caves, and Chinks, wrought in it by the
violent Onsets of the Sea; and then the City Rhegium situated on the Cal^brian
Coast, and almost opposite to Messina, which imports a Breach or Cutting off,
from the Greek word (...), which signifies to Break off; do evince to us by
probability of Circumstances, that Sicily was one piece with the adjacent
Continent, until the violence of Earthquakes, and the impetuous Futy of the
Waters and Waves did dislodge and consume the earth which tied it to Italy.

It was once called Trinacria, because it extends it self into the Sea with
three Capes or Promontories, viz. 1 Pelorus now Capo de Foro. 2 Pachinus, now
Capo Passaro, and Lilybaeum now Cape Boij, or Coro. The first Inhabitants that
History represents to us to have possessed this Country, are those vast Giants
Recorded in the Odysses of Homer, under the Appellation of the Laestrygones and
Cyclops. These were afterward supplanted and discarded by the Sicani, a People
of Spain, who called it Sicania. But these new Invaders being not long after
rooted out by the Siculi, who were driven out of Latium by Evander and his
Areadians, and forced to seek new Habitations here; it abandoned the Name of
Sicania, and assumed that of Sicily. At their first Landing they built the City
of Zancle called afterward Messana, together with Ne^, Hybla, Catana, and
Leontium. After them came another Italian Colony styled the Morgetes, being
forced hither by the Oenotrians, and fixed their Residence in that part of the
Island where they erected the City Morgentum, and adopted it into their own
Surname. The first of the Greeks who Invaded it, were the Chalcidians, a People
of the Isle of Euboea, now called Negropont, to whom the City of Naxos owed its
first Foundation; and after Archias of Corinth, and his Retinue of Adventurers,
by whom Syracusa (Famous in elder Times for the Petalismus or Banishment of
Citizens by having their Names writ in an Olive Leaf) was first built, or else
very much enlarged and adorned. Next them the Rhodians and Cr^tians sent some
Colonies hither, the first Founders of Gela; and after, of the so much
Celebrated City of Agrigentum. And not long after, a new Stock of Planters
built Heraclia. The Citizens of Megaris, another State of Greece, transmitted a
Colony also, who built S^linus: And so did those of Messene or Mycena also, who
taking the Town of Zancle from the Siculi, new beantified it; and being thus
repaired, fixed on it the Name of Messana. Nor can we deem the Tyrians and
Phaenicians, such Noted Undertakers of Public Businesse^, would be so
stupidly unactive not to attempt nothing, when so rich and eminent a prey did
invite their Industry; for we find they attaqued the Promontories of Pachinus
and Lilybaeum, and some of the adjoining Islands, and Forti^ied them, the
better to secure and improve the Trade they had established in Sicily. But
these several Colonies being broken into several Interests and Factions,
Combined not together in the Design of an absolute Conquest, but planting
themselves on the Shore, did not discard the Name of the Island, by which they
found it distinguished upon their first Eruption. After this Island by these
particular Onsets and Impressions, fell under the Cognizance of the Greeks,
from all their principal Cities, Colonies issued out, who Inhabited the
Seacoasts of the Country; but so as they never Concentered in a Common Body,
but had their several ends and particular Interests, whereby they came to be
split into many Factions, and sacrificed as a Prey to as many Tyrants. Phalaris
overruling Agrigentum, Panaetius at Leontium, Gelon at Syracusa, Cleander at
Gela; and when one Faction was too Impotent to obviate or resist the other,
they called in several Foreign Nations to support their Quarrel. For on this
Foundation the Carthaginians were called in by the Messanians, against the
Agrigentines. And on the same Principle, was managed the Peloponnesian War, the
Athenians Combining with the Leontines, and the Spartans with the Syracusans,
in which the whole Power of Athens was broken by Sea and Land, and their two
Generals Nicias and Demosthenes offered up to an untimely and Bloody Fate in
prison. But because Syracusa was a City of the most eminent Authority, and of
the greatest Influence over the rest, the state and Affairs of that City are
made more visible by History, than those which have an Aspect upon the Towns or
Communities of this Island. The Government at first was popular, as it was in
most of the Greek Colonies, according to the Platforms and Models they
transported with them, and was but newly transplanted into the Aristocratical
when Gelon erected his Kingdom here, about twenty years after the expulsion of
Tarquins at Rome, whom with as many Succeeded in the Royal Dignity, take in
this subsequent Register.

A. M. 3465. 1. Gelon taking advantage of the Contests in Syracusa betwixt the
Magistrates and People made himself Master of the City, and was Chosen King. 7.
A. M. 3472. 2. Hiero the first, Valiant, but rude and Covetous. A. M. 3484. 3.
Thrasibulus Brother to Hiero, whose Government was so Barbarous and
Insupportable, that he Swayed but ten Months. A. M. 3544. 4. Dionysius the so
much Celebrated Tyrant, who being General of the Syracusans, made himself their
King. A Man of great Vices, and as eminent Virtues. 38. A. M. 3582. 5.
Dionysius the second Succeeded his Father in his Kingdom and his Vices, but
not in his Courage or Prudence, being first supplanted by Dion a Gentleman of
Syracusa, and secondly, vanquished and made Captive by Timoleon, of Corinth. A.
M. 3635. 6. Agathocles a Potter, after a Soldier, twenty years after the death
of Timoleon, made himself King of Syracusa. 29. A. M. 3681. 7. Hiero the
second, of a Leader of their Armies, chosen King of Syracusa by a Party which
he had packed amongst them. In his Time broke out the first Punick War, the
Romans being called in by the Mamertones, who held Messana against the
Carthaginians. 56. A. M. 3737. 8. Hieronymus Son of Hiero, after whose Decease
all Sicily became subject to the Dominion of Rome, by the successful Conduct of
Marcellus.
Being thus made Subservient to the Government of Rome, it was wrapped up in
the Fate of that City, and of the Roman Empire; until in the partition, ^f the
Roman Empire, it was cast together with Apuglia and Calabria into the Power of
the Greeks. In the Declension and wane of whose Greatness, this Island having
been miserably depopulated and harrassed by Constans, Anno 669. it became a
prey to the Saracens; from them rescued again by the Normans; who held both
this, and the Realm of Naples in Fee of the Church, under the Title of Kings of
both the Sicilyes. After that it fell under the Fortune of that Kingdom
subject unto the Princes of the Norman and German Line, until the Death of
Conrade, no discomposure or Interruption intervening. After whose Exit, when
Manfred Base Son of the Emperor Frederick, and Brother of Conrade, had by a
forcible Intrusion entitled himself to the Crown and Scepter of this Island, it
was offered by the Pope (upon some Conditions knotted with many rugged
difficulties) to Richard Earl of Cornwall Brother to Henry the third; a man
according to the Standard of those Times, of a most important Revenue; upon
whose waving this motion, it was again offered to his Nephew Edmund second Son
to Henry the third, who was espoused to this Royalty by a Ring, and Money Coined
in his Name by the Popes appointment, with the Impresse and Inscription affixed
to it of Edmundus Rex Siciliae. But Henry the third being not in any Capacity
to pursue this Design, the Civil Contests with his Barons having entangled him
in more difficult Undertakings, and the Pope having sufficiently by this
Overture drained his Exchequer, it was in the Year 1261. given to Charles Earl
of Provence and Anoju, Brother to Lewis the tenth of France. To his Command
this Island was subservient until the Year 1281. in which his Competitor Peter
of Arragon justled his Title by a new Claim, emergent from his Wife the
Daughter and Heir of Manfred above mentioned; and for the clearer decision of
the Title, invited him to the Commencement of a Duel before King Edward the
first of England, at Bourdeaux; which defiance he tacitly declining, Peter in
the mean time by dark Stratagems and black Contrivances, wherein he was aided
by John de Prochita a Gentleman of the Kingdom of Naples, from whom Charles of
Anjou had violently snatched the Island of Prochita, upon a Summons received
from a Toll of a Bell, sounded, as it was pretended, to give an Alarm to
Sicily of the approach and onset of some Invading Sarazens, the French were
Assassinated in this Island which massacre so firmly riveted the title into the
House of Aragon, that it still continues incorporated into the Interest of
Spain.

Sardinia.
THE Island of Sardinia lies West from Sicily, from the nearest point thereof
it is distant about Two hundred miles. It is in length one Hundred and eighty,
Ninety in breadth, and in Circuit Five hundred and sixty miles. In the Time of
Aristotle it was called Ichnusa, and next Sandaliota, from the Resemblance of a
Shooe-sole or the Impression of a Man's Foot on the Earth; and finally, Sardinia
from Sardus the Son of Hercules, who coming out of Africa entitled himself to
the Possession. And that which more improves and fortifies this Narration is,
that the People in the Latin Tongue have still the Appellation of Sardi, and
the circumambient Sea the Denomination of Mare Sardoum. And to this Name it
has remained so constantly ever since espoused, that no following Plantations
were ever able to extinguish or divorce it. Some Companies of Attica were
Conducted hither by Iolaus, where they erected Olbion and Agrillis; which
Colonies, to enforce and multiply the Memory of their Founder, assumed to
themselves the Name of Iolatenses. And after the Ruin of Troy, some of the
broken Relics of that scattered Nation came and planted in the void places of
this Island; whose Successors are mentioned by Livie and Pliny, under the
Denomination of the Ilienses. After these the Carthaginians by the nearness of
their Habitation, did attaque all Advantages to make, as at last they did, a
full Conquest of it; building therein the Cities of Carmis, Calaris, and
Sulchi; and asserting their Title to it, it was unjustly wrung from them by the
Romans, at the end of the first Punick War; at what time Carthage was in
hazard to be Ruined by the defection of her own Mercenaries, and so in no
Capacity to resist.

This Island being thus extorted from the Carthaginians by the Romans* was
immediately under the Signory of the Prefect of Rome; but after by Junsti^an,
it was incorporated into his New Dioce^s of Africa, and as an Appendage to it,
was Claimed, Invaded, and Subdued by the Sarazens, Anno 807. who destroyed
Calaris, subverted by Gracchus and the Romans; and again in more settled Times
re-established. But from them it was rescued by the Pisans, (who re-edified
Calari) and Genoese, who made a partition of it betwixt them; but the Genoese
disgusted with their Portion, as being less in Quantity, and worse in Quality,
began to enter into Contest with the Pisans, which at last ushered in an open
War, Anno 1324. In which having worried themselves with mutual Contests, Pope
Boniface the eighth, to appease their Animo^ties, and supersede all Quarrel for
the future, by a new Donation enstated it on James the 2d. King of Aragon, who
had entitled himself to it by a specious Claim before, upon pretense that it
was a Limb or Appendix to Sicily, and wrapped up in the Patrimony of that
Diadem; and the more to fortify his new Acquists, obtained the Papal
Concession to support and improve his Interest here, which before appeared to
be but infirm and crazie; and being thus doubly guarded with his own Title and
the Pope's Grant, he after some signal Decisions of the Sword, wholly
supplanted both the Pisans and Genoese; and in the Year 1324. reduced this
Island under the Dominion of the Aragonian Scepter. And from him has the
Propriety ever since been conducted down to his Successors in so uninterrupted
a Channel, that the Devolution and Traverses of many winding Descents has at
this instant brought it to confe^s the Empire and Seignory of Philip the fourth
K. of Spain.

Naples.
THE Kingdom of Naples is almost on every side circumscribed with the
Adriatic, Ionian, and Tuscan-Seas, unless on the West, where it is separated
from the Lands of the Church, by a small Neck of Land drawn from the Mouth of
the River of Druentus, to the Spring Head of Axofenus. It is divided into Terra
di Lavoro, Abruzzo, Apulia, Terra de Otranto, Calabria-Inferior,
Calabria-Superior, and the Isles of Naples.

Terra di Lavoro was Anciently called Campania, and extracted this Surname from
the Campani, who with the Oscani, who were invested in Possessions about Capua,
in Ages of a very old Inscription style^ Osca, were the ancient Inhabitants of
it. Abruzzo, in Latin styled Aprutium, was the Residence or Territory of the
Picentes and the Samnites; the last of which were subdivided into the
^erentani, Arpinates, Caraceni Praecatini, Peligni, Vestini, Hirpini, and the
Samnites, properly so called. Terra di Otranto was in elder Times Peopled by
the Salentini, Iapyges, and Messapiani; and from hence in the Records and
Monuments of Antiquity, it is exhibited to Posterity under the Names of
Salentina, Iapygia, and Messapia. Calabria-Inferior and Superior, were both
originally that Track of Earth which was postest by the Calabri, Tarentini,
Lucani, ^rutij, and some sprincklings of the Liburni, a People devoted by the
Romans to the sustaining of Burdens and other servile employments; and this I
believe was done by such cheap and contemptible undertakings to extinguish in
them all thoughts which might egg them on to a Recovery of that Liberty which
the Sword of the Romans had lopped off; for these, the Calabri and Tarentini
were the last (not without many signal and solemn strugglings) who prostrated
themselves as a prey to the Victorious Tallons of the Roman Eagle.

This Kingdom of Naples has been whirled about with so many Revolutions, that
the Inhabitants of any Region have not been obnoxious to more Vicissitudes and
Mutations than the Possessors of these Provinces have been. For 1. the Grecians
entered and scattered here their particular Colonies of Achaians and Spartans,
which obliged Antiquity to give the Name of Magna Graecia to Calabria; in which
Track they erected Locris, so eminent in old Records for Zeleucus the
Lawgiver, and his Laws and Institutions, and Eunomus the Musician. 2.
Tarentum, which contributes a Name to that Capacious Bay called Sinus
Tarentinus. 3. Crotona, whose Inhabitants were anciently so active in the
Olympic Games. 4. Amycle, a Town whose Inhabitants were made up in elder Times
of the Pythagoreans, a Sect which by the Institutions and Rules of their Order,
devoted themselves to Silence. 5. Sybaris ^o infamous in Story for their
Softness and Effeminacy, having melted themselves into so much Ease and
Luxury, that they expulsed all Smiths and Brasiers into Exile* because by the
Noise of their Bellows and Hammers, they might make an Invasion on their Repose
and Slumber, and entertained with unusual Caresses, Musicians, Fiddlers, because
they improved their Sleep and Excess. And 6. they here erected Rhegium, which
Name they fixed upon it from the Word (...), which signifies to break or tear
asunder; this City being separated or torn off from Sicily, by that Straight of
Sea which they style the Faro of Messina. In Terra di Lavoro they erected
Parth^nope, now called Naples, Osca now named Capua, Cuma and Sinuessa now
called Sessa. In Abruzzo they established Arpinum. In Apulia Anciently by the
Grecia^s called Daunia, they founded Luceria, Asculum sometimes styled Asculum
Satrianum, and Argyripa the Argos Hirpium, of the ancients, and contracted by
use and depravation of Dialect into Agyripa, which as Antiquity asserts and
intimates, was erected into the shape and model of a City by Diomedes, and a
Colony transmitted from Etolia. In Terra di Otranto they established
Brundufium, Hydruntum, and as some affirm (but upon what grounds I know not)
Gallipolis likewise; but though Naples were thus strengthened with Colonies,
and knotted with Cities, yet this could not so secure her from Foreign
Eruptions, but that she bowed her Head; and partly by a voluntary Resignation,
and partly by Conquest, gave her self up to be made part of that Patrimony
which improved the Roman Grandeur; and after it had for some years submitted to
the Dominion of Rome, as it was first a Common wealth, and afterward the Seat
of the Empire, it was rent off from that Great Body by the Goths, under whose
Tyranny it had not long lain gasping, but it was forced to surrender it self to
the Jurisdiction of the Lombards, who by their frequent and happy Inroads
disseised the Goths of their new Acquists; but their Conquests were not fixed
or permanent, for their Foundation being Cimented with Blood, was infirm and
slippery, being after some assaults made upon it by Charles the Great, forced
to bow to his Scepter: But to wind up all Controversy for the future, and to
entomb all emergent Differences in an amicable Pacification, this Charles about
the Year 803. made an equal and indifferent partage between Nicephorus then
Emperor of the East, and himself as Emperor of the West; the Limits of which
Division was the River Liris now Cantigliano by Capua, and the River Aufidus
now Ofanto in Apulia. But this partage did not long continue without some
Discomposure; for ill Agents having fomen^ed some Differences between the
Greeks and the Germans, their private Animosities and Heats were at last blown
up into the public Flame of War, which did determine in the total expulsion
of the Germans out of Naples; yet this was not acted without the Concurrent
Supply of the Sarazens, Enemies to them both; who discovering the weakness of
the Greeks in being invited in to supplant the Germans, Invaded those who had
called them in; and thus was this unhappy Kingdom for several Ages made the
sad Stage where the Latins, Greeks, and Sarazens, acted their Bloody
Tragedies. But in fine, the Greeks being wasted with frequent Conflicts, and
almost sinking under the weight of a Foreign Conquest, they having evapourated
their noblest and most active spirits at those wounds the Swords of these
Infidels had inflicted on them, were supported in this their Agony by Forty
Norman Gentlemen, who about the Year 1000. returning from a Pilgrimage made
into the Holy Land, gave so noble and generous Assistance to the Afflicted
Christians that they checked the Fortune of the Sarazens, and intercepted the
Current of their Victories, which before like a Deluge menaced wholly to
over-whelme the Christian ^nterest and Concernment in this Kingdom. But this
gave the distressed Inhabitants but some dawning of better hopes; the
improvement of this Success was left to the Valor and Conduct of one Drangot,
who having slain Repostel a Gentleman of Eminence, in the presence of Robert
Duke of Normandy, Father to our William the Conqueror, so disgusted his Allies
and Relations, that to decline the Tempest which menaced him, he retired into
this Kingdom for shelter, and after many Conflicts commenced with the
Sarazens, by a Fortunate Managery of the Christian Quarrel, he contracted their
Power into narrower limits; but being supplied with new Recruits the Sarazens
not only reinforced their Animosities but Hopes also, until Tancred and his
twelve Sons arriving out of Normandy with fresh Supplies, after many signal
encounters, wholly supplanted the Interest that these Infidels had in Naples;
but though these Invaders were thus dissipated, yet the Greeks remained
dis-satisfied, and gave new occasion of War and Trouble to these Norman
Conquerours under the Command of Melorco Vicegerent of this Province under the
Grecian Emperors; but the Affairs of the Normans were so well swayed and
ordered by the Care and Prudence of William Son to Tancred above mentioned,
that this new Emotion was extinguished by the Defeat of Melorco, and the Troops
marshalled under his Conduct; but this Discomfiture did not so totally dispel
the Tempest, but that there were new Clouds collected together, to disorder and
eclipse the Glory of the Norman Conquests; which in fine, were so wholly
dissipated, by the active Courage of Robert Guiscard another of the Sons of
Tancred, that the Greeks being absolutely crushed and subdued, and the Relics
of the Sarazens extirpated and thrown out, he justly merited in the Annals of
succeeding Times the Title of the Conqueror of the Kingdom of Naples; and he
bequeathed this Province with all its Perquisits and Appendages to be enjoyed
by his second Son Robert Guiscard Earl of Sicily, who in the Year 1125. by the
Favor and Influence of Anacletus then Pope, had the Title of King of Naples
conferred upon him, and his Son William received the Crown, with this
Restriction, that he should hold this Diadem as a Donative from the Pope, and
in Homage of the Sea of Rome; and in the Hands of his Successors did the
Neapolitan Scepter remain fixed, until it came to be weilded by William the
second, who upon his Decease left Constance his Daughter, his only Lawful
Issue, and Tancred his Natural Son, the Issue of unlawful Embraces; and he by
the concurrence and support of his Faction, so managed his Designs, that he
invested his Head with the Crown of Naples, to the prejudice and Disherision of
Constance the Lawful Heir; but disdaining to acknowledge the Pope for Sovereign
of the Fee, the Pope to retaliate this Affront, Matches Constance to Henry the
sixth Emperor of Germany, and by opposing the Right of his Empress to the
distorted and Usurped Title of Tancred, so crippled his Authority and Power,
that finally after many Contests and Bloody Decisions, the Scepter of Naples
came to be swayed by Henry the sixth abovesaid; but his Successor Frederick the
second embarquing in the former Contrast with the succeeding Popes in Relation
to the Sovereignty of Naples, disclaimed and renounced any Homage to the Sea of
Rome, which so inflamed that Bishop, that he collected all supply that the
Engines borrowed either from Strength or Art could contribute to vindicate his
pretended Right to the Sovereignty of Naples; yet was he thwarted in his
endeavors with such vigorous Opposition during the Government of Frederick the
second abovesaid, Conrade his Son, Manfred his Natural Son, and Conradine
Grandchild to Frederick, nothing was effected of Importance which might afford
any support to the accomplishment of the Designs of the Popes for the time
being: so that Pope Innocent the fourth, to Fortify his Attempts with Foreign
Succor, presented the Kingdom to St. Lewis King of France; for his Brother
Charles Count of Anjou and Provence, who had the Repute of an excellent
Soldier, and an experienced Commander; and about the Year 1264. which was two
years after Pope Urban the fourth invested him with it; he to assert his
Interest, Commenced a War with Conradine King of Naples, and having put his
Title to the Umpirage of a Battle, after a Bloody Debate, took this Conradine
Captive; and made the forfeiture of his Head expiate its wearing that Diadem
which the Popes Donation had before by a pretended Investiture entitled him
to; and having thus fixed the Scepter of Naples in his own Hand, he left it to
be swayed by his Son and Heir Charles the Lame, who by Mary his Queen
Inheritrix of Hungary had Issue, Charles surnamed Martel, who had his Mothers
Kingdom assigned him for his Subsistence or Portion; Lewis his second Son, who
assumed Holy Orders, and Clowded all his earthly Glories in the Cowle of a
Franeiscan Friar, and afterward was Bishop of Thoulouse; Robert his third Son,
was by the Munificence of his Father entitled to the Inheritance of the
Kingdom of Naples. There were other Sons who had other Lands consigned them in
Appennage for their future support and Alimony. Robert abovesaid, had Issue
Charles, who dying without Issue Male in his Fathers life time, left only a
Daughter and Heir called Joane, who after the Decease of her Grandfather
Robert, came to Manage the Neapolitan Scepter; and this is that Joane so
Famously Infamous in the Annals of Naples, for the probable Assassination of
her first Husband Andrew, and other wild Disorders, which have cast so dark a
Tincture upon her Fame, that though some have endeavored to wrap up her Guilt
in a modest Covering, yet the Blackness of her Life is visible by an indelible
stain through all those Veils the Industry of Flattery attempts to fold it up
in. But to proceed; about the Expiration of the Reign of this Ioane, which was
about the Year 1378. the Church of Rome was Disordered by a remarkable Schism;
for Urban the sixth, being made Pope, the Violence of a predominant Faction, a
considerable part of the Conclave of Cardinals Elected Robert Cardinal of
Geneva, by the Name of Clement the seventh. Queen Joan being warped with
Animosity against Urban, who was born under her Dominion and Scepter, made her
self a Partisan in the Cause and Quarrel of his Adversary and Competitor
Clement. Her Crime contracted from the Slaughter of her Husband Andrew, had
been long entombed in a Pacification transacted in her Favor by Pope Clement
the sixth, with Lewis the Great, King of Hungary, Brother to Andrew abovesaid.
But Urban the sixth, to recompense her for those Disservices with which she had
disobliged him, again raked into her Guilt, and incensed Charles of Duras, of
the House of Hungary, to expiate the former Murder by a just Revenge; and this
Prince, inflamed by his Instigations, came and Beseiged her in Castello del
Ovo, and having reduced her, and that Fortress to his Discretion, strangled
her in or near that place where she had acted her Barbarous Parricide on her
first Husband Andrew. Charles of Duras having thus destroyed this Infamous
Princess seized on the Neapolitan Diadem, which did not sit so fast on his
Temples, but that it was shaken by a Concurrent Title, for Joan not long before
her Death, to fortify her self agrinst the Designs of Pope Urban, had adopted
Lewis Duke of Anjou Brother to Ch^rles the fifth King of France, for her Heir;
and he endeavored to vindicate and extort the Crown from Charles of Duras by
Dint of Sword; but the latter did so vigorously sustain all the Impressions of
the House of Anjou, that he not only asserted and fixed the Right of the Crown
to himself, but likewise transmitted a peaceable Possession of it to his
Successors; which were, first, Ladislaus his Son and Heir, who Deceased without
Issue, and Joan his only Daughter and then Heir, who upon the Death of
Ladislaus, ascended the Throne of Naples by the Name of Joan the second; who
for Disorders and irregular Excesses, and holding a scandalous Familarity with
one Caracciolo, as likewise for her ill Administration of the public Affairs,
was Degraded from the Regal Dignity by Pope Martin the fourth, and Lewis of
Anjou, Grandchild to Lewis Duke of Anjou above mentioned, named by him to wear
the Diadem of Naples in her place; but she disdaining to be thus divested, to
secure her self against the attempts and pretenses of this Lewis, Adopted
Alfonsus King of Aragon and Sicily for her Heir; but being a Woman of a
volatile and inconstant Temper, upon pretense of some ungrateful Affronts put
upon her by Alfonsus abovesaid, Cancelled her first Adoption, and by a second
Instrument declared Lewis the fourth Duke of Anjou, Son to Lewis abovesaid, for
her Heir; and this Lewis having wrung the Crown from the House of Aragon,
enjoyed it jointly with this Queen Joan, in a fixed serenity of Government for
some years; but dying without Issue before her, she to preserve her self from
the Eruptions of the Aragonian Faction, Adopted Rene Duke of Anjou his Brother,
for her Heir; and soon after she had declared and effected this, she her self
was disrobed by Death of all Earthly Glory. But this Rene being then Captive
with the Duke of Burgundy, was debarred from amassing those Forces together,
which might adjoust his Title to the Crown of Naples; indeed his Duchess
Elizabeth, attempted to retrive it, but being overlaid with the Faction and
Force of Alfonsus, She and the House of Anjou were utterly supplanted, and
Alfonsus upon a pretense extracted from the first Adoption of Joan, which was
supported by Conquest, upon the Ruins of this Family, stepped up to the Throne
of Naples; and he more to ennoble his Family by an Additional Augmentation of
Revenue, enstated this Kingdom on his Natural Son Ferdinand, who being thus
invested in it, transmitted it to his Son Alfonsus the second; and he had Issue
Ferdinand the second, who likewise wore the Diadem of Naples; but a Tenure very
volatile and unfixt attended the Sovereignty, and made it rest but loosly on
his Temples; for Charles the eighth King of France, Espousing the Title and
Quarrel of the House of An^ou, so vigorously supported their Interest, that he
supplanted this Ferdinand, and forced him to abandon the Neapolitan Scepter;
but the French upon the Departure of Charles the eighth managing both the Civil
and Military Affairs of this Kingdom with much Impetuousnesse and
Inadvertency, excited the Neapolitans to resent their sway and Government with
so much Regret and Passion, that Frederick Brother of Alfonsus the second,
regained it with as much Facility as his Nephew Ferdinand had cheaply lost it.
But Lewis the twelfth, Successor and Kinsman to Charles the eighth, upon the
Decease of this Charles (who dyed suddenly at Amboise, as he was preparing for
a second Eruption upon Naples) Collected a Powerful Army to vindicate his
pretenses and Title to that Kingdom, so that Frederick finding himself too
weak to sustain the weight of so mighty an Opposition, threw himself into the
Protection of Ferdinand King of Aragon and Castile, who in stead of asserting
his Interest against the Onsets of the French, by an unworthy Compact with
Lewis the twelfth, disserted his Kinsman, and had the Moiety of the Kingdom
assigned him, as the price of this Dereliction; but not long after, the French
and Spaniard entering into Contention about the Bounds and Limits of the Lands
divided, their Animosities were improved to that height, that they blazed out
in the Flame of a public War; which was managed with that Vigor and Prudence
by Gonsalvo the Spanish General, that after many Encounters the French were
wholly disseised, and their Interest they had in this Kingdom extorted from
them; and though in Ages subsequent to this, the French did not tamely abandon
their pretended Concernment here, but sought to retrive it by the Bloody
Umpirage of the Sword, yet were their Designs so ill managed, and their Arms so
unprosperous, that their Disastrous success did but more fasten the Crown and
Scepter of Naples to that of Spain: to whose Diadem the Interest and Title of
this Kingdom has remained ever since so firmly linked, that it is still
united to the Hereditary Patrimony of Philip the fourth now King of Spain.

Milan.
MILAN is shut in on the East with Mantua and Parma, on the West with Piemont
and Switzerland, on the North with the Province called Marca Anconitana, and on
the South with that Chain of Hills which is styled the Appenine.

The Ancient Inhabitants were the Insubres, the B^ji, the Cenomani, and the
Senones; who were after diverse signal Contentions divested of their
Possessions by the Romans, and forced to surrender themselves as Tributary to
their Dominion and Seignory; and in that Demeasn which supported Rome, as it
was first the Head of a spreading Commonwealth, and then secondly, the
Metrapolis of a spacious Empire, did this Province lie folded up, until the
Government of this Province came to be Managed by Augustulus, the last of the
Western Emperors, who being subdued and his Forces broken by Odoacer King of
the Heruli and Thuringians, this Province became the Guerdon of his Triumphs;
but the Possession being thus achieved by an unjust Invasion, was not long
after extorted and ravished away from them by Theodorick K. of the Go^hs, about
the Year 495. but here the Title was as volatile and transient as formerly; for
Teyas his ^uccessor, was about the Year 567. vanquished by the un^ted Forces of
Alboinus King of the Av^res, invited out of Hungary, and Narses General for the
Emperor Justinian in Ita^y; the Goths being thus disieised, this Province was
consigned to Alb^inus, and his Troops by Narses, Anno 568. as the price of his
Successful Courage, and meritorious Fidelity so visibly exhibited in the War
commenced with the expulsed Goth; and in himself and his Line, did the
Sovereignty of this Province, by a Decursion and Series of Twenty three Kings
remain uninterruptedly lodged, until the Devolution of Descent brought the
Scepter to be weilded by Desiderius, who being about the Year 774. Discomfited
by Charles the Great, this Kingdom sunk in his Ruins; and was afterward
incorporated as a Province into the spreading Demeasne of that Victorious
Monarch. After whose Reign this Province remained Imperial, and was subservient
still to those who had the Empire of the West. But when the House of
Charle^aigue degenerated, and suffered the Imperial Diadem to be ravished from
their Heads after the Year 900. an eager Dispute was managed by the Continuance
of Fifty years, betwixt the Italian and German Princes, in relation to the
Possession and Sovereignty of the Empire. In Fine, the Germans prevailed in the
person of Otho the first, and his Successors having designed and fixed their
Seat of Power and Government in the Empire, they afterward were entangled in
several Contentions with the Papacy, which so much retrenche^ and contracted
their Authority, that their Power in Italy began sensibly to crumble away, and
a considerable part of Lombardy slipped out of their Dominion; and some
Seignories chose to themselves Italian Lords, and some elected Liberty and a
Popular Government. In these Confusions Milan and its Appendant Territory, put
it self under the Patronage and Protection of Otho its Archbishop, Descended
from the Viscounts of Angleria, a place of a narrow Circuit in this Duchy.

But after his Decease Matthew Brothers, Son to this Archbishop, was confirmed
in the Government of Milan by Albert Emperor of Germany, but under no other
Notion or Title than that narrow one, only of Commander; (for still it seems
the Skeleton of Sovereignty was deposited in the Hands of the Emperors, though
those Nerves and Muscles which should make it act vigourously, and move
regularly, were rent off) and from him did the same Command devolve to his Son
Galeazzo Visconti, who because he exercised this Authority without the
Approbation of Lewis of Bavaria the Emperor, he was disseised of his Power and
expulsed; but his Son Actio Visconti was reinvested in that Command from which
his Father had been dislodged by the same Lewis; but after his Exit, the same
Command was successively Managed by his two Uncles Luchino and John Visconti,
younger Brothers to his F^ther Galeazzo; and after their ^xtinction, the
Government of this State was dispensed and swayed by Galeazzo the second, Son
of Stephen, who likewise was a younger Brother of these two, but embellished
with no other Title but that of Commander of Milan; and here this Appellation
expired with him, and was entombed in his Urne; for after his Decase, John
Galeazzo Visconti Son of Galeazzo the first, abovementioned, coming to graspe
the Command of this Province, by the Benefaction and Munificence of the
Emperor Wenceslaus about the Year 1395. as some compute, or about the Year
1397. as others calculate, received his Investiture into the State of Milan,
with the more splendid Title of Duke; which was successively enjoyed by his two
Sons, John Maria, who in a popular Sedition fell an early Oblation to the
Disorder and Fury of the Vulgar; and Philip Maria, who likewise made his Exit
without Issue, so that the Right of Inheritance was lodged in Valentina their
Sister and Heir, who about the Year 1398. was Matched to Lewis Duke of Orleans,
Son to Charles the fifth King of France, and by the Contract of Matrimony, it
was manifested and declared, that upon Defailance of the Masculine Line of
Galeazzo, the Children of Valentina should be invested in the Succession of
this Duchy; notwithstanding, this Clause had this emient Defect, that this
Duchy being established a Masculine Fee, Galeazzo could not make it Feminine
without the Emperors Grant or License, which was not demanded or required,
because the Empire was then vacant by the Degradation of Wenceslaus whom the
Electors had divested and deposed because of his dull and sluggish
Administration of the Affairs of the Empire; but it is asserted by the French,
that Pope Benedict the thirteenth, who then held his See at Avignon, ratified
and approved the abovementioned Contract, for that Right the Popes challenge
in the Vacancy of the Empire. But this Succession falling in the Confusions of
France under Charles the seventh, when the two Sons of Valentina, Charles Duke
of Orleans, and John Count of Ango^lesme were Captive in England, where the
first continued twenty five years, and the last almost thirty. It was a Design
of not much difficulty for Francis Sforza (a man of a vigorous Resolution and a
deep speculation) who had Wedded Bona Natural Daughter to Philip Maria, the
last Duke of Milan, abovementioned; in that interval of Time, and the
Desolation of the House of Orleans, to surprise and seize the Duchy of Milan,
of which he had procured and obtained an Investiture of the Emperor Frederick
the fourth. But this did not so supersede the int^insique Right of the House of
Orleans, but Lewis the twelfth coming to be King of France, about the Year
1498. so powerfully prosecuted his Right, that he expulsed Lodowick Sforza (who
h^d by a cla^destine Assassination destroyed his two Nephews, the Sons of his
Brother Francis abovesaid, entrusted to his Guardianship and Protection, and
violently ravished away the Possession of this Duchy) and having made him his
Prisoner, carried him into France, where he dyed in Captivity in the Tower of
Loches. Lewis remaining thus Master of this Duchy, to secure his Claim and
fortify his Title, he obtained two Investitures of the Emperor Maximilian,
the first in the Year 1506. and the second in the Year 1509. But this did not
so support his Possession, but that toward the latter end of his Government he
was supplanted by Maximilian Sforza, Son to Lodowick, and the Concomitant
Succors of the Suisse, with the Consent of Maximilian the Emperor, who was
disgusted because Claude eldest Daughter to Lewis who had been promised to his
Grandchild Charles, was ^spoused to Francis, afterward King of France, by the
Name of Francis the first; which Francis after Decease of Lewis, being emp^l'd
with the Diadem of France, so Successfully vindicated his Claim and Title, that
he regained this Duchy, and rendered Maximilian his Prisoner, but he either
neglected o^ the d^dained to do Homage to the ^mperour for a new Investiture;
which Contempt of his, Charles the fifth, who succeeded his Grandfather
Maximilian, re ented with so much Regret, that his Animosity against Francis
grew inveterate and implacable, which blazed out in the Flame of a Public
War, in which Francis was made Captive at the Battle of P^via, and from thence
transported and put under Restraint at Madrid, and there remained until he
purchased his Enfranchisement with a plenary Release and Surrender of his Right
to this Duchy into the Hands of Charles the fifth, though the French affirm
this could only prejudice himself, but not the Children of Claude his Queen,
who were entitled to a Right by Descent from their Mother; and that this
Concession of Madrid is null by the Fundamental Laws of France, which will not
permit the Alienation of the Sovereign Rights of the Crown without the Consent
of the Estates General; and they never ratified this Concession; but the actual
Possession of the Spaniard has been more strong than these Pretenses, who have
so secured their Interest in this Duchy, against all the Efforts and hostile
Eruptions of the French, that it is still wound up in the Patrimony of Philip
the fourth King of Spain.

The Spanish Interest in Siena.
Siena.
SIENA and its circumambient Territory is situated between the Estate of Pisa,
and the Patrimony of the Popes of Rome, called the Demeasn of the Church. The
City is by Antoninus in his Itinerary styled Sena Julia, to distinguish it from
another of that Name, situated on the Margin or Fringes of the Adriatic Gulf,
and named Sena Gallica. It was as the Ancient Traditions of Italy testify,
erected by Brennus, who here, as in some Infirmatory, did deposite his
Soldiers who were superannuated with Age, or else almost crumbled away with
Sickness. In Times of a more modern Aspect this Province was wholly devoted or
offered up to the Interest of the Faction or Combination of the Gibellines or
Imperial party, so that the price was narrow and easy at which they
enfranchised and purchased their liberty of the Emperor Rodolphus. After this
City and Province came to confess the Seignory and Scepter of the Spaniard;
but they had not been long resident in their new Acquists, but they were
disseised by the French, but by the second Eruption of those Spanish they had
not long before expulsed, they were again rooted out and supplanted; and the
King of Spain having thus rescued Siena from the yoke of the French, conveyed
all his Concernment in it to Cosmo de Medices Duke of Florence about the Year
1558. but with this Retrenchment or limitation, that the Duchy of Siena it
self should hold in Fee of the Crown of Spain, and the Cities and Ports of
Porto Hercol^, Orbitillo, Piombino, and Porto Longone, should be annexed to the
Crown of Spain, and remain as Limbs of the Patrimony of that Diadem for ever;
and though Porto Piombino and Longone were not many years since torn from the
Spanish Scepter by the prosperous Arms of the French, yet the Spanish
discovering how Destructive and Ruinous it would be to their Affairs in Italy,
to suffer these new Intruders to be fixed in a constant Possession of them,
retrived them by Dint of the Sword, and are at this instant entitled to the
peaceable Possession of them.

The Interest of the House of AUSTRIA in GERMANY.
AUSTRIA properly so called, has on the East the Kingdom of Hungary, on the
West Bavaria, on the North B^^^^ia, on the South Stiria or Stiermarck,
represented to us by the Dutch under the Denomination of Ost^^rick, that is to
say, the Eastern Kingdom, this being the extreme Province of East-France, or
the Eastern Kingdom of the French; in the rude and unpolished Latin of those
Times styled Austrasia, whence the modern Austria has borrowed its Name and
extraction.

The ancient Inhabitants were the Quadi who were subdued by the Romans; but
these had scarcely advanced their Trophies upon the Ruins of this People, but
the Marcomanni improving their strength by a Confederate mixture with the Boij,
dislodged the Romans from their new Acquists, and Conquered part of this
Province, and left the remainder to be offered up as a Sacrifice to the
Victorious Sword of the Avares.

But these Boij being subjugated by Clovis the Great, and the Avares expulsed
from Pannonia by Charlemaigne, both this and that became incorporated into the
French Empire, until the subduing Pannonia by the Hungarians. To oppose whom,
and more vigorously to protect this Province in its Peace and Safety, some
under the Notion of Guardians or Lord Marchers, were Deputed by the Kings and
Emperors of Germany to have an Inspection into the Affairs of this Territory;
and more to reward and ennoble their Care, they were adorned with the Title of
Marquisses. At first Officiarie, but at last Hereditary; made so by the
Emperor Henry the first, who gave this Province Anno 980. to one Leopold
surnamed the Illustrious, extracted from the House of Schwaben; and from him
descended Leopold the fourth Marquisse of Austria, who dying without Issue,
Henry the second was not only invested with the Estate, but likewise with the
Title of Marquisse of Austria; but by the liberal Munificence of Frederick
Barbarossa in the Year 1158. was advanced to a higher Dignity and Created Duke
of this Province by that Emperor; and from him it came down to his Grandchild
Leopold the fifth, who surprised Richard the first, in his Return from the Holy
War; and having made him his Captive, obtained so plentiful a Ransom for his
Redemption, that with it he Purchased Stiermark and the Counties of Neobourg
and Lintz, and Circumscribed U^enna with a Wall; and this Leopold had Issue
Frederick the Warlike, who for some Enterprises wherein he exhibited signal
Testimonies of his Courage, was made King of Austria by Frederick the second
Emperor of Germany; but he Deceasing without Issue, Ottocarus Son of
Wenceslaus King of Bohemia, being fortified with a Right derived from Margaret
Sister to this Frederick, entered upon his newly established Monarchy, adding
thereto, as an increase of Patrimony, the Countries of Carinthia, and Carniola,
which he had Purchased of Ulric the last Prince thereof; but being Vanquished
and Slain by Rodolphus of Hapsberg not long before advanced to the German
Empire in the Year 1246. he conferred the Possession of these large Acquists on
his eldest Son Albert with the Title of Duke of Austria, about the Year 1298.
But though these new Conquests were incorporated into the Demeasn of Albert, by
the successful Sword of his Father, yet was their Title better secured and
supported by Marriage; for he Wedded Elizabeth Daughter of M^inard Earl of
Tiroll and Elizabeth his Wife, the Daughter of Gertrude, who was Daughter to
Henry Brother to Frederick the Warlike; which Gertrude Matched with Hermanus
Marquisse of Bad^n, by whom she had Frederick Beheaded at Naples by Charles of
Valois, 1268. And this Elizabeth abovesaid, in whose Right Albert became
entitled to Austria, Tiroll, and many other Opulent and considerable
Possessions elsewhere; and from him did this Duchy by Descent devolve to
Albert the sixth, who (as some Records and Histories assert) assumed the Style
of Archduke, about the Year 1430. and much enhaunsed his Grandeur and Revenue
by Matching with Elizabeth Heir of Sigismund King of Hungary and of Bohemia,
she adding those two Crowns to his Patrimony; and he left Issue Ladislaus, who
Deceasing Childlesse, Frederick the second, being extracted from Leopold one of
the Sons of Albert the third Duke of Austria surnamed the Short, was by a Right
flowing from him entitled to this Dukedom; and he had Issue Maximilian the
first, from whom this Duchy devolved successively to his two Grandchildren
Charles the fifth, and Ferdinand the first. The last of which had Issue
Maximilian the second; from whom the Title was conducted down to his two Sons
Rodolph the third, and Matthias, who both Deceasing without Issue, the Title
was invested in their Kinsman Ferdinand the second Duke of Gratz, Son of
Charles Duke of Austria youngest Son of Ferdinand the first; from whom it is
transmitted to his Grandchild Leopold Ignatius, the instant Emperor of Germany.

Stiria or Stiermark, is bounded on the North with Austria, on the South with
Carinthia, on the East with Hungary, on the West with Carinthia likewise. It
was anciently possessed by Inhabitants who fell under the Denomination of the
Taurisci part of the Norici, from whom it extracted the Appellation of
Stiermark; the Germans calling that a Stier which the Latins call Tauriscus,
or a little Bullock. From which Account it may be asserted that Stiermark was
nothing Anciently, but the Borders or Marches of the Taurisci, being the utmost
Limits or Extent of their Possessions. It was annexed to Pannonia in the
Destribution of the Roman Provinces, and had the Name of Valeria imposed upon
it, as a Trophie of Honor imposed upon it, to improve the Memory of Valeria
the Daughter of Dioclesian. But when it was rent off from the Roman Empire it
obtained the Name of Stiermark, which had an Aspect upon the Ancient
Inhabitants the Taurisci. It was first erected into an Earldome in the person
of one Ottocarus, who was Dignified with the Title of Earl by Conrade the
second. And this Title continued until Leopold the fourth was created Marquisse
of Stiermark by the Emperor of Germany, for the Time being; and from him the
Right of Succession transported this Province to his Son Ottocarus the fourth,
who was adorned with the Title of Duke of Stiria by Frederick Barbarossa. But
he being without hope of Issue, and infected with the incurable Disease of the
Leprosy, conveyed his Interest and Concernment in this Province to Leopold the
fifth, Duke of Austria, which he purchased with that vast heap of Treasure he
extorted from Richard the first, for his Ransom from that Captivity he was
detained in. And has been wrapped up ever since in the Demeasne of the House
of Austria; but so that it has been consigned as a Portion to support the
younger Sons of that Family; as namely, to Leopold the ninth of that Name, one
of the younger Sons of Albert the Short, and after to Ernest the youngest Son
of that Leopold; and lastly, to Charles the youngest Son of Ferdinand the
first, commonly called Charles Duke of Gratz, Father to Ferdinand the second,
who was Successor to Matthias in the Empire, and Heir General likewise to that
Complicated Interest he enjoyed in Austria, and the rest of the Estates
incorporate with it, where it has ever since remained so united, that it is
not probable for the future, that it will so unpolitiquely be dismembered from
it.

Carinthia and Carniola are two other Provinces which enforce the Grandeur and
swell the Patrimony of the Austrian Family. The first called Karnten in Dutch,
is bounded on the East with Stiermark, on the West with the Bishopric of
Saltzbourg, on the North with Austria, on the South with Carniola. Carniola
styled Krain in Dutch, is surrounded with Sclavonia on the East, Friuli on the
West, Carinthia on the North, and Istria on the South. The ancient Inhabitants
of Karnten and Krain were the Carni; from them not only the adjoining Alps had
the Name of Carnicae, but these two Counties had those Names imposed upon them,
by which they now are known. Both Provinces were united long since in the
persons of the Dukes of Karnten; the first of whom the Testimony of Authentic
Record does exhibit to public view, was Henry Son to Berthold a Noble Man of
Bavaria, in the Time of the Emperor Otho the third, who invested him with the
Title, and planted him in the Estate; which were both disposed off in
succeeding Times at will of the Emperors, as their Interest guided them. Nor
was the Title fixed in any House, until it devolved to Henry Son of Englebert
President of Istria, in which Family it remained under this Henry, his Brother
Englebert, Ulric the first, Henry the second, Herman and Ulric the 2d. the last
who was entitled to these Provinces; who by Matching with Agnes Sister and
Heir of Otho the second Duke of Meranis, linked that Estate to his former
Patrimony. But being ancient and Issue-lesse, he conveyed his Interest here to
Ottocarus King of Bohemia and Duke of Austria, by whom these Countries were
surrendered to Rodolphus of Habsperg, as an Oblation to that Peace which was
solemnly stipulated between them. And though Rodolphus gave Carinthia to
Mainard Earl of Tiroll (in Right of whose Daughter, Albert the Son of Rodolphus
was enstated in Austria) yet upon the expiration of Henry the Son of Mainard
without Issue Male, it devolved (according to a Pre-contract) unto Albert the
Short, eldest Son of Albert, and Grandchild of Rodolphus, continned ever since
annexed to that Family, though not always resident in the Chief House of
Austria.

In this Province of Carniola is the Town and little Territory of Gorit^
anciently styled Noreia, and was in elder Times of that Repute that the
Proprietary of it was adorned with the Title of an Earl; he that had the
Dignity of Count of Goritz, was Albert second Son to Mainard Earl of Tiroll,
who divested himself of the Propriety of it, to fix the Title on him; and in
the Descendant Line of this Albert it continued until the Year 1500. and then
Leonard the last Earl thereof dying without Issue, it was seized on by
Maximilian the Emperor as his next visible Heir, whose Successors both in the
House of Austria and Empire also, inter-weave the Title of Earl of Goritz in
their usual Style.

Tiroll.
TIROLL is bounded on the East with Friuli and Marca Trivigiana, on the West
with Grisons and some part of Switzerland, on the North with Bavaria, and on
the South with Lombardy.

The Earls were at first but Provincial Officers; but when this naked and empty
Title vanished and grew Hereditary, no Beam either from private or public
Record does contribute any Light to a Discovery. The first whom any certain
Evidence does represent to us, is Mainard who dyed Earl of Tiroll about the
Year 1258. and from him did this Earldome devolve to his Grandchild Henry, who
dying without Issue Male, his Daughter Margaret by the consent and Suffrage of
her Subjects, conveyed her Propriety in this Earldome to the Sons of Albert the
Short, which has been linked ever since to the Revenue of the Austrian Family.
Ferdinand the first gave it in Appennage to his second Son Ferdinand surnamed
of Inspruch, who having disgusted his Allies by Matching with Philippina a
Burger's Daughter of Ausburg, he to becalme their Passions which boiled with
Regret and Animosity against this cheap Alliance, entered into Covenant with
them, that her Issue should not be entitled to the Inheritance of Tiroll; In
order to which stipulation, after his Decease this Earldome devolved to the
House of Gratz, his eldest Son Charles being adorned with the Dignity of
Marquisse of Burgh, and his second Son Andrew advanced to be Cardinal of
Brixia, so that the Propriety of this County has been ever since resident in
the above recited* Family; and at this instant confesses the Seignory and Title
of the Descendants of Leopold Brother to Ferdinand the second, Duke of Gratz,
and Emperor of Germany.

Bohemia.
BOHEMIA is encompassed on the East with Moravia, on the West with the Upper
Palatinate and Voitland, on the North with Misnia, Lusatia, and some part of
Silesia; on the South with some parts of Bavaria and Austria.

The first Inhabitants were the Marcomanni and Quadi, mingled with the Boiari
Marsigni, Burij and Gothini; who upon the wane of that Power and Splendour which
ennobled the Roman Empire, were disseised of their ancient Patrimony in this
Kingdom by the Sclavi, a Nation Inhabiting the Banks of the River Ister; a
People very Obscure in their Original and in their Country, until their
Successes dispelled that Mist which hung about them, and made them more
conspicuous. Under what Form of Government they modelled themselves after their
Achievement of this Kingdom, is not obvious from any Ancient Record; or if
they did erect any Frame, it was swept away by new Squadrons of Sclaves,
Croatians, and other scattered Nations, who under the Conduct of Zechius a
Leader of great estimate, like an Inundation broke in upon them, which Zechius,
with his Brother Leches about the Year 640. were expulsed out of Croatia, for
some Offenses of a dark Complexion there acted by them; and being very
acceptable to the Sclaves of Bohemia, who viewed him as a Prince extracted out
of the same Cradle and Seminary with themselves, and one of the same Language,
concerned in the same Laws, and conformable to the same Customs with their
own, they Adopted him into the Supreme Government of this Province. But after
his Decease the Estate crumbled into the Confusions of a disordered Anarchy;
until Crocus about the Year 670. recollected the broken pieces into shape and
Order; and from his Justice and Integrity in the Administration of the Public
Affairs, acquired the Name of the Bohemian Lawgiver; after his Exit the
Bohemians resigned themselves up to the Government of Libussa his youngest
Daughter, but her Hand being too narrow to graspe the Affairs of State, her
Subjects made choice of Primi^^aus, and by Matching of him to her devolved the
Government on his shoulders; and in his Posterity the Supreme Authority was
resident, who were adorned with no other Title but sometimes Governors and
sometimes Dukes of Bohemia; until the Rule of Ueratislaus Brother to Sbtign^us,
who about the Year 1086. was for his Worthy and generous Performances in
several Undertakings, by the Emperor Henry the fourth, at Metz, invested with
the Title of King; which Regal Dignity was to continue Elective either at the
will and Arbitrament of the Emperor, or at the Disposition of the Estates and
People; and this is evident from several Precedents, this Uratislaus left three
Sons who were divested of the Crown to give way to Conrade Brother to
Uratislaus, who by the suffrages of the People was Elected King; and after his
Decease Brecislaus Son to Uratislaus, to the prejudice of hi^ two Sons, was
advanced by Choice to the Bohemian Diadem; and after his Exit, Borivorius
fourth Son to Brecislaus, to the Disherison of his three elder Brothers, was
Elected to weild the Scepter; and thus did the Crown continue in the persons of
Sutopulcus, Uladislaus the second, Sobeslaus Brother to this Uladislaus,
Uladislaus the third, Son to Uladislaus the second, above mentioned, who by the
Peoples Election was advanced to the Diadem, the Sons of Sobeslaus being
excluded and all the Residue of their Successors; until the Crown came to be
placed on the Head of Ferdinand the first Emperor of Germany, who
notwithstanding his Latitude of Power, acknowledged that the Bohemian Scepter
devolved to him not by the Authority of any Intrinsique or Inherent Right or
the Claim of Succession, but only by the Election of the People; and this his
Confession was enrolled in the Records of the Kingdom; and though it is
certain, that Maximilian his Son, Rodolphus and Matthias his two Grandchildren,
were Successively Kings after him, yet not their Descent, but the Peoples
Election, fortified their advancement to the Bohemian Diadem; and though upon
the Decease of Matthias, Ferdinand surnamed of Gratz, as Adopted Son to
Matthias, and declared Successor to the Crown of Bohemia by his Testament,
intruded upon the Throne; yet being not formally and legally Elected by the
People, he was by the Estates of the Kingdom rejected, who fixed upon Frederick
Elector Palatine of the Rhine as the object of their Choice; but he being
betrayed by his Confederates, and over-laid with the united Armies of the
Emperor Ferdinand, and the Dukes of Saxony and Bavaria abandoned Bohemia,
which was re-possest by Ferdinand, in whose Descendant Line it has been since
so permanent (the Peoples Election having been by Menaces and Force extorted)
that it is now the Possession of his Grandchild Leopoldus Ignatius the instant
Emperor of Germany.

Silesia.
SILESIA is bounded on the East with Poland, on the West with Lusatia, on the
North with the Marck of Bradenburg, on the South with Moravia.

The first Inhabitants hereof were the Marsigni, Burij, Gothini, and some part
of the Quadi. In the great partage of the Eastern parts of Germany amongst the
Sclaves, who had supplanted the ancient Proprietaries, it was incorporated with
the Dukedom or Kingdom of Poland* and remained annexed unto it until the
Government of Uladislaus the second, who being divested of his Crown and
Scepter by the unnatural Combination of his Brethren, was by the powerful
Influence and Intercession of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, Seated in this
Country, with this Restriction, that it shoul be held in Homage to the
Sovereignty of Poland. After his Decease it became split into parcels, and was
distributed amongst his three Sons, and again according to that ancient Custom
of Germany called Land-Skiftan (which with the Saxons was transplanted into
England) was subdivided into so many subordinate parts, which were to support
the Revenue and Livelihood of their Posterity, that it became resolved and
broken into fourteen Dukedomes; of all which, only Oswitz and Zator continue
fastened to the Crown of Poland, ten of the twelve remaining being by the Power
and Prudence of Wenceslaus the second, and John of Luxenbourg, Son to the
Emperor Henry the seventh, both Kings of Bohemia, knit to the Patrimony of
that Diadem only Su^initz remained under the Regiment and Administration of its
own Dukes, until Bog^slaus the last Duke by Testamentary Donation, passed away
all his Interest in it to Charles the fourth Emperor, and King of Bohemia
also; so that eleven of these petty Royalties by Conquest and voluntary
Concession, came to be linked to those Possessions which improved the Grandeur
of the ^ohemian Scepter, and have still so constantly waited on the Fate which
has attended the Diadem of that Kingdom, that they are now subservient to the
Interest and Dominion of the Austrian Family, at this instant Seated in the
Imperial Throne; only Lignitz the last in the Inventory of Fourteen Dukedomes,
does yet pay its Obedience to a proper Prince or Duke whose Predecessors have
enjoyed it by a prescription of many Descents. But alas! his power is
circumscribed, and himself so chained up by Tribute and Homage, to the Commands
of the Emperor, as King of Bohemia, that he appears little more than
precarious.

Moravia.
MORAVIA is shut in on the East with Hungary, on the West with Bohemia, on the
North with Silesia, on the South with the Lower Austria. The Ancient
Inhabitants were the Marcomanni and Quadi, who were in subsequent Ages rooted
out and discarded by a Sprig or Branch of the Sclaves, who Inhabited about the
Banks of the River Mora, from whence they imposed the Name of Moravia on their
new acquired Patrimony. At the beginning of their Settlement in this Province,
their Government was managed by Kings, the first Name of whom, represented to
us in Record is Raslai, who was made Captive by Lewis the Godly, and this
Province forced to become Tributary to the Empire; after Raslai the Right of
Succession brought the Moravian Scepter to be swayed by Hermodurus and
Suantopulcus, under whose Reign these Moravian Sclaves were retrived from the
Mists of Paganism and Infidelity to the Light and Clearer Conduct of
Christianity, by the pious Industry of Cyrill and Methodius, two Grecian
Doctors. After Suantopulcus, his Son Suantobegius ascended the Moravian Throne;
a Prince of a Noble and inexpugnable Spirit, who stretched his Scepter by many
eminent Conquests over Bohemia, Silesia, and Polonia al^o; but his Power
growing formidable, Arnulph the Emperor thought it meet to contract it, and
taking the Advantage to lay the Foundation of a Quarrel from his Denial to pay
the accustomed Tribute, by the united Aid of the Hungarians then Pagans, so
bruised him in several encounters, that his Kingdom crumbled into a heap of
R^ines, being seized on by the Hungarians and Poles, and other Nations. And in
this Calamitous condition it lay entombed, until it began to glitter with a new
Beam of Grandeur, by being erected into a Marquisate, but when Chronology is
silent; only History represents to us that Jodocus Barbatus about the Year
1410. Elected Emperor, was likewise Marquisse of Moravia; after whose Decease
it devolved to Sigismund Emperor and King of Bohemia as his next Heir, and he
enstated it on his Son in Law Albert Duke of Anstria about the Year 1417. which
Albert upon his Decease not only succeeded him in Moravia, but likewise was
planted in all the rest of his Estates; since which time it has been so
constant an attendant on the Fate and Fortune of the Crown of Bohemia, that at
this instant it obeys the Scepter of Leopoldus Emperor of Germany.

Lusatia.
LUSATIA, in High Dutch styled the Lausnits, is clasped in on the East with
Silesia, on the West with Misnia, on the North with the Marck of Brandenbourg,
and on the South with Bohemia: Who were the first Inhabitants, no Beam from
Antiquiy affords us Light enough to Discover, only an obsolete Supposition
reflects upon the Senones of Tacitus to be its Ancient Possessors. In Ages of a
more Modern Inscription, the Winithi or Venedi, the most Powerful Branch of all
the Sclavos were entitled by Conquest to the Propriety of it. When it was
advanced to the Dignity of a Marquisate, the Annalls of the Empire are so dim
and obscure that they exhibit no Testimony to us which may justify a perfect
Discovery. About the Year 1156. one C^nrade dyed invested with the Title of
Marquisse, to whose Dominion the Emperor Henry the fifth, added both the Title
and Marquisate of Misnia, which for some Decursion of time remained annexed to
Lusatia; after this, this Province of Lausnits being not able to support it
self against the frequent Incursions and Inroads of the Poles, it stooped to
the Scepter of their Kingdom, and continued subservient to the Interest of that
Diadem, until it was conveyed by Sale to Frederick the second, Marquisse and
Elector of Brandenbourg, who reserving to himself C^thouse, and some other
pieces contiguous to the Margin and Verge of his Confines, transmitted the
Remainder by a voluntary Resignation to George Pogibrachius King of Bohemia,
who Claimed it by the Right and Authority of an Original Grant made to
Uratislaus the first Bohemian King, by Henry the fourth Emperor of Germany;
and from this George did the Right and Title of this Province flow down to
Ferdinand the second Emperor of Germany, in an even Channel; who conveyed his
Interest in it to the late Duke of Saxony, as a Guerdon of those Supplies with
which he Supported his Quarrel against the Palsgrave Fredrick Elected King of
Bohemia. yet though Moravia, Silesia, and this Lusatia, were thus interwoven in
the person of one Supreme Governor, yet did they continue so distinct in their
particular Laws and Governments, that the Chief Magistrate or Ruler is admitted
and acknowledged by each Province distinctly by it self, and not by any one of
them in the Name of the rest; and this is done to preserve themselves free from
any Slavish Connection or Dependency of each to the other; which Custom or
Privilege, notwithstanding these late Concussions, has remained unshaken and
unviolated to this day.

Alsatia.
ALSATIA, in Dutch, Elsats, is shut in on the East with the Rhine and some
parts of Schwaben, on the West with the Mountain Vogesus, which divo^ces it
from Lorrein, on the North with the Palatinate, on the South with Switzerland.

The Ancient Inhabitants were the Tribochi, with some mixture of the Nem^^es
and Ra^ra^i* It was first subdued by the Romans; and w^ung from them by the
Almans; afterward extorted from these by the French, and by them annexed as a
Province to the Kingdom of Lorrein, and and when that Realm was in the
Solstice of its most flourishing Condition, it fell under the Notion of a
Province of the Empire. The Government at first was managed for the Emperors
by Provincial Earls called Landgraves, at first Officiarie and Ti^ular only,
as being accomptable for the profits of the County to the present Emperor. But
in the subsequent Age it was made Hereditary and Successive, in the person of
Theodorick, by Otho the third; after whose Decease the Empire returning to be
Elective, gave such an Alarm to these Provincial Commanders, that they
endeavored to secure themselves by lopping off any future dependant Connection
that might render them precarious; so that the Propriety of Elsats remained
folded up in the successive Line of this Theodorick, until the Government of
the Emperor Frederick the second, and then this Estate and Seignory of Alsatia
was broken to pieces and conveyed by Female Coheirs to Albert the second Earl
of Habspurg, Albert Earl of Hohenloe, and Lewis Count of Ottingen. Rodolph of
Habspurg, afterward Emperor, Son of this Albert, Matched with Anne Heir of
the Earl of Hohenloe, and so in her Right and in his own, became invested in
two parts of this Province, which make up the Upper Elsats, which remained so
constantly fixed in the Possession of the House of Austria, that by the steps
of several Descents it came to acknowledge the Dominion of the Emperor
Ferdinand the third, not long since Deceased, who to reimburse the French for
those vast expenses the German War had embarked and engaged that Crown in, by
the Articles of the late Peace so solemnly transacted at Munster, conveyed it
by Grant to the Crown of France, and remains so at this instant an Appendage to
the Demeasn of that Diadem.

Sungow or the Earldom of Pfirt, was Anciently clasped up within the Patrimony
of the Princes of Schwaben, upon the expiration of which Eminent House, in the
person of Conraradine about the Year 1268, the Patrimony of which, supported
the Luster of that Family; in his Extinction sunk into parcells, some
proportion of which erected this into a distinct Earldome. And under this
Notion it remained until Ulrick the last Earl, going out in two Female Coheirs,
about the Year 1324. Ann the eldest Matched to Albert the Short, Duke of
Austria, and Son to the Emperor Rod^lphus, and Ursula the second, by an equal
Distribution shared his Inheritance; and she fearing his Power, for a
Recompense of Eight Thousand Crowns conveyed her Moiety to this Albert; whose
Successors (unless when it was pawned or engaged to Burgundy) were entitled by
an uninterrupted Right to the Propriety of it, until the War Commenced not many
years since, between the two Emperors Ferdinand the second, and Ferdinand the
third, and Lewis the thirteenth King of France, made by that King in favor of
the Swede, who was in danger to be over-laid, and dislodged from his new
Acquists in the Empire, by the thriving Caesarean Army, after the Fatal Battle
of Nortlingen; the effects of which Quarrel were so destructive and ruinous to
the last Emperor, that to expedite an Accommodation with the Crown of France,
he gave up his Interest in this Province, during the term of the Truce, to be
enjoyed by the French.

Brisgow in Schwaben.
BRISGOW was in Times of a very high Ascent the Patrimony of the Earls of
Zeringen, which was erected into an Earldome by Berthold the first, Son of
Gebizo, and Grandchild of Guntran the second Earl of Hapspurg; which Family
finding its Tomb and fatal Extinction in the person of Berthold the fifth, the
seventh in succession, who Deceased Anno 1218. the Right of Brisgow devolved to
the Earls of Fribourg, the Principal City of that Country. Cuno the first who
bare the Title of Earl of Fribourg, being the eldest Son of Judith Sister and
Heir of Berthold the last Earl of Zeringen. Eggon is the last Recorded in the
Register of those Earls of Fribourg who were invested with that Dignity and the
Propriety of Brisgow; who being overborn by the Eruptions of his Mutinous
Subjects, he sunk under the pressure, and transmitted by Sale his entire
Concernment in this Province upon the Receipt of Twelve thousand Ducats, to
Albert and Leopold Dukes of Austria, Sons of Albert the Short; in the Patrimony
of whose Successors the Title of this Province has ever since been so
constantly folded up, that it still confesses the Signory of the Austrian
Family.

Hungary.
HUNGARY is shut in on the East with Transylvania and Walachia; on the West
with Stiria, Austria, and Moravia; on the North with the Carpathian Hills; on
the on the South with Sclavonia and some part of Dacia.

The Ancient Inhabitants of Hungary on the North side Tisse, were the Iazyges
Metanastae; on the East Side of Tibiscus, the Daci were planted; on the
South Side of the Danau, the Pannones resolved into the several Colonies of the
Azuli, Latovici, Werciani, Jassij, and Oseriates; as likewise the Ercuneales,
Breuci; Aravisei, and Scordisci Inhabited; the first of which extended their
Dwellings to the East, as the last enlarged their Habitations to the West. But
all these above mentioned were either very much broken, or else forced to
surrender themselves to the Successful Sword of the Romans, Anno post urbem
Conditam 719. Lucius Cornificius, and Sextus Pompeius being Consuls; and after
they had been planted in the Possession of this Province for some Centuries of
years, their Tenure and Title was disordered by the Invasions of the Chuni or
Huns, who under the Command of Balamir their General, in several Encounters, so
disspirited the Power and bruised the Force of the Romans, that they adandoned
this Province to the Possession of these new Conquerours; but the same
Vicissitude which cast out the Romans, rolled in upon these Huns, and crushed
them with the Wheel of a Revolution 'like the former; for the Winnithi or
Longobards, having both infested these Huns with many Inroads, and afflicted
them in many fortunate Encounters, so wasted their Strength, and impaired their
Armies, that they gave up themselves and this Province, as a Cheap Oblation to
the Triumphs of these Victorious Longobards; but these being called by Narses
into Italy, to reinforce his Armies (who then were in Contest with the Goths
for the Sovereignty of that Territory) discarded the Cold and Barren Fields of
Hungary to settle on the Warmer Champaign of Lombardy, where under the
Government and Scepter of Alboinus, they erected their Longobardian Kingdom.
The Longobards having thus left the Stage, the Avares or Avarini, a People
dropped out of the Bosom of Sarmatia, about the Reign of Tiberius the second
Emperor of Greece, entered under the Conduct of Caganus or Chan, an Heroic
but Merciful (Clemency and Magnanimity are twins) Cheiftane, who first
dissipated the Forces employed to break him by Tiberius abovesaid, and then
after a Bloody Decision subdued Cometiolus Lieutenant to the Emperor
Mauritius, Successor to Tiberius, and the Forces marshalled under his Conduct;
which Emperor attempting to repair the Dishonor contracted by this Defeat,
had his Endeavors frustrated by that execrable and perfidious Assassination
which was acted on him by his Bloody Servant Phocas; which Murder so unsettled
and disordered all those hinges which sustained the Frame of the Grecian
Empire, that these Avares and their Commanders taking the Advantage of its
intestine Distractions, not only reduced Hungary to their subjection, but
likewise so extended their Conquests, that in the Reign of Phocas abovesaid,
and the Emperor Heraclius, they Forraged to the Gates of Constantinople; and
having thus broken the Power of the Greeks, they next Assaulted the Goth^ and
Gepidae, who yet possessed some part of Hungary; and after many Conflicts and
Disputes with these tougher Nations about their Title, they supplanted these
also, and asserted the entire Possession to themselves; and here they settled in
a quiet and undisturbed Residence, until the Government of Charles the Great;
and then he having like a Whirlwind, cast out those Nations which opposed
him, shivered these into a wild Dispersion, and by his Victorious Arms
dislodged them from the Possession of this Kingdom; after their Exit this
Province was subservient to the Commands of the German Emperors; until
Arnulphus being Assaulted by the fierce Impressions of Suantobogius King of
Moravia, called in the Hungars, a People of Scithia, wandering in Sarmatia
Europaea, and not tied or fixed to any certain abode, to his support and
Assistance, and they so generously crushed the Attempts, and repulsed the
Assaults given to the Emperor and his Armies, that to reward so signal and
generous performances, Arnulphus Invested them in the Possession of Pannonia,
and by a grateful elevation advanced Casala their Leader, to the Title of Duke
of this Province; and he to perpetuate to Posterity the Memory of this
Magnificent Donation, discarded the Ancient Name of Pannonia, and imposed that
of Hungary (an Appellation extracted from the People above mentioned) upon it;
and from him it came down to his great Grandchild Stephen the fourth Duke of
Hungary, in whom that Title ceased, and was improved to the more eminent
Dignity of King; which Office by the transmission of Descent, passed along to
his Successor Stephen the fourth of that Name King of Hungary; and he
determined in Mary his sole Heir, who by Matching with Charles the I am, Son
of Charles K. of Naples, linked the Crown of Hungary to his Patrimony; and in
his Descendant Line it resided until the Scepter of this Kingdom came to be
grasped by his Successor Ludovicus or Lewis, who concluding in Daughters and
Coheirs, Mary the eldest being Wedded to Sigismund the Emperor, brought this
Crown about the Year 1387. to acknowledge his Scepter and Seignory; and he left
Issue, Elizabeth Daughter to them two, and she by Espousing Albert of Austria,
planted the Crown of Hungary on his Temples; and from him it devolved to
Elizabeth his Daughter by this Alliance, who was Affianced to Ladislaus the
second, Son of Casimir the fourth King of Poland, who in her Right was justly
entitled to the Hungarian Diadem, and left it to his Son Ladislaus or Lewis,
infortunately slain at the Battle of Mohats by the Turks, about the Year 1526.
upon whose Decease without Issue, Ferdinand Brother to Charles the fifth, in
Right of Anne his Wife, who was Sister and Heir to Lewis abovesaid, was
Invested with the Crown of Hungary; and from him the Scepter of this Kingdom
was transported by the Devolution of several Descents to Ferdinand the third
Emperor of Germany, who upon his late Decease has left it to be weilded by
his Son and Heir Leopoldus Ignatius, who now is placed on the Hungarian Throne.

Croatia.
CROATIA is bounded on the East with Bosnia, on the West with Carniola, on the
South with Contado di Zara, anciently Named Liburnia, on the North with
Windischland. The Reason why the Name was imposed, is not obvious in Authors,
only it is generally asserted it was fixed on it by the Sclaves when they made
their first Eruption on this Country, when they disseised the Goths who
supplanted the Romans, who had before rooted out and dislodged, by several
multiplied Conquests, the ancient Inhabitants called the Liburni and Illyrij,
mingled with some allay of the neighboring Nations, or rather Colonies of the
Japodes, the Scirtari, the Mazai, the Peruistae, the Derrij, Ceraunij, Daursii,
Vardae, Siculotae, Sardiotae, and others of more despicable Estimate. But long
the Sclaves had not settled in this Province, but their Disorders unsettled them;
for by their Mutinies and Rebellions against their Governors, which concluded
still in their slaughter and Ruin, they filled the State with Anarchie and
Vicissitude, and were never calm or fixed, until the several Tribes to allay
this Distemper, had Princes who succeeded one another in a more Regular Method,
under the Title of Kings of Croatia; and in this Capacity it remained until the
Year 970. when having worried and harrassed their Neighbors by Pyracies and
other acts of Devastation, the Venetians, inflamed by these Affronts, to
expiate their Depredations with a just Revenge, in several Conflicts so embased
and retrenched their Power, that Zelamirus the last King, Deceasing without
Issue, bequeathed the Kingdom to his Wife, and she by a willing Donation
transferred her Interest to her Brother Ladislaus the Saint, King of Hungary,
so that it has had its Title ever since so involved and wound up in the Fate
and Fortune of Hungary, that by Ann the Sister and Heir of K. Lewis, who
perished in the Ruin of the Battle of Mohatz,, it accrued to Ferdinand the
first Emperor of Germany; and from him by the Traverses of several Descents,
did it pass along, until at last it is now come to confess the Sovereignty of
Leopoldus Ignatius now Emperor of Germany.

VVindischland.
VVINDISCHLAND is chained in on the East with part of the lower Hungary, on the
West with Carniola or Karnt on the North with the River Dravus, on the South
with Croatia.

It was anciently esteemed a Limb of Pannonia Inferior, as in more modern
Times a parcel of the Province of Savia. The ancient Inhabitants were the
Winithi or Vendi, who being swallowed up in the frequent mixtures of their
Confining Neighbors the Sclaves, were esteemed a Branch of that Powerful and
spreading Nation; but still to preserve the Name of their first Original the
Denomination of Windischland was imposed on this Province, which since by the
Sale and conveyance above mentioned, made by Zelamirus to Uladislaus the Saint,
has been so linked with Croatia, that as it has had still the same
Successors, so at this instant it owns no other Scepter, but that of Leopoldus
Ignatius now Emperor of Germany.

FINIS.

