CALLING AND ELECTION: OR, Many are Called, but few are chosen. BEING A
Consideration of Mat. 22. 14.

By CHARLES PHELPES.

To whom coming as unto a Living Stone, disallowed indeed of Men, but chosen of
God and precious: Ye also as lively Stones are built up a Spiritual house, an
holy Priesthood, to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ. -- Ye are a Chosen Generation, etc. which in time past were not a
People, but are now the People of God, 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5, -- 9, 10.

And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them
over to a reprobate mind, Romans 1. 28.

God works all things according to the Counsel of his own Will, Ephesians. 1. 11.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Southwood at the Star next to Sergeants Inn in
Chancery lane, 1674.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
I had no thoughts of writing out the ensuing discourse, until a very good
friend of mine requested me, that when I had opportunity I would do so much for
him, which I was not very forward unto, not resolved against: But upon further
consideration, I did intend according to my small ability, and as I had time,
to satisfy his desire. But before I had begun it, several others also were as
desirous as the former, both to have it written out, and also that it should be
made public. The former is now done, but whether the latter desire will be
answered or no, I yet know not.

That which made me the more willing to grant what was desired by my Friend,
and Friends was, That I might in some measure discover the abuse of the
Doctrine of Election by many of the Leaders of the People, whereby many Blind
ones being led by the Blind, fall into the ditch of Error: And many others
also are endangered also so to do. For as it was said in former times by the
Lord concerning some Teachers; so surely it may be said of too many in ours:
Thy Interpreters have transgressed against me, Isa. 43. 27. What the Scriptures
speak concerning Election agrees sweetly with the word of the beginning of
Christ, to wit, That He is indeed the Savior of the World; And therefore
nothing at all opposes them who believe it. But Men, in their Interpretations
and Glosses, pervert those things which are more hard to be understood: And
then also they wrest the other Scriptures, which are more easy to their own
and others, destruction; that they may make them agree with their perversions
of the more hard, 2 Pet. 3. 16. So it is in this particular instance. They
first devise and embrace a new Doctrine of Election, which the Scripture
knows not, to wit, An absolute Election of some men's persons in a personal
consideration before the World had a being: And then they deny, or confess not,
that Jesus Christ by the Grace of God tasted Death for every Man; or, that the
Grace of God brings Salvation to all men, that they may be saved. That so there
may be some agreement in their instructions which cause to err from the words
of knowledge. But those who first begin with, and learn the word of the
beginning of Christ, which is the foundation of other Doctrines, receive light
therefrom by degrees into other Doctrines which are built thereon: And in
following Christ therein, who is the light of the World, they shall not abide
in darkness, but the light shall be vouchsafed, and shine more and more unto
them until the perfect day.

If any should fault me for not speaking to other Scriptures which some think
favor their device of personal Election, as Acts 13. 48. Romans 8. 28-30. etc.
Let them know, I have not meddled with them, both because the word Election is
not expressed therein: And also, and especially because these, and other
Scriptures of like nature are spoken unto already more fully and profitably
then I can do by my Brethren and Helpers in the Lord; as by Mr. Thomas Moor
Sen. in his Book entitled An explicit declaration of the Testimony of Christ,
from page 354. to 372. and page 451-457. And in his Treatise of Election. And
by Mr. John Horn in his Essays, page 24. 26, etc. And therefore to them I refer
them, because also I have been much more large then I at first intended.

And let not them who believe the Testimony of God concerning Christ, viz. That
He is the Son of God, and Savior of the World, deceive themselves, in thinking
that my only, or principal end and aim in what I have written is, to detect the
errors of them who are enemies thereto: for though I have endeavored so to do
in some things for their good who do so err: And to preserve others from such
evil and erroneous Doctrines, if they have an heart and opportunity to read
this: Yet I principally intended this discourse to discover how many vain
believers of the Gospel of Christ there are, who though they are called, yet
are not chosen: And for admonition to them, and instruction to all who have the
form of sound words, that we might all of us, not only in word profess to
believe Christ's Gospel. But so from the heart obey it, that we may be and abide
free from sin, and become continually servants unto Righteousness, that we may
have our fruit unto Holiness, and the end Eternal Life.

Consider what is said herein, and compare it with the word of God, and
Testimony of Jesus: And what agrees therewith embrace it, and yield up
thereto: And if in any thing I have dissented therefrom, let it be rejected.
Try all things, hold fast that which is good.

Charles Phelpes.
Feb. 24. 1672/3.
Mat. 22. 14. For many are Called, but few are Chosen.


THese Words are in General the Shutting up, or Conclusion, of the foregoing
Parable, which, it may seem, our Savior speaks directly to the Chief Priests
and Pharisees; though it was spoken also in the Hearing, and for the Good and
Admonition of others, of the People then present, and of the Disciples also:
But it appears to be spoken directly to the Chief Priests and Pharisees. For in
Chap. 21. our Savior spoke in Parables, in which He signifies how He should
be Dealt with, and Rejected by the Husbandmen and Builders, Verse 28. -- 44.
And when the chief Priests and Pharisees had heard His Parables, they perceived
that* He spoke of them, Ver. 45. And this Chap. 22. thus beginueth: Jesus
answered and spoke unto them again by Parables, and said, etc. Ver. 1. As also,
and further appears by what is said in this Chap. 22. 15.

And it appears, That this Parable is Prophetical, showing beforehand the
Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that He should receive there-through: And
then, God's Grace to the Jews, together with their Unworthiness generally, Ver.
2. 7. And on their Rejection of the Gospel, God's Mercy to us Gentiles (for
through their Rejection of Christ, when Preached by the Apostles, and Fall
thereby; Salvation came to us Gentiles, for to provoke them to jealousy, Acts
13. 46, 47. and 28. 28. Romans 11. 11, 12.) And the Iniquity of too many of the
Gentiles after Called and brought into the House, Ver. 8, 9, -- 12. --

And this Verse, we have propounded to speak unto, contains in it particularly
the Reason of God's great displeasedness with, and severity.

1. More remotely against the Jews, who p^t away the Word of God, and judged
themselves unworthy of Eternal Life (which was their own, not God's
Forejudgment,) Acts 13. 45, 46. Mat. 22. 7.

2. And more immediately against the unworthy Gentiles, or the Man indefinitely
that had not on the Wedding Garment. Concerning whom He gives this Charge to
the Servants. Bind him hand and foot, and cast him into ^uter Darkness, there
shall be Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth, Ver. 11. 13. To which He subjoyns this,
I say, as the Reason of His being so angry with, and Incensed against the
unworthy, both Jews and Gentiles. For many are Called, but few are Chosen.

In the former part of which Words, to wit, [ Many are Called] let us inquire
and consider, I. To what are the many Called, and upon what Account? II. By
whom are the many Called? III. Why says He [ Many] are Called, and not [ All?]
IV. To what End are they Called? And this will lead us to the latter part.


First, To what are the many Called, and upon what Account?

They are called to the Marriage and Marriage Feast, which God has prepared in
the Person of Jesus Christ our Lord: So it is said, The Kingdom of Heaven is
like unto a certain King which made a Marriage for his Son. And sent -- to call
them that were bidden, to the Wedding. -- Again he sent -- saying, Tell them
which are bidden, behold, I have prepared my Dinner; -- Come unto the Marriage,
Ver. 2. 4. And when these first bidden Guests, the Jews, refused and made light
of it, he commands again. Go ye into the Highways (unto the Gentiles) and as
many as ye shall find, bid to the Marriage, ver. 8, 9, 10. And so it is to the
Marriage, and Marriage Feast, therewith and thereby prepared to which the many
are Called, Bidden and Invited.

Now the Marriage to which they are Called, signifies not only, as some say,
the Feast prepared; though that may be, and is included also: But firstly and
principally the Marriage it self, which the King of Heaven, the most High God,
the Possessor of Heaven and Earth (who is indeed a great King, Mal. 1. 14.)
made for His Son, His only Begotten Son; In which the Divine and Humane Nature
were Married and United in a close, and Personal Union, in the Person of the
Word, the Son of God; which was the Root and Cause of that Provision prepared
for us: And to which Men are Called, to the end they might come to, and be
Espoused unto Jesus Christ. This, I conceive, is first meant and intended by
the Marriage here spoken of, that in which the Word was made Flesh. For as much
as the Children were partakers of Flesh and Blood, He also Himself likewise
took part of the same: That in our Nature He might be further Abased for us,
that He might take out of the way all that was contrary to us, and obtain into
Himself all the fullness of Grace and Truth, John 1. 1, 3, 14. Heb. 2. 14. This
is the first Branch in the Mystery of Godliness, God was manifest in the
Flesh, 1 Timothy 3. 16. And being made of a Woman, He was under the Law, as
Mankind was fallen under it, yet without Sin; And had the Sins and Trespasses
of the World imputed to, and laid upon Him: God made Him to be Sin for us, who
knew no sin, Gal. 4. 4. with Romans 3. 19. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 21. And in and by this
Marriage He was fitted and prepared to be Wounded for our Transgressions, and
Bruised for our Iniquities, and to Taste Death for us, even that first Death,
which was the Wages of our first Sin and Sinfulness: As here it is said, My
Oxen and Fatlings are killed, Mat. 22. 4. Christ our Passover has been Killed
and Sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5. 7. And so, That whereto Men are Called first
of all, it is to the Beholding, View, and Belief of, the Abasement and Death of
the only Begotten Son of God in the Nature of Man, which is indeed the
procuring Cause of all the Glory conferred upon it in His Person, 1 Cor. 15. 3.
Gal. 3. 1. Phil. 2. 6. 9. John 3. 35. with Chap. 10. 17. Rev. 5. 12. And
because all that is Treasured up in Christ is the Purchase and Procurement of
His Cross and Sufferings; therefore the Gospel is called, The Preaching of the
Cross, and of Christ Crucified, 1 Cor. 1. 17, 18. 22, 24. and Chap. 2. 1, 2.
Gal. 3. 1. and Chap. 6. 14.

And together herewith also they are Called unto the Marriage Feast, or Dinner,
which is prepared by means of the Sufferings of Christ, in the Virtue whereof
He is raised again, in which all things are ready: Which in a like Parable to
this, Luke 14. 16, 17. is called, A great Supper: Great indeed, for in it all
things are ready. And it is called, a Supper; because once in the end (or
Evening) of the World Christ appeared to put away Sin by the Sacrifice of
Himself, Heb. 9. 26. This Purpose and Grade was given in Christ before the
Ancient, or Agie Times: But in these last Times, all Things are now actually
prepared, 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. so as in Him there is a Justification from the Guilt
of our first Sin and Sinfulness, Romans 3. 22, 23. and 5. 18. the abolishing of
our first Death, 2 Timothy 1. 10. A Victory obtained by Him over all our Enemies,
Heb. 2. 14. John 12. 31. Psalm. 98. 1. And in Him there is Redemption through
His Blood, even the Forgiveness of our following Sins, Acts 13. 38, 39. And He
has brought in everlasting Righteousness, Gal. 2. 21. And received the Spirit
without measure, John 3. 34. Acts 2. 33. In Him are hid all the Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge, Col. 2. 3. He is full of Grace and Truth, John 1. 14, 16.
God has given us Eternal Life, and this Life is in His Son, 1 John 5. 10, 11.
Yea, in Him it has pleased the Father that all Fullness should dwell, Col. 1.
18, 19. and 2. 9, 10. He is Glorified in our Nature with the Father's own self,
with the Glory He had with Him before the World was, John 17. 4, 5. All Things
that the Father has are His, John 16. 15. The Father so loves the Son because
He laid down His Life for us that He might take it up again, that He has given
all Things into His Hand; All Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly things; all
things that pertain to Life and Godliness: And all Power both in Heaven and in
Earth, John 10. 17. with Chap. 3. 35. Ephesians. 1. 3. Mat. 28. 18. By means of His
being Sacrificed for us, there is a Feast prepared for us, 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8. A
Feast of fat Things, of Wines on the Lees, of fat things full of Marrow, of
Wines on the Lees well Refined, Isa. 25. 6. Prove. 9. 1, 3. And to this
Marriage Feast also are Men Called, and Bidden, that they might partake hereof,
and their Souls be satisfied here with as with Marrow and Fatness, Isa. 55. 1,
2, 3.

And so that whereto men are Called, is to Jesus Christ and Him Crucisied, and
that excellent and complete Preparation provided in Him: They are called into
the Grace of Christ Jesus, Gal. 1. 6. The Spirit of Christ in the Prophets did
testify before hand of the Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that should
follow. And these things are now Reported to us in the Gospel with the Holy
Ghost sent down from Heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 11, 12. with Luke 24. 25, 27.

To Christ, God the Father was, and is, Calling and Directing men: To the
Teachers, He said, This is the Rest wherewith ye may cause the weary to rest,
and this is the Refreshing, Isa. 28. 12. 16. Behold, says he, my Servant whom
I uphold, etc. Isa. 42. 1. 6, 7. He hears Witness of Him; and Christ is so the
Sum of his Teaching, that every one that has Heard and has Learned of the
Father comes unto Him, John 5. 31, 37. and 6. 45.

Unto Himself Jesus Christ also calls men: He says, Look unto me all the
ends of the Earth, and be ye saved: For I am a Just God and a Savior, and
there is none beside me, Isa. 45. 21, 23. with Phil. 2. 8, 9, 10. And He says,
Behold me, behold me, unto a Nation that was not called by His Name, Isa. 65.
1. Thou shall, says the Father, Call a Nation which Thou knew not, to wit,
unto Thy self; for so much is signified in what follows: And Nations that knew
not Thee, shall run unto Thee, etc. Isa. 55. 5. All things, says our Savior,
are delivered unto me of my Father, etc. Come unto me -- I will give you rest,
Isa. 49. 1. 6. Mat. 11. 27, 28. John 7. 37, 38. --

It is also the Work of the Holy Spirit, to Lift up the Son of Man, as Moses
lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, that Men might look unto, and believe
in Him. To bear Witness of Jesus Christ: To take of His things, His Abasement,
Death, Resurrection and Glory, and to show unto us: And therefore also He is
called, the Spirit of Christ, John 3. 5, 6, 14. and 15. 26. and 16. 14, 15.
Acts 5. 30, 32. Romans 8. 9. 1 Pet. 1. 11.

Yea, the one God, Father, Word, and Holy Spirit, bears His Record of Jesus
Christ, and this is the Record, that God has given us Eternal Life, and this
Life is in His Son, 1 John 5. 7, 10, 11. Yea, to Him all the holy Ones call us;
the Spirit and the Bride say, Come; to wit, unto Christ: And let him that
hears say, Come, etc. Rev. 22. 16, 17.

And hereby we may see the desperate folly and madness of Men, who forsake, or
come not unto the Lord, the Fountain of Living Waters, but hew them out
Cisterns broken Cisterns, that can hold no Water, Jer. 2. 12, 13.

And it might Engage and Provoke us all to obey this heavenly Call, and run
unto Christ, because of the Lord his God, and for the Holy One of Israel, who
has Glorified Him in Himself; and displayed the Preciousness of His Blood, and
His Excellency and Comeliness by means thereof so our escape, before us in the
Gospel: And is Calling and Inviting us unto Him, Isa. 55. 5. with John 13. 31,
32. Oh! let us not turn a deaf Ear to this Call, but let us incline our Ears
and come unto Him, let us hear that our Souls may live, etc. Isa. 55. 2, 3.
Considering also that which follows. Namely,

The Account and Ground upon which Men are Called unto this Marriage, and
Marriage Feast, is, because it was intended and prepared for them: If the
Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the Battle? 1
Cor. 14. 8. But so does not this Trumpet in the glorious Gospel of God: for as
it gives a joyful sound, Psalm. 89. 15. so also a certain one. Gods Mouth has
therein spoken Truth, and Wickedness is an Abomination to His Lips: All the
Words of His Mouth are in Righteousness, there is nothing froward, or wreathed
in them, Prove. 8. 6, 8. This is a faithful Saying, and worthy of all
Acceptance, it is both true and Good, that Christ Jesus came into the World to
save Sinners: Sinners indefinitely, and without exclusion of any, 1 Timothy 1. 15.
This His Marriage of our Nature is, and was by an Heavenly Messenger proclaimed
to be Glad tidings of great joy to all people, Luke 2. 10, 11, 14. And Christ
had the Trespasses of the World imputed to Him, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 21. And by the
Grace of God He tasted Death for every man, Heb. 2. 9. And is Risen again for
the^ Justification: So that as verily as all have sinned in the first Public
Man, and are come short of the Glory of God: So also they are Justified freely
by God's Grace through that Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, Romans 3. 22, 24.
and 5. 18. And in Him there is a Feast prepared for all People, Isa. 25. 6.
Forgiveness of Sins for all Nations, Luke 24. 47. Acts 26. 17, 18.
Righteousness for all, Romans 3. 22. Isa. 61. 11. Eternal Life for all Mankind,
while it is called to day, 1 John 5. 10, 11, 12. A Salvation prepared before
the Face of all People: Neither is there Salvation in any other, Luke 2. 30,
31. Acts 4. 12. And on this Ground it is that men are Invited to come to this
Marriage, and Marriage Feast because it was made, and made ready for them, even
for Jews and Gentiles, and so consequently for all Mankind, Mat. 22. 2. 8, 9,
10. Luke 14. 16. 24. On this account His Servants have been provoked and
excited to Entreat and Beseech men generally to receive the Grace of God to
purpose: The Love of Christ did constrain them, to persuade men to come unto
Jesus Christ, because they thus judged, that if one died for all, then were all
dead, and that He died for all, etc. And after they had given an account of the
Ministry of Reconciliation which they had received, to wit, that God was in
Christ (when one died for all, and rose again) Reconciling the World unto
Himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them, but unto Christ, they say:
Now therefore we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by
us, we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5. 11, 14,
15, 19, 20, 21. and 6. 1. John 3. 14, 16. and 4. 42. Hence the Lord makes
Proclamation and Invitation to every Thirster, both to such as thirst out of
necessity, and to such also as thirst out of delight, having tasted the
Graciousness of the Lord; and says, Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to
the Waters, and he that has no money, etc. And to move them hereto, He says,
Behold, I have given Him for a Witness: For a Witness of His Love and
Faithfulness: He has so loved the World that He has given His only begotten
Son, to be the Savior of it, that all men through Him might believe, John 3.
16, 17. and 1. 7. 1 John 4. 14. And hence exhorts men, To seek the Lord while
He may be found, and call upon Him while He is near. Yea, The Wicked to forsake
his ways, and the man of Iniquity his thoughts, and to return unto Him, and He
will have Mercy, etc. Isa. 55. 1. 4, 6, 7. Here is a good account and sure
ground given in the Gospel, both for the Servants to Call, so as they shall not
run at uncertainty, nor fight as those that beat the Air: But may both Preach
to any man, or every man, as they have opportunity, and Pray for them, Without
wrath, though they be their Enemies; and without doubting, whether God bears
any good Will to them or no: For they may certainly know and conclude, God will
have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth: Because Christ
gave Himself a Ransom and Price of Redemption to God for all, a Testimony in
due time. And for those who are Called, who from hence may be Encouraged upon
principles of Certainty and Truth to come unto Him, in whom dwells all the
Fullness of the Godhead bodily, and in whom is all Compleatness prepared and
treasured up for us. And whosoever believes in Him shall never be ashamed nor
confounded, Luke 6. 27, 36. 1 Cor. 9. 26. 1 Timothy 2. 4, 6, 8. And so much for
the first Inquiry.

Secondly, By whom are the many Called?

By the Servants Instrumentally and Ministerially, and especially by the
Apostles in these last days. For, as we have said, our Savior in this Parable
speaks Prophetically of the Gospels being Preached unto Jews and Gentiles,
after He had finished the Work the Father gave Him to do upon the Earth: And
after His Death, Resurrection, Ascension, Receipt of, and sending forth the
Holy Spirit in His Name, in and by which His Apostles were fitted and furnished
to Preach the Gospel according to the Revelation of the Mystery: For until then
the Servants had not Commission and Furniture to Preach among the Gentiles the
unsearchable Riches of Christ. And though when Christ was risen from the Dead,
He gave Commission to His Apostles, to go into all the World, and Preach the
Gospel to every Creature of all the Nations; yet they were by Him commanded to
tarry at Jerusalem, until they were Endued with Power from on High, that they
might be fitted and enabled to put in Execution that Authority and Commission
they had received, Mark 16. 15. Mat. 28. 18, 19. Luke 24. 47, 49. And then they
were to be Christ's Witnesses unto all men of what they had seen and heard. And
yet though by the Servants here are meant, the Apostles principally, yet not
only: For the Bride in general says, Come: And he that hears is commanded to
say, Come, Rev. 22. 17. And so the many are Called by the Servants of the King
indefinitly, though principal Respect is had to the Apostles. So much is
plainly signified to us in this Chapter, that the many Called are called to
this Marriage, and Marriage Feast by the Servants: So it is said as with
respect to the Jews: The King sent forth his Servants to call them that were
bidden to the Wedding, Mat. 22. 3. Again, He sent forth other Servants, Ver. 4.
And when the first invited Guests refused, and dispitefully used them; he says
to his Servants, The Wedding is ready, but they which were bidden were not
worthy: Go ye therefore into the Highways, etc. S^ those Servants went out
into the Highways, and gathered together all, as many as they found, Ver. 8,
9, 10. And indeed it is the Work of the Faithful Servants of the great King,
not to Commend, or Preach themselves, but Jesus Christ the Lord, 2 Cor. 4. 5.
And not to Disciple men unto themselves, but to call and Espouse them to one
Husband, that they might be presented as a chaste Virgin unto Christ, Acts 20.
28, 30. 2 Cor. 11. 1, 2, 3. Their great Business is, to bear Witness of Christ,
of His Sufferings, and of what He has thereby done and obtained into Himself,
and is become, and is: And of what He is now doing, both from Heaven in the
Name of the Father to us: And in Heaven with the Father for us: And what He
will do hereafter, John 15. 27. Acts 5. 30, 32. 1 Pet. 5. 1. Heb. 13. 7, 8. And
not to proclaim their own goodness, as the most men do, Prove. 20. 6. that men
might admire them, or have their Faith standing in their Wisdom, Goodness, or
Holiness, 1 Cor. 2. 1, 5. Acts 3. 12. But to Confess, Praise, and Call men unto
Him, in whom dwells all the Fullness; that in coming unto, and believing in
Him, they might of His Fullness receive, and Grace for Grace.

But though they are called by the Servants instrumentally; yet not by them
only: The King sends them not alone on this Errand of His; but He accompanies
them by the Light, Influence and Power of His Blessed Spirit, in their plain
and faithful Ministration: So much in former Times was signified to us: As, in
that Scripture like to this, and whereto, it may seem, our Savior refers in
this Parable, Prove. 9. 1, 3. Wisdom has Builded her House, She has hewn out
her seven Pillars; She has killed her killing, She has mingled her Wine, She
has also furnished her Table: She has sent forth her Maidens, [She] cries
upon the highest places of the City, etc. Though She sent them forth to call
others into the House, yet Her Presence goes along with them: And not only they
Cry and Call; but also She cries. Does not Wisdom cry, and Understanding put
forth her Voice? She stands in the top of High places, -- She cries at the
Gates of the City, -- Unto you, O men, I Call, and my Voice is to the Sons of
Man. She sends forth her Spirit in and with Her Servants, that they might be
successful Instruments in Her hand, Prove. 8. 1, 4, 5. with Chap. 1. 20, 23. So
our Lord Jesus when He gave Authority to His Apostles to Disciple all Nations,
etc. To Encourage them unto this their Service, and against all their
Discouragements He graciously assures them, that He would be with them always
(and not at some times only) unto the end of the World. And that He was
faithful who promised, another Evangelist informs us, saying, they went forth
Preaching the Gospel every where, the Lord working with them, Mat. 28. 18, 20.
with Mark 16. 15. 20. Hence they are said to be Workers together with Him, 2
Cor. 6. 1. And he that despises and rejects His Servants in their faithful
Ministration of the Gospel, rejects not Man but God, who also has given to
them His Spirit to accompany them, and make their Word powerful, 1 These. 4. 8.
And hence they are in every place a sweet Savor unto God of Christ, 2 Cor. 2.
14, 15. He is verily and continually so present with them by the Power and
Influence of His blessed Spirit in their sincere speaking the Word of Christ,
as that, He that hears them hears Him, and he that receives them receives
Him, even Christ and Him that sent Him. And he that despises them despises
Christ, and Him that sent Him, Mat. 10. 40. with Luke 10. 16. Hence the
stiff-necked Jews, who were Uncircumcised in heart and ears, are said, in
opposing and rejecting His Servants the Prophets, to have always resisted the
Holy Spirit; which they could not have done, had not the Holy Spirit been
always present with them, and assistant to them, Acts 7. 51, 52. Neh. 9. 30.
Isa. 63. 10. And this Consideration, that the many are Called by the Servants,
the Lord working with them, may be of usefulness unto us.

1. To show unto us the evil and falseness of men's sayings, in which they
divide and separate the Word of Christ in the faithful Ministration of it, from
the Spirit, and say: It is true, many men are (...) Called with an outward
Call, but they are not Called with an inward and effectual Call: The Servants
speak to their outward Ears, but God by His Spirit speaks not unto the Hearts
of them. The contrary to what they say plainly appears to be true, in what
has been said from the Scriptures of Truth. God is certainly present in and
with His own Word, that it might be received by men. As the Apostle signifies:
I have planted, Apollo watered, but God gave the Increase. So then, neither is
he that Planteth any thing, neither he that Waters: But God that gives the
increase. For we are Laborers together with God, etc. The Apostle says not,
as many do in their Glosses corruptly, and injuriously to the Text, and Souls
of Men: Paul may plant, and Apolla water, but God must give the Increase. In
which saying they Imply, that the former may be without the latter: But the
Apostle evidently assures us, not that God Must only, but that He does give the
Increase, whether men receive it or not. And therefore when He speaks in the
time past of their Laboring, He speaks in the time past of Gods Cooperation.
I have planted, but God gave, etc. And when in the time present of the former,
he so also speaks of the latter. Paul planteth, Apollo waters, but God
gives the Increase. It is true indeed, we are to distinguish between the Word,
and Spirit, but not to divide between them, as if when ever God sends His
Servants to Preach the Gospel, He does not vouchsafe His Spirit to go along
with them, which is not true, 1 Cor. 3. 5, 7, 9. Nor is it safe or good for any
to conclude from the event, that because men receive not, therefore God gives
not: For God may give and yet men not receive. God may turn men, and yet men
may not be eventually turned: God may draw men unto Christ, and yet they may
not come, but break his Bands asunder, and cast away his cords from them: God
may Purge, and yet men through their stubbornness may not be purged, his
goodness may lead them to Repentance, who yet are not led thereby to it, but
may forsake Him when He leads them by the way, Neh. 9. 20, 26. Acts 26. 18.
Has. 11. 4, 5. Jer. 5. 5. Ezekiel. 24. 13. Romans 2. 4, 5. Christ, the Good and
Faithful Sower, sows the good Seed, the Word of the Kingdom, in the Hearts of
the worst sort of Hearers, to the end they might Believe and be Saved: And it
would effect this in them, did they not suffer the Devil to steal away that
which was sown in their hearts, Mat. 13, 19. with Luke 8. 12. And certainly,
therefore also the Gospel is called, The Ministration of the Spirit, because it
does so infallibly accompany it in the faithful Preaching thereof, that they
that Preach the one, Minister the other, 2 Cor. 3. 6, 8. Gal. 3. 2, 5. And
hence also the Words of Christ are said to be Spirit and Life; and the Spirit
is said to be the Word of God, John 6. 63. with Ephesians. 6. 17.

2. This Consideration also may Encourage his Servants who bring good Tidings,
to get them up into the high Mountains, to Lift up their Voices with strength,
to Lift them up; and not be afraid, or ashamed of their Message, because His
Spirit remains with them, Hag. 2. 5. This is contained in Gods Covenant with
Christ, and them that turn from Transgression in Jacob; that his Spirit that is
upon Christ, and his words which he has put into his Mouth, shall not depart
out of his Mouth, nor out of the Mouth of his Seed (the Apostles and first
Trusters in Christ) nor out of the Mouth of his Seeds seed (those that believe
on Christ through the Apostles Word, John 17. 20, 22.) says Jehovah, from
henceforth, and for ever; His Spirit and His Words go together inseparably, in
the Mouth of His Servants: So that, while they speak His Words to the outward
Ears of men, His Spirit speaks to the Hearts of men: And thence He exhorts
His Servants: Arise, shine, etc. Isa. 59. 20, 21. and 60. 1. Alas, otherwise
His Servants might be discouraged and ashamed, and even say as He did: O my
Lord, send I pray thee by the hand of him whom thou will send, Exodus 4. 13. For
they have no sufficiency of themselves to think any thing as of themselves;
though they be in pain, and labor to bring forth, yet they will bring forth
nothing but the Wind; they can of themselves work no deliverance in the Earth,
neither will the Inhabitants of the Earth fall before them, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Isa.
26. 17. 18. But now, this may Encourage them to Lift up the Hands that hang
down, and confirm their feeble Knees, that the Great King will be with their
Mouth in speaking His Word; so as, where the Word of this King is, there also
shall be Power going along with it, Eccles. 8. 4. with Luke 4. 18, 32. Hence
the Apostle says, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the
Power of God, etc. Romans 1. 16. Go ye forth therefore, ye Servants of the Lord,
in this your might, holding forth the Word of Life; has not He sent you, whose
Presence shall go along with you? He will not leave you nor forsake you, Judge.
6. 14.

3. It may also Admonish His Servants to declare the Testimony of God without
Excellency of Speech, or of Wisdom: Seeing He has promised to be always with
them; and faithful is He that has promised, who also will do it. Let them make
use of quaint Language, enticing Words, and Excellency of man's Wisdom (if they
please) who think they may, or know not but they do go alone: But he that has
Gods Word, let him speak Gods Word faithfully: What is their Chaff to this
Wheat? Is not His Word like as a Fire? And like an Hammer that breaks the Rock
in pieces? Jer. 23. 28, 29. It argues a secret fear and jealousy in men, as if
the Gospel of Christ were a Weak, Forceless, Spiritless Doctrine, and needed
some what of man's to make it powerful; when they deliver it in the Words, or
with the Arguments, which man's wisdom teaches: And in thus doing they are so
far from making it more Effectual, or Saving to men, that they render it
Inforcible, and Inefficacious, because they thus corrupt the Word of God, 2
Cor. 2. 14. 17. Christ sent me, says the Apostle -- to Preach the Gospel, not
with wisdom of Words, lest the Cross of Christ should be made of none effect.
For the Preaching of the Cross (even this manner of Preaching it, without
wisdom of Words, the foolishness of Preaching) is to them that perish
Foolishness, but unto us that are saved it is the Power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 17,
18, 21. The weapons of their Warfare, who War not after the flesh; after the
Wisdom or Guidance thereof, are not Carnal, but Mighty through God, to the
pulling down strong Holds, casting down Imaginations, etc. 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5.
It is good therefore for Christ's Servants in Calling men to the Marriage, and
Marriage Feast, to beware of Philosophy and vain Deceit. Yea, and to choose
rather to speak five Words with their understanding, that they may Teach others
also, then Ten Thousand words in an unknown Tongue; for in so doing, they do as
to the Generality of men speak into the Air: Yea, are unprofitable to all, and
not understood by the most of men, 1 Cor. 14. 19. And to that end, its needful
both to deny desires of vain Glory: As Well as also to consider, that the plain
and foolish Preaching of the Gospel is the Way God has pitched upon for Saving
men: And how weak or foolish soever this Way appears to the Wise ones, yet, the
FoolishnesS of God is Wiser then men, and the Weakness of God is stronger then
men, 1 Cor. 1. 21, 24, 25. Col. 2. 8, 9, 10. Oh then! how does it behove His
Servants, seeing they have such hope, to use great plainness of Speech! And not
as Moses, who put a Vail over his Face, etc. 2 Cor. 3. 6, 12, 13. To renounce
the hidden things of Dishonesty, not walking in Craftiness, nor handling the
Word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the Truth commending
themselves to every man's Conscience in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4. 1, 2.

4. It may exhort us, to give diligent heed to their Words and Calls, and to
esteem them highly for their Works sake, who speak to us the Word of God,
because their Master also is present with them, and assistant to them; it might
therefore Engage us when His Servants come amongst us, to say in our hearts,
however, as the Centurian did to Peter, We are all here present before God, to
hear all things that are commanded thee of God, Acts 10. 33, 34. The Apostle
speaks this to the praise of the Churches of Galatia, that when he first
Preached the Gospel amongst them, they received him (notwithstanding his
Temptation in the flesh) as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus, Gal. 4. 13,
14. Oh! How Beautiful are, and should be, the feet of them that Preach the
Gospel of Peace, and bring glad Tidings of good things? Romans 10. 14, 15. Did we
indeed consider, that they call us unto the Fellowship of Jesus Christ our
Lord, and into the Grace of Him, 1 Cor. 1. 9. Gal. 1. 6. And that the great
King of Heaven and Earth speaks by them, and with them; and does, as it were,
by them beseech us to come and Eat of Wisdoms Bread, and to Drink of the Wine
she has mingled: To forsake the foolish and Live, etc. It would certainly be
powerful with us, to Engage us to receive their Word, and obey their Call, not
as the word or call of men, but as it is in truth, of God, 1 These. 2. 13. And
to account them worthy of double Honor who Labor in the Word and Doctrine,
for their Masters sake, even because they belong to, and are Laborers with
Christ. And though not to Idolize them, or think of them more highly then we
ought to think; yet to account them as Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the
Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4. 1, 6. And to know, that when, in and with Preaching
the Gospel of Christ, they Call upon and Invite us to come unto the Feast, God
also Calls us, and enableth us to what He Calls us unto. And as our Savior
says to His Disciples: Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that receives
whomsoever I send, receives Me: And he that receives Me, receives Him that
sent Me, John 13. 20. Whereas, were the most of men Called with an outward Call
only, they might either receive, or reject the Caller, and neither receive nor
reject Jesus Christ, or Him that sent Him.

5. This Consideration shows unto us, their causless Iniquity, and inexcusable
folly, who, when they are thus Called to Christ by such a Powerful and
Effectual Call, yet regard not, but turn a deaf Ear thereto: Of such our
Savior says, Ye will not come unto Me that ye might have life, John 5. 32,
36, 39, 40. This was the provoking Iniquity of Gods People in former Times,
whereby God was greatly Incensed against them. They -- refused to hearken, and
pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their Eaers that they should not hear:
Yea, they made their hearts as an Adamant stone, lest they should hear the Law,
and the Words which the Lord of Hosts had sent in His Spirit by the former
Prophets: Therefore came a great Wrath from the Lord of Hosts: Therefore it is
come to pass, that as he cried and they would not hear; so they cried, and I
would not hear, says the Lord of Hosts, Zech. 7. 11, 13, 14. Indeed those
Persons who say, the greatest part of the Called ones are only called with an
outward and ineffectual Call, put a Plea into their Mouths, and fill them with
Arguments, to excuse their not coming: They may say, they had no power of
themselves, and God gave them none, or not that which was sufficient: These
teach men to lay the blame upon God, and to father the brats of their
disobedience on Him: But alas, it will appear in conclusion, that such charge
God foolishly: And that, though the Spirit that dwells in us lusts to
envic; yet He gives more Grace, that Grace which brings Salvation to all men,
to enable us to come at His Calls: And at last He will be Justified in His
Sayings, and overcome when He is Judged, James 4. 5, 6. with Tit. 2. 11. This
is men's iniquity, not that they cannot come of themselves, but that they will
not, when God is enabling them hereto: This is the Condemnation, that Light is
come into the World, and men loved Darkness rather then Light, etc. John 3. 19.
20. And certainly, God may Expostulate with us, as He did with Israel of Old,
and say: Oh thou who art Named the House of Jacob, is the Spirit of the Lord
straightned? Though thou have no power, nor sufficiency of thy self, as of thy
self to come to Christ, yet is the Spirit of the Lord shortened toward thee?
Are these (thy disobedience, and refusals to come) His doings? Are they His
doings, because He prevents thee not with power and capacity to what He Calls
thee to? Indeed they might be said to be His doings, did He Call thee to the
Feast, and Threaten thee with destruction, and yet not assord thee any power or
ability to come: As He might be said to Kill who did not what was proper and
powerful to save the Life. when He had an opportunity: But it is not so here:
For as in His Hand is Power and Might, so also in His Hand it is -- to give
strength unto all, He is Gracious, and gives liberally unto all men without
upbraiding, Mic. 2. 7. with Mark 3. 4. 1 Chronicles. 29. 12. Jam. 1. 5. And
therefore it will be found to be such an Iniquity in men, as for which they
will have no cloak (however artificial their spiritual Tailors are) that they
will not come to Christ when thus Called: As our Savior signifies, when He
speaks concerning the Jews, saying: If [I] had not come: Though my Servants
had come never so often, and Called and Invited never so frequently and urgently;
Yet if [I] had not come and spoken unto them they had not had sin, but now they
have no cloak for their Sin, John 15. 22. Because I have Called, says Wisdom,
and ye refused: I have stretched out my hand (my Power and Spirit in and with
my Call, to enable you to come) and no man regarded: But ye have set at naught
all my Counsel, and would none of my Reproof: I also will laugh at your
Calamity, and mock when your fear comes, etc. Prove. 1. 20, 24, 31.

Thirdly, Why says He [ Many] are Called, and not [ All?]

1. Not because all men, who are capable, are not Called in due time by such
means as the Great King in His infinite Wisdom is pleased to make use of: For
the Mighty God, even Jehovah has spoken, [ And Called the Earth, from the
rifing of the Sun unto the going down thereof,] Psalm. 50. 1. Wisdom cries
without (without the City, without the Pale of the professed Church, without,
where are Dogs, Gentiles, and Uncircumcised ones in heart and flesh, compare
Rev. 22. 15. with Mat. 15. 26, 27.) she utters her Voice in the streets. --
How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity, and the scorners delight in
their scorning, and fools hate knowledge? To these she calls, and stretches
forth her hand, Prove. 1. 20, 23, 24. Does not Wisdom cry, and Understanding put
forth her Voice? (Can any one truly deny this?) she stands upon the Top of
High places, by the Way, in the places of the Paths. She cries at the Gates at
the entry of the City, at the coming in of the Doors (that is, she cries and
lifts up her Voice every where, without, and within the City, abroad and at
home, etc. But to whom does she put forth her Voice? Surely, to men
indefinitely; for so it follows) unto you [O men, I call, and my Voice is to
the Sons of man.] And not of Israel only: O ye simple understand wisdom. --
Hear, for I will speak of excellent things, etc. Prove. 8. 1, 4, 6, 10. and 9.
1, 4, 5. Christ was and is the true Light, which Lights every man that comes
into the World: And He is therefore a Light unto them, that He might be for
Salvation unto the ends of the Earth, John 1. 9. and 8. 12, with Isa. 49. 6.
and Acts 13. 47. And the Gospel is Preached in every Creature, or in all the
Creation under Heaven, Col. 1. 23. And those who have with the heart received
the wholesome Words of our Lord Jesus, and the Doctrine which is according to
Godliness, know and believe, that God would have all men to be saved, and come
to the knowledge of the Truth: And that, because Christ gave Himself a Ransom
for all, a Testimony in due time, 1 Timothy 2. 4. 6. And though men's voices will
be heard but a little way, yet lo, he sends forth His Voice, and that a
Mighty Voice, and says; Look unto me all the ends of the Earth, and be ye
saved: For I am God and there is none else, Isa. 45. 22. Psalm. 19. 1. 6. with
Romans 1. 19, 21. Yea, and the word [ Many] does also sometimes signify All. As
[many] of them that are in the dust of the Earth shall awake: Some to
everlasting Life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt: Certainly, all
that are in the Graves shall hear the Voice of the Son of man, and shall come
forth, compare Dan 12. 2. with John 5. 27, 29. 1 Cor. 15. 20, 21. So again:
Through the offense of one [ many] are dead: And as by one man's disobedience [
many] were made Sinners: When as it is evident, that by one man Sin entered into
the World, and Death by Sin, and so Death passed upon [ all] men, for that [
all] have sinned, Romans 5. 15, 19. with Ver. 12. 18. compare also Mat. 20. 28.
with 1 Timothy 2. 6. Neh. 13. 26. with 1 Kings 3. 12, 13. and Chap. 4. 31. Psalm.
32. 10.

But though what we have spoken under this Head be verily true; both that in
due time, God calls all men, as is said, to the end they might come to the
knowledge of the Truth and be saved: And that [ many] may signify [ all.] Yet
notwithstanding I judge.

2. By [ many] in this place we are insisting on, all men are not intended nor
meant. -- Not only,

1. Because all Infants are not called, and commanded to come into the House,
and they are a very great part of the World: But nothing is required of them in
their Incapacity: Hence, when the Lord says to Israel: Thou shall love the
Lord thy God, and keep his Charge, and his Statutes, and his Judgments, and his
Commandments always: He adds, And know you this day, for I speak not [with
your Children, etc.] Deuteronomy. 11. 1, 2. God is no hard or austere Master, to Reap
where He has not Sown, nor Gather where He has not Strowen; though wicked
Servants so say. As where much is given, much will be expected; and where
little, little: So by the same rule of Equality, where nothing is given, of
such nothing will be required. Indeed Infants are a part of the Nations that
are to be Discipled; and, as a means to that end, to be Baptized by the
Servants, in, or unto the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, being
brought unto them for that purpose. As in former Times the Male-Infants of
Israel were to be Circumcised: And the Gospel is to be Preached as to Include
them also as the Subjects of the great and fundamental Truths thereof, to wit,
That Christ has Died and is Risen again for them, etc. Mat. 28. 18, 19. with
Mark. 16. 15. But until they come to the Use and Exercise of Understanding, or
some Capacity be vouchsafed to them, there are no Commandments given unto them
by the Lord Jesus. But, I say, not only in this Consideration it appears that
by [ many] all men are not here intended. But also,

2. Because in this Parable our Savior speaks of men's being Called by the
Servants, as is before shown: And so of their being Called and Invited to the
Feast by the clear and distinct Declaration of God's Grace in Christ by the
Gospel: And so all men, who are come to years of Capacity, are not Called, viz.
by the Servants in the plain Preaching of the Marriage, and Marriage Feast
therewith and thereby prepared. The Commission is given to the Servants first
to Call the Jews; and after they made light of the Feast and Invitation, the
King said to the Servants, go ye into the Highways, and [ as many as ye shall
find] bid to the Marriage. So those Servants went out into the Highways, and
gathered together all [ as many as they found,] Mat. 22. 8, 10. These are the [
many] here spoken of; as many as the Servants found, and Preached the Gospel
unto, according to the Revelation of the Mystery. And these may be called [
many] to Intimate to us, that all Nations and Persons in the World have not
this Favor vouchsafed to them; though yet a multitude have. And called [ many]
to signify That this advantage is now more largely vouchsafed then in former
Times: Then He showed His Word unto Jacob, that one People and Nation, His
Statutes and His Judgments unto Israel; He dealt not so with any other Nation:
And as for His Judgments they have not known them, Psalm. 147, 19, 20. Deuteronomy. 4.
5, 8. And unto them He sent all His Servants the Prophets, rising early and
sending them, because He had compassion upon them, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16. Jer. 7.
25. And herein they were privileged above, and had greater advantage then
other Nations: According to that, What advantage then has the Jew? Or what
profit is there of Circumcision? Much every way, chiefly, because that unto
them were committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 1, 2. Acts 3. 25. But they were
the fewest of all People: And however, but one Nation at first, and so very few
in comparison of all Nations. But now after the Oxen and Fatlings were actually
slain, and the Feast prepared, the Servants Commission was enlarged, and many
Nations were Called by their Ministration, and Professedly believed the Gospel,
and yielded fained Obedience to Christ. Yea, and at this time, many Nations,
though not all, have Scriptures of Truth amongst them, and therein the Gospel
as Preached according to the Revelation of the Mystery by the Apostles: And His
Servants continued and preserved amongst them; suitable to those Prophecies, and
such like: Thou shall Call a Nation thou know not, and Nations that knew not
thee shall run unto thee, Isa. 55. 5. He shall sprinkle many Nations, Isa. 52.
15. Many Nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day, Zech. 2. 11. And of [
these many] we have to speak in what follows, and so would be understood.
Though yet we desire that these three Cautions may be considered and minded in
the whole Treatise. To wit,

Caution, 1. When we say [ many] only, and not all, are intended in this
Parable: We mean not, nor believe, all the rest are not Called by any means:
For though All are not Called by the distinct Preaching of Christ in the Mouth
and Ministry of His believing Servants; yet God leaves not Himself without
Witness to others: But that which may be known of God is manifest in them, for
[ God] has showed it unto them; for the Invisible things of Him, from the
Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are
made; even His eternal Power and Godhead, Romans 1. 19, 20. Hence the Apostle
when he had been intimating that men cannot believe except they hear, propounds
a Question, and gives Answer thereto. But, I say, have they not heard? Namely,
the Gospel: Yes, verily (even so heard that they might believe, for so much
appears by the scope of the place) their sound went into all the Earth, and
their Words unto the ends of the World: In which the Apostle refers to Psalm.
19. 1, 6. And signifies, that the Gospel is Preached in every Creature, Romans
10. 14, 18. with Col. 1. 23. And so, though all are not called by the Servants
in the clear and plain Preaching of the Gospel: Yet all, that are capable, are
in due time called by the Lord of the Servants, who is Lord of all, (as is
before shown.) And who is not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance.

2. Nor do we suppose, or believe, that none of them, who are not of the Many
here spoken of, may hereafter partake of Eternal Life, though they have not the
clear and distinct Revelation and Knowledge of Christ and the Gospel vouchsafed
to them. But (however some zealous ones, though not according to Knowledge,
neither have, nor think they want this Charity,) yet we desire to be so
charitable, and believing of the Scriptures as to conclude; God is no respecter
of Persons, but in every Nation he that fears God, and works Righteousness
is accepted of Him: As was Cornelius, before the Gospel was plainly declared to
him, and many others amongst Gentiles, Acts 10. 2, 34. and 13. 26. and 16. 14.
etc. Yea, in this Parable is signified to us, that when the Servants went out
into the Highways, they found some good ones amongst the Gentiles, that were
so before called by them, Mat. 22. 10. And had they died before the Gospel had
been plainly Preached to them (as doubtless some such did) they should have
enjoyed Eternal Life in due season. The Judge of all the Earth will do right,
and not destroy the Good, such as He reputes such, with the bad, Genesis 18. 24,
25. And though all shall be Judged according to the Rule of the Gospel, yet it
shall be according to the means vouchsafed. And if the Uncircumcision, who have
not the Law and Doctrine of God, keep the Righteousness of the Law (as the
Appostle supposes he may do) if he believe that God is, and is a rewarder of
them that diligently seek Him: Shall not His uncircumcision be counted for
Circumcisiou? Shall not he come acceptably to God, and be graciously rewarded
with Eternal Life? Yes surely, Romans 2. Heb. 11. 6. Certainly many Thousands,
and Ten Thousands, shall be eternally Saved, who were never Called by the
Servants with the plain Preaching of the Gospel; and who never had any distinct
knowledge of Jesus Christ, while they were in Mortal Bodies: As, Infants dying
in their Incapacity; and many Jews before the first Coming of Christ: And many
fearers of God amongst the Gentiles, both before and since Christ's Appearing to
put away Sin by the Sacrifice of Himself, Mat. 2. 16, 18. with Jer. 31. 15, 17.
Mat. 19. 14. Psalm. 11 5. 9, 10, 11. And yet there is no Salvation in any other
but Christ; and through Him, and through His Name, Power, and Authority, and
upon the Account of His Sufferings and Sacrifice they shall be saved, though no
clear or distinct knowledge of Him was vouchsafed to them: And therefore the
want of it shall not be Imputed to, or Charged upon them to their Condemnation.
And this Charity we desire to have, because we thus judge, that one Died for
all, and Rose again, viz. That Jesus Christ by the Grace of God tasted Death
for every man, and is Risen again from the Dead for their Justification: And
hereby, all that have sinned in the first public man, and come short of the
Glory of God, are Justified freely by God's Grace through that Redemption in
Christ Jesus, in an answerable sense as they were Condemned in the first man
Adam, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Heb. 2. 9. Romans 3. 23, 24. and 5. 18. So as no man
shall perish in that first Death for ever, which was the Wages of the
Disobedience of that one man: Nor in the Eternal Judgment shall there be any
occasion for the use of that Proverb, The Fathers have eaten sower Grapes, and
the Childrens teeth are set on edge, 1 Cor. 15. 20, 21. Jer. 31. 29, 30. Ezekiel.
18. 2, 4. And in the Cross of Christ, and Virtue thereof, we so see the
admirable Love of God to every sinful Creature of Mankind, while it is called
to day; as well as also in plain Intimations and Instructions given us in the
Testimony of the Scriptures: That we cannot but judge, that His Requirings and
Expectations will be no other then according to His Distributions and
Dispensations; that is, where much is given, of them He will require the more;
and where little, He will require but according thereto: And where He has not
sown He will not reap, nor gather where He has not strowen. And therefore all
Infants, who die in their Infancy, and were never guilty of that Condemning Sin
of the World, of loving Darkness rather than Light, after Light is vouchsafed,
shall in the general Resurrection have Eternal Life through Christ's Name. And
all others who have not had any distinct knowledge of Christ, and yet by the
Goodness and Mercy of God through the Mediator have been led to Repentance,
and have feared God, and been Workers of Righteousness, according to the means
vouchsafed; and continued such to Death, shall also through Christ have the
reward of Everlasting Life, 1 Timothy 2. 4, 6. 2 Pet. 3. 9, 15. Romans 2. 4, 7, 12,
16. Luke 12. 48. Mat. 25. 24, 26. Rev. 20. 12, 15. But how can they have such
Charity, or desire to have it, who deny, or believe not, the Great and
Fundamental things of the Gospel, as spoken and delivered to us in the Words
which the Holy Ghost teacherh! Do men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of
Thistles? Mat. 7. 15, 16. Those Builders can never Build well who dis-alow and
reject the Foundation.

3. Nor do we believe that by the [ many] called are meant, all such as are
Called by realous Teachers, and such as name themselves the Ministers of
Christ; or however not such in this consideration, as Called by them; for there
are many such who in their evil Doctrines rather Call men from Christ then to
Him. How many are there that disciple men to Antichrist, instead of inviting
them to our Lord Jesus; and steal away the Word of God from the People in the
Records of them? And how mauy others are there, though not so grossly evil, yet
as dangerous and destructive to the souls of men; who though they would have
the Scriptures continued amongst men in such Languages as are understood by
them; yet they tell them the meaning of the Scripture is the Scripture, and
that is such as lies not in the plain import of the Expressions; however not
in many of the fundamental Sayings of the Gospel: And the Scripture, some call,
a dead Letter; other some call it, the Letter: And their Glosses and
Interpretations are the Spiritual meaning. Thus they call the World which God
so loved as to give His Son to be, and of which He is, the Savior, the World
of Elect, the [ all and every man] for whom Christ! Dred, some of all sorts, or
every Godly man, etc. thus endeavoring to pervert the Gospel of Christ. And
yet appearing very zealous in seeking the good of men, which is indeed somewhat
strange, considering that they believe Christ Died for the fewest of men only,
and for whom they know not: As one of them lately expressed himself in his
Prayer, such an one as it was, as I was instantly informed by some Credible
persons that heard him. [ Lord, said he, if there be any one Soul in this
Congregation (which was a great one) for whom Christ has Died, let me not lose
my Labor.] And considering also that they believe that there is a precise and
certain number of Persons determined to Salvation: And these shall Infallibly
be Saved, though they held their Tongues; and all the rest inevitably perish. I
say, these things considered, it is somewhat strange they should be so
appearingly zealous in seeking the good of men Indefinitely: It may be fcared,
this Zeal proceeds not from the Love of Christ: For the Love of Christ
constrains us, says the Apostle, because we thus judge, that if one Died for
all, then were all dead, and that He died for all, etc. Which they believe not:
But that herein they are like them who did shut up the Kingdom of Heaven
against men, neither entering in themselves, nor suffering them that were
entering to enter: And yet for a pretense they made long Prayers (for their
Hearts went after their Covetousness) and they did compass Sea and Land to make
a Proselite, Mat. 23. 13, 14, 15. Truly, concerning such who Preach and Plead
for such Doctrines as these, viz. That Christ Died not for all men, but for the
fewest only. That God has Decreed a set and determinate number of Persons in a
Personal consideration to believe and be saved: And these all shall
Insrustrably believe and be saved, and these only; and all the rest must
unavoidably perish. That such as are once in Christ cannot possibly fall
finally from the Grace of God, etc. It may be said: Hearken not to the Words of
these Prophets -- they make you vain, they speak a Vision of their own Heart,
and not out of the Mouth of the Lord, Jer. 23. 16. 21. 2 Pet. 2. 1. For how
much soever these thus Call, and how much soever others Listen thereto; and how
Reformed and Zealous soever they appearingly be come hereby; they are not, in
this Consideration, of the Called here spoken of, much less of the Chosen.

But the [ many] that are Called, are such as are Called to Christ (as is
before said) by Christ's Servants, in proclaiming Christ's Gospel unto them, in
the Words which the Holy Ghost has Taught. As the Great King directs His
Servants to Call to the Wedding; so He puts into their Mouths what they should
say, which is Summarily the form of sound Words. He sent forth other Servants,
saying, Tell them which are bidden, behold, I have prepared my Dinner, my Oxen
and Fatlings are killed, and all things are ready, come unto the Marriage, Mat.
22. 4, 8, 10. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. 1 Timothy 2. 4, 7. 1 John 4. 13, 14. And what has
been said shall suffice to this Enquiry.

Fourthly, To what end are the many Called?

Certainly, They are therefore Called and Invited to the Wedding and Dinner,
that they might obey the Call, and come and Eat of Wisdom's Bread, and Drink of
the Wine which She has mingled: Forsake the Foolish and Live, and go in the
Way of Understanding, Prove. 9. 1, 3, 6. That they might come to the knowledge
of the Truth and be Sa^ed, 1 Timothy 2. 4, 6. His end herein was not, nor is, to
leave men without excuse, or to aggravate their Condemnation; though this will
be the Issue and Effect of men's stubborn, and still continued in refusal: But
we may see the End of the Lord to be such as declares, that He is very
pitiful, or, very well Bowelled, and of tender Meroies to the Souls of men, as
James 5. 11. For as God sent not His Son into the World to condemn the World,
but that the World through Him might be saved, John 3. 17. 1 John 4. 14. And
the Son of Man came not to destroy men's souls or Judge the World, but to save
them, to save the World, Luke 9. 55, 56. John 12. 47. So, as the Father sent
Him, and accordingly He came into the World; He sent and preserves His
Servants in the World, that they might Call men unto Himself, to the end they
might come and be Saved, John 17. 18, 22. He sends them to open the Eyes of
the Blind, and to turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan
to God, that they may receive Forgiveness of Sin, and Inheritance among them
that are Sanctified by Faith that is in Christ, Acts 26. 17, 18. We have this
same Parable, or a like to it, mentioned in Luke 14. 16, 17. And there it
follows after our Savior's giving Instructions about an earthly Feast; and
was spoken, as it seems, at a Feast, Ver. 1. 14. Now to what end does an honest
man provide a great Dinner or Supper, and Invite Persons to it by his Servants?
Is it not that they might come and partake hereof? Does he Entreat and Beseech
men to come? And when they will not be persuaded and prevailed with, is he very
angry with them for such refusal? And yet had no Cordial desire, or intention
they should come. What should we call this amongst men? Not Honesty, or
Sincerity, but Dissimulation. And shall we entertain such evil evil and wicked
thoughts of God as to think; That though He has prepared a Dinner at such a
dear Cost, and Invites men thereto, and is exceedingly and eternally Angry with
them who will not come, yet He never meant or intended they should come? Or
shall men call this an holy Dissimulation, when they cannot but see it is a
Dissimulation? Is not this the way to make them Dissemblers also who thus think
and speak of God, how Holy soever they appear, or would be thought to be, as
they were whose Leaven was Hypocricy? Mat. 23. Oh! far be it from us to think
thus wickedly of God! He is Perfect, Upright, and without Dissimulation in all
His Mercy and Kindness: Hence whereas in one Evangelist, our Savior says: Be
ye merciful as your Father is: In another, it is: Be ye Perfect as your there in
Heaven is Perfect: And then presently warns His Disciples to beware of
Hypocrisy, Luke 6. 36. with Mat. 5. 48. and 6. 1. etc. To signify to us, that
in all Gods Kindness, and Kind and Gracious Invitations, He is perfectly
Merciful, And has pleasure in Uprightness, 1 Chronicles. 29. 17. And because He
knows what evil thoughts and jealousies concerning Him proceed naturally out of
our Hearts; and to the end they should not lodge within us: Therefore He assures
us of His Uprightness and Sincerity in His Calls and Invitations: Unto you, O
men, I call, and my Voice is to the Sons of man: O ye simple understand Wisdom,
and ye fools be ye of an understanding Heart; hear, for I will speak of
Excellent things, and the opening of my Lips shall be right things: For my
Mouth shall speak Truth, and Wickedness is an abomination to my Lips. All the
Words of my Mouth are in Righteousness (and not in Hypocrisy, for these two
are opposed the one to the other, Mat. 23. 28.) -- Receive my Instruction, etc.
Prove. 8. 4, 7, 10. He hates burning Lips and a wicked Heart, and says, Their
wickedness shall be showed before the whole Congregation, Prove. 26. 23, 26. And
warns us to beware of such whose Lips drop as the Honeycomb, and their Mouths
are smoother then Oil: But their end is bitter as Wormwood, sharp as a
two-edged Sword, Prove. 5. 3, 4. And certainly He is not such an one as they
are, though some foolish ones so think, Psalm. 50. 21. He does not command the
Gospel to be Preached to all, and yet intends the most of men should not
believe it: But therefore He causes it to be proclaimed, that all to whom it
is so published might through Christ believe, John 1. 7. We may read His
gracious End in His Invitation: He says, Come, that we might indeed come; and
so not only be of the Many who are Called, but of the Chosen ones also. And
this leads us to the latter part of the verse.

[ But few are Chosen.] In speaking unto which Words we shall endeavor to show
these things, God assisting. I. Who the Elect, or Chosen ones here spoken of,
are: And what is the Election or Choosing the Scripture speaks of. II. That
few of the many Called ones are Chosen. III. That it is men's (...) Iniquity
that they are not Elected, or Chosen.


First, We shall endeavor to show, who the Elect or Chosen ones here spoken of
are; and what is the Election or Choosing the Scripture speaks of. And in
speaking hereto, we no otherwise intend to speak of Election unto Worldly
things, or to choice Advantages, or Offices only, then as may illustrate, or
conduce unto the Election here intimately intended, to wit; that which is unto
Salvation.

In speaking then to this first Thing, we shall first show, What is not the
Election here spoken of, and who are not the Elect or Chosen ones: And then,
what it is, and who are the subjects of it.

1. Then, By [Election] here intimately spoken of, or elsewhere in Scripture,
is not meant An absolute and irrespective Predestinating, or Decreeing from
Eternity, a determinate and set number of Persons in a personal consideration
to Believe and be Saved: And that these All, and these Only, shall Inevitably
and Infallibly obtain the Salvation in Christ Jesus with Eternal Glory: Nor are
the Chosen and Elect ones here spoken of, the subjects of such a purpose; or
Predetermination as this is; such an Election, and such Elect ones are none of
God's. But the Doctrines and Notions here-about proceed from the Vain, Corrupt,
and dangerous Imaginations of men's Hearts; out of which proceeds naturally all
that is evil. And that by God's Election, and Elect ones, such a thing is not
meant will appear if we consider.

1. That [ Calling] in the sense intended in the Text, is always placed before
[ Election;] when they are mentioned together, either in the Order of
Expressions, or however in Order of Nature. So it is here in this place we are
considering; as also in Mat. 20. 16. For many be Called, but few Chosen. Thus
again, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. To
the former also agrees, Rev. 17. 14. They that are with the Lamb, are Called
and Chosen, etc. To the same purpose also the Lord Speaks unto Jacob by the
Prophet Isaiah: Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the Earth, and [Called]
thee from the Chief men thereof, and said unto thee, thou art my Servant, I
have [Chosen] thee, etc. Isa. 41. 9. Indeed in 2 These. 2. 13, 14. Chosen, is
there placed in words before Called: But it evidently appears to any
Judicious and Unprejudiced Reader, that in that place, Called goes before
Chosen in Order of Nature; for thus the Words are: God has Chosen you from the
beginning unto Salvation, through, or in, the Sanctification of the Spirit, and
Belief of the Truth. Whereunto (namely, unto which Sanctification of the
Spirit, and Belief of the Truth, in which they were Chosen) He Called you by
our Gospel, etc. It is very clear that in order of Work, though not of Word,
Called went before Chosen: For if they were Chosen in the Belief of the Truth;
And men cannot believe on Him of whom they have not heard, nor hear without a
Preacher of the Gospel, then it necessarily follows, men must be Called by
the Gospel before they can Believe, and so before they are Chosen, Romans 10. 14,
15. And so in the Order of Nature, this agrees with the other Scriptures
forementioned.

Now, though the order of expressions simply, when but at sometime only so
placed, proves nothing: yet when the same order is always, or generally so
observed by the Holy Ghost, it is worthy our consideration, and not lightly to
be passed over by us. Gen 48. 5. 20. Indeed ofttime in Scripture, for some good
reason, those persons or things are mentioned last in words, which otherwise
should have been before spoken of; because the Holy Ghost would begin with them
again; or speak more fully of them. So [ Believing] is put after [ Confessing]
in one Verse; but then it is begun with, and first mentioned in the next, Romans
10. 9, 10. So [ Jesus Christ] is placed after the seven Spirits, because He is
largely Described and Treated of in what follows, Rev. 1. 5, 6. And thus we
might show in many other places. But neither of these can be affirmed
concerning the order of Words in the Scripture we are speaking to, for it is
the Conclusion of our Savior's Speech in this Parable; nor of the rest
mentioned.

2. That by Election is not meant such a Purpose or Decree, as is before spoken
of, nor by the Elect here, the subjects of such a Decree, may appear further in
this; that those who were afterward Elected, or made of the Chosen Generation,
were not of it in former times. To this purpose the Apostle Peter speaks: Ye
are a Chosen, or Elect Generation, a Royal Priesthood, etc. Which in time past
were not a People, but are now the People of God, which had not obtained Mercy,
but have now obtained Mercy, 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10. Where it plainly appears, that
Ver. 10. shows, They were not formerly such Persons as he affirms them now to
be in Ver. 9. Now ye are Elected or Chosen, but in times past ye were not so,
even in the time past when they walked in Lasciviousness, Lusts, excess of
Wine, Revellings, Banquettings, and abominable Idolatries, Chap. 4. 3. To the
same purpose also the Apostle Paul speaks, as with respect to Jews and
Gentiles, Romans 9. 24, 25, 26. I will call them my People (which not only were
not called, but) were not my People: And her Beloved (or Elect, compare Isa.
42. 1. with Mat. 12. 18.) which was not Beloved, or Elect. And indeed men are
Chosen in Christ, as afterward we may show: But there was a time when Paul
(who was after Converted, a Chosen Vessel) was not in Christ; and then he was
not an Elect, or Chosen one, Ephesians. 1. 4. with Romans 16. 7. So the Preacher also
signifies, that such as not at present Elected may be so, while it is called
to day, in that he says: Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, or, of
thy Elections, (as others do also rightly read it) that is, either, 1. In the
days of thy Elections, whilst thou may choose Life, choose the best part,
which shall not be taken from thee, Deuteronomy. 30. 19. Luke 10. 42. Or, 2. In the
days of thine Elections, when thou may be Chosen, though at present thou art
not; there are days for that, in which such as are not Elected may be so, while
it is the day of his Grace and Patience, Eccles. 12. 1. Yea in our Types, the
very precise time is intimately set down, when God chose Israel, Ezekiel. 20. 5.
Thus says the Lord God [in the day when I chose Israel.] And sometimes [
Chusing] is mentioned in the present time. As, Blessed is the man whom thou
[Chusest] and causest to approach unto thee, Psalm. 6 5. 4.

3. It is further evident, That God's Elect are not such manner of Persons as
many would persuade us they are: For they, who plead for such an irrespective,
or absolute purpose, affirm: That the Elect were Chosen before the World in a
personal Consideration, and so remain such when Born into the World; and while
they abide also in their Ignorance and Unbelief, and Disobedience to God: They
suppose, though it be not manifested, that profane Persons, Drunkards,
Whoremongers, Unbelievers, yea, Persecutors of Christ and His People, may be of
the Elect. But however they are some men's Elect, they are not the Elect of God:
For the Elect of God are such as are Holy and Beloved, Col. 3. 12. The Elect
Generation is an holy Nation, 1 Pet. 2. 9. God's Elect are such as to whom
there is no Condemnation; as the Apostle intimates when he says: Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? It is God that Justifies, who
shall Condemn? It plainly appears, that God's Elect are such as He condemns
not, but in the present time Justifies. Now He condemns all Unbelievers, and
condemns no Unfeigned believers: Therefore it plainly appears, that the
Believers only are the Subjects of God's Election, and not any Unbelievers,
while abiding in their Unbelief. To this purpose God's prime Elect one says:
He that believes is not condemned: Who shall lay any thing to His charge? It
is God that Justifies. But he that believes not is condemned already (and so
at present none of God's Elect) because he has not believed, etc. compare Romans
8. 33, 34. with John 3. 16, 18, 19. He that believes on the Son has
everlasting Life: But he that believes not the Son shall not see Life, but the
Wrath of God abides on him, John 3. 36. Yea, who are God's Elect whom He
Condemns not, but Justifies; the Apostle gives us to understand, namely,
such as are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit: Not such as are in Christ simply, but such as together there with walk
in Christ as to their demeaner, compare Romans 8. 33, 34. with Ver. 1. Now then,
time was when Paul was in Unbelief, 1 Timothy 1. 13. And then he was condemned,
and so not of the Elect, or Chosen Generation. And again, God's Elect are such
as cry unto Him night and day, Luke 18. 7.

4. God's Elect can hardly be deceived, as our Savior signifies when He
says: There shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show
great signs and wonders; insomuch that if possible they shall deceive [the very
Elect,] Mat. 24. 24. Mark 13. 22. By the way; Our Savior here does not
signify, that none of the very Elect may possibly be deceived: This Phrase [
if possible] denotes not the utter and absolute Impossibility of such a thing,
no more then it does elsewhere. As where the Evangelisc says of Paul: He
hasted [if possible] for him to be at Jerusalem the day of Pentecost, Acts 20.
16. Certainly, no wise man would hasten to do that which he knew was altogether
impossible to be done. So Romans 12. 18. with Heb. 12. 14. But our Savior
signifies, Both that the false Teachers would use all ways and means possible
to seduce them, so that those that were not seduced by them, we may safely
conclude, they could not possibly deceive. As Well as also the Phrase denotes,
that it is a very difficult thing for such to be seduced and deceived, though
it be not altogether and absolutely impossible, But now as with respect to such
as remain in their Ignorance and Unbelief, they are already deceived, and may
still and further be easily deceived and beguiled, Tit. 3. 3. 2 Cor. 4. 4.
Therefore, such, while so abiding, are none of God's Elect, or Chosen ones.
Compare Mat. 24. 24. with Verse 4. 5.

5. Again, That by [the Elect or Chosen] here spoken of, such persons are not
intended as some dream of, is further manifest: Because it is here signified to
be a great and provoking Iniquity in those Persons who were not Chosen, that
they were not Chosen; and therefore they are commanded to be cast into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 22. 12, 14. Now it
is no man's great and damning Iniquity that he was not Chosen in a personal
Consideration before the World was (if any such so were, as doubtless they were
not:) For no man could possibly Contribute any thing to such an Election, nor
possibly by any means hinder it; because then he had no being; not only none in
a personal Consideration, but also not any in the first public Man; for he was
Created since the Creation of the World. Though it would be a man's unavoidabl^
Misery not to be Chosen in such a sense as some plead for; yet it could be no
more his Iniquity, then it would be for a man not to Act before he was a man,
or formed of God; or that he was not of God's Privy Counsel when he had no
existence, or personal being; yea, none in the Loins of the first Adam, nor he
any being or existence: Which surely is none at all.

6. And lastly, Election means not such an Absolute fore-ordination from
Eternity; nor are the Elect the Subjects of such a purpose: Because the Elect
may make their Election sure; as the Apostle Peter signifies in saying;
Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your Calling and
[Election] sure, (firm, Heb. 3. 6. Steadfast, Ver. 14. even standing and settled
upon its foundation, Christ; make it valid and of force, Heb. 9. 17.) for if ye
do these things ye shall never fall, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Now certainly, the Absolute
Decrees of God cannot be made more firm or stable, more sure or steadfast by us:
But the Counsel of the Lord shall stand for ever: As the Lord of Hosts has
purposed, so it shall stand. What He has purposed who can disanul, and so by
consequence, who can establish, or make it of force? Psalm. 33. 11, 12. Isa. 14.
24, 27.

By all which it is evidently manifested, that God's Election is not such a
Purpose or Decree of God respecting some men's Persons in a personal
Consideration, nor are His Elect the Subjects of such an irrespective
Fore-ordination.

Object. 1. But against what has been said, some may Object that in Ephesians. 1.
4. who has Chosen us in Him before the foundation of the World. From whence
some Collect, that the Elect were Chosen before the World was in a personal
Consideration.

Answ. In Answer to what many would prove from this Scripture, we may say many
things, which we desire may be considered. As

1. Suppose we that such a thing could be concluded from this one Scripture, as
many do conceive, and are confident may be; which we can by no means grant: Yet
when as we have seen many Scriptures clearly deny the truth of such a
conclusion, whether is it not more reasonable to hearken to the many rather
than unto this one? seeing though they be all alike worthy of acceptance, and
one Scripture may make a truth evident, yet many concurring make it more
evident and unquestionable, See Heb. 7. 14, 15. Suppose we that one honest and
credible person should affirm a thing, and urge it on us to be believed; we
might give credit to him: But if twenty persons, every one equally honest and
credible with that one, should affirm the contrary: Should we not rather
believe the truth so established in the mouth of so many Witnesses, than wave
them all, and adhere to this one? This Comparison illustrates the matter we are
speaking of: Certainly the Scriptures in general do with one mouth and consent
disclaim that notion of personal election; and should we deny all for one, if
that did speak to the contrary? Which God forbid we should imagine: But men's
hasting from all other Scriptures speaking about election, and as it were,
lightly esteeming them in comparison of this one, is a great Argument to me,
that the Election they contend for is such an one as is suitable to the Spirit
of this World, and those evil Thoughts which proceed out of our corrupt Heart;
and therefore they hastily embrace one Scripture which they groundlesly judge
is on their side; and run away from, and evade the force of twenty to one,
every one whereof is of equal Authority: For certainly we are naturally
destitute of all good, and inclined to all that is evil: The Lord knows and
has declared, that the thoughts of Men, yea of the wisest of them, are vain;
every thought in us stands cross to the obedience of Christ and his Gospel,
Psalm. 94. 11. 1 Cor. 3. 20. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. -- But,

2. We further Answer, by way of exception to the Objection, and say: This
Scripture contradicts not at all, no not seemingly, what is affirmed by the
residue; nor affords any relief to them who so frequently betake themselves
hereto for refuge: But sweetly and fully agrees with the rest mentioned: And
that we may rightly understand it, let us consider these things. I. When they
are said to be chosen. II. In whom, or in what Root. III. Who are the Subjects
of this Election.


1. When they are said to be chosen: This Scripture says not any men were
chosen before the world was Created of God at first, but [before the foundation
of the world.] Now that may signify,

1. Either before the Dejection, or Casting down of the World: For so the Word
translated [ Foundation] does properly signify; and comes from a word that
signifies, to Cast down, or Downwards, Rev. 12. 10. 2 Cor. 4. 9. Now then the
Subjects of this Election are such as were Chosen before the Dejection of the
World in the Sentence of God, before He denounced the Curse and Judgment upon
the World for the Sin of man. But that was not before the World, but since the
Fall of Adam, and Interposition of the Mediator, Genesis 3. 15, 19.

2. Or as we read it [ before the foundation of the World] may not signify,
before any thing was formed of God; but before the foundation of it as now
laid. The World as at first made was marred by the Sin of man; the Earth and
all the Inhabitants thereof were dissolved: Now Christ steps in, and makes it
again, John 1. 10. And is, as it were, the Basis on which the Pillars of the
Earth, or World, stand, Psalm. 75. 3. By Christ He made the Worlds: God made all
things by Him at the first, and made them, when they were marred by man's Sin:
And He upholds all things by the Word of His Power, having by Himself purged
our Sins, Heb. 1. 2, 3. And so, As Abel's blood was said to be shed from the
foundation of the World, Luke 11. 50, 51. So these were Chosen before that
time, yea, before he was Born: Yea, indeed at that time (as I conceive) when
Christ interposed Himself, after the Fall of man, and in order of Nature after
that. And so their Election is included in that Oracle, Genesis 3. 15. And this is
the time when they were Chosen: And so it was before the Agie, or Secular
Times, 1 Timothy 1. 9, 10. Tit. 1. 2.

2. In whom were they Chosen, or in Root? And that is expressly declared to us [
in Christ] the last Adam: Therefore it is evident, they were not Chosen in the
first Man Adam, nor so early. For that was not first which is Spiritual, but
that which is Natural, and afterward that which is Spiritual, 1 Cor. 15. 46.
Hence Christ is called the second Man, who was Interposed as Mediator after the
Fall of the first, Ver. 47. And as considered in Him, and not in the first
Adam, or in themselves, they were Chosen: And this is worthy our Consideration.
But to this we shall not Enlarge here, because we may mention it again.

3. Who are the Subjects of this Election? The Apostle says [ Us] whereby
either more generally,

1. He may have respect to the Persons to whom he Writes, and such as are like
to them. And so the Subjects here spoken of are, not any Persons in a personal
Consideration; but [ the Saints which are at Ephesus, and faithful (or
believing Ones, Believers, John 20. 27. 1 Timothy 6. 2.) in Christ Jesus] Ephesians.
1. 1. Where also he shows to us what is the meaning of [ us in Christ,] Ver. 4.
Namely, us as Considered in this Root of Election and prime Elect, viz. Christ,
and not as we are in our selves, or while we abide in our Natural estate. And
so the Subjects of this Election in this double Description, to wit, [ Saints
and Believers in Christ] are the same with that, 2 These. 2. 13. He has Chosen
us from the beginning in the Sanctification of the Spirit, and Belief of the
Truth: Therefore not before it. And so God in Choosing Christ did Choose, not any
man while out of Him, but all such as should come into, and believe in Him,
without difference, or respect of Persons. Now these Ephesians, who now were
Believers, were sometimes without Christ, and then they were not Chosen in Him,
because not Believers in Him, Ephesians. 2. 12. with Chap. 1. 1. 4. But now
believing in Him, after they heard the Word of Truth the Gospel of their
Salvation, they were made of that Generation of Men that were Chosen in Him
before the Dejection, or Foundation of the World: They were now of the Chosen
Generation, which in time past were not an Elect People, as before, 1 Pet. 2.
9, 10. with Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. They had a new Name given unto them. And in thus
understanding it, it appears; that God works all things according to the
Counsel of His own Will; His actual Election, and Elect ones, are suitable to,
and agreeing with His purpose, Ephesians. 1. 11.

2. Or we may look upon the [ Us] here spoken of, in a more especial
Consideration, to have Respect and Reference, not to the Believers in general,
as being Chosen in Christ to Salvation, but to some Persons being Chosen in Him
to a more excellent Service and Ministration, then were any of the Holy Ones
before the coming of Christ in the flesh, Mat. 11. 9, 11. And so the Persons
here directly spoken of and intended are, Christ's extraordinary Ambassadors,
viz. The Apostles of our Lord Jesus. The Apostles here magnifies their Office
and Service, Romans 11. 13. And signifies, that as before the Dejection, or
Foundation of the World, God Chose Christ to be the Mediator, Savior and great
Apostle, and purposed to send Him forth in the last Ages to make Peace actually
for us, and Preach Peace to us: So He reserved this Honor for His Son, that by
Him the Mystery should be opened. And in Him He Chose, not Paul, or Peter, as
men simply considered, but the first Trusters in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 12. to be
Instruments in this choice Service, and to be sent forth into the World, as God
sent Christ into the World, viz. To Preach the Gospel according to the
Revelation of the Mystery, Ephesians. 1. 8, 10. And it appears this was His
Counsel by His Work: For He works all things after, or according to the
Counsel of His own Will, ver. 11. And that these are the Persons here directly
spoken of appears plainly;

First, By the Change of the Persons: In the two first Verses, the Apostle
Writes to the Saints at Ephesus, etc. And Saluteth them, Ver. 2. [ Grace unto
you.] But then He changes the Persons from Ver. 3. to Ver. 12. And always
says [ We, and Us] and never [ You] till Ver. 13.

Secondly, It plainly also appears, that from Ver. 3. to Ver. 12. He speaks
not directly of the Believing Ephesians, because He speaks of them that trusted
in Christ before they were Believers; and it was by the Means and Ministration
of these first Trusters they were after brought in, and helped through Grace to
Believe, for so He says: That we should be to the praise of His Glory, who
first trusted in Christ. In whom ye also trusted, or believed, after ye heard
the Word of Truth, the Gospel of your Salvation; namely, by those first
Trusters, or some of them: See and consider, Ver. 12, 13, 14. And surely, this
is the clear and direct meaning and intendment of the Apostle in these words.
But I shall add no more to this place, because it has been spoken to by my
Brethren and Companions in the Faith, viz. Mr. Thomas Moor, senior, in his
Explicit Declaration of the Testimony, page 263, 274. And pointed unto by Mr.
John Horn, in his Open Door, page 122. and in Reviewer Reviewed, page 83.

Object. 2. If any one should further Object that in Romans 9. 11, 13. to prove
their Personal Election in a Personal Consideration from; I say.

Answ. This does not at all prove what they alledg it for; And this will appear
whither we consider the words Historically, or Allegorically. We shall speak a
little to each Acceptance.

First, Consider them Historically, according to their first and plain
Intendment. And so,

1. This was not spoken of the Persons here intended, before the Creation of
the World, but in time, and that after Rebecca had conceived by our Father
Isaac. And after the Children strugled in her Womb, Genesis 25. 21, 22, 23. Romans
9. 10, 12. And so it proves not the Election of some Persons in a personal
Consideration before the World was.

2. Nor was this spoken of the Persons of Jacob and Esau only, but of their
Posterities also, as is most evident in what the Lord said to Rebecca, when she
went to inquire of Him. The Lord said unto her, two Nations are in thy Womb,
and two manner of People shall be separated from thy Barrels; the one People
shall be stronger then the other People, and the Elder shall serve the Younger,
Gen 25. 23. And though in Romans 9. 11. the Translatours have put in [ the
Children] (whether in favor to that device of Personal Election or no, I know
not.) Yet these words are faithfully set down in a different Character, that we
may know they are not a part of the Text: But the Verse should thus be read:
For they, or the Nations or Peoples, being not yet born, etc.

3. And it therefore appears, that the Election here spoken of, or the purpose
according to it, was not an Absolute decreeing Jacob Nationally considered to
Eternal Life, and rejecting Esau and all his Posterity therefrom; for neither
can we have so much faith as to believe the former Nation was all Eternally
saved, Romans 9. 27. nor so little Charity as to conceive the latter was all
damned, seeing we read of some Good men that came from him, as is probable; as
Job, compare Job 1. 1. with Lam. 4. 21. And Eliphaz the Temanite, compare, Job
2. 11. with Genesis 36. 9, 11. And his Posterity might enter into the Congregation
of the Lord in the third Generation, Deuteronomy. 23. 7, 8. As well as also, the
Apostle says, [ By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to
come] Heb. 11. 20. But this purpose according to Election was, that Jacob
Nationally considered should be preferred before Esau, or Edom: That Christ
should come of them according to the Flesh; and they should have the Word, and
Oracles, and Ordinances of God committed to them, which was a great Advantage,
Romans 3. 1, 2. And thus He dealt not with any other Nation, Psalm. 147. 19, 20.
And yet in Esau's serving Jacob, he, or any of his Posterity might be Blessed
also; and might in the third Generation enter into the Lords Congregation, as
is said. And so now, notwithstanding that purpose in these last Ages, because
of the Jews unbelief, the Kingdom of God is taken from them who were become the
Elder People, and given to Esau, and the Gentiles: Yet notwithstanding, if any
of the Broken-off Jews abide not still in unbelief they shall be Graffed in
again, Mat. 21. 43. compare Amos 9. 11, 12. with Acts 15. 14 17. Romans 11. 23.
And this well agrees with the Scope of the Apostle in this place.

As for that which is mentioned in Romans 9. 13. Jacob have I loved, but Esau
have I hated. It was Spoken and Written long after Jacob and Esau, the Fathers
of the two Nations were dead: And declares how God had privileged the former
Nation above the latter according to His purpose, in Answer to that Demand,
Wherein have Thou loved us? And that hatred of Esau was, however at first, but
comparative or a lesser degree of Love, as is signified in the Testimony of it,
viz. I laid his Mountains waste, Mal. 1. 2, 3. with Genesis 29. 30, 31.

Secondly, Consider we these things Allegorically: As the Apostle speaks of
Sarah and Hagar, and their Children: Which things are an Allegory, Gal. 4. 22,
24, 31. So here, As Isaac, so Jacob also was a Type of Christ, and those Born
of Him, Psalm. 24. 6. Gal. 6. 16. Now before men are Born this is God's purpose,
that whosoever believes in Christ should not perish, but have everlasting
Life: And whosoever rejects Him, though he has never so great a zeal to God
otherwise, and seek and take pains never so much to establish a Righteousness
to himself, of whom Esau was a Type, shall be rejected: But this without any
discriminating Eye or Respect to any man in a personal Consideration. And so
God's purpose shall stand according to Election: Namely, it shall abide and
take place, not in accepting men into Favor and Fellowship with Himself,
according to their Works of Righteousness, but as the Grace of God does choose
men out of, and sever them from the World, into Christ, so as they are made of
His Seed, and reckoned after Him. And this understanding of these things is
suitable to the scope of the Place. For, in Answer to the Jews who were ready to
say, there was Unrighteousness with God should He reject them, because they
were the Seed of Abraham according to the flesh, and zealous according to the
Law, the Apostle says; That not all Abraham's Seed according to the Flesh, nor
any in that Consideration simply, were counted for the Seed, but in Isaac
should His Seed be Called, namely, such as are born of the Promise in Christ by
the Gospel, which no man is till he has been once Born, John 3. 3, 5, 7. For
the confirming which he brings in this Instance also of Jacob and Esau; the
former a Type of Christ, and those who believe through Grace; the latter of the
Law-workers, as has been said, Romans 9. 6. 11. And this also further appears to
be the meaning of the place, in Ver. 30, 31, 32, 33. where the Apostle sums up
briefly and clearly what he had said more largely and darkly. What say we then?
(viz. in what he had forespoken from Ver. 6. to this place; the Answer to which
Question follows, viz.) That the Gentiles which followed not after
Righteousness have attained to Righteousness, even the Righteousness which is
of Faith. But Israel which followed after the Law of Righteousness has not
attained to the Law of Righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought it not by
Faith, but as it were by the Works of the Law: For they stumbled at that
stumbling Stone, etc. [See Mr. Thomas Moor, senior, in his Explicit
Declaration of the Testimony, page 321. 353. 376. And Mr. John Horn, in his
Essays, page 36, 37, And in Reviewer Reviewed, page 88, 92, 99. etc.]

Thus far we have endeavored to show [That by Election is not meant, an
absolute Decree of God, respecting some men's Persons in a personal
Consideration; nor are God's Elect and Chosen oncs the Subjects of such a
purpose.] Now we add further,

2. Nor are the Elect here spoken of such as are called simply, as that does
signify the Act of the Caller: For God may Call, and thus men may be Called to
the most High, and yet not so Exalt Him as to come unto Him, Has. 11. 7. God
may Call, and men refuse, Prove. 1. 24. So much is signified in the Words, that
it is more and a further Business to be Chosen then to be Called: Many are
Called, but few are Chosen: Though a man cannot be Chosen but he must be Called
(I speak of such as are come to years of Capacity) yet he may be Called and not
Chosen. Yea, we may read the words as others do: Many are the Called. In some
sense, namely, the Call may have some Prevalency upon men, so as they may
Credit the Report of the Testimony of Christ, and come amongst and be reckoned
as Members of God's People, and make some right acknowledgment and profession
of the Faith; and yet not be Chosen. Not every one that says unto Christ,
Lord, Lord, (either by way of Confession or Supplication) shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the Will of Christ's Father which is in
Heaven, Mat. 7. 21. Men may be so far prevailed with by the Call as to desire
to have Christ's Name on them and be Hearers of the Word, and make a Trade of
Hearing; they may seek Him daily, and frequently tread His Courts, and use His
Ordinances, and yet not be Chosen in this peculiar sense we speak of, Isa. 4.
1. and 48. 1, 2. Jam. 1. 22, 24. The man that had not on the Wedding Garment
was not Chosen, and yet the Call had such Prevalency upon him, as that he was
gathered thereby into the House, or Church of Christ, and was there when Christ
found him, Mat. 22. 10, 12. And this is good to be considered also by us, that
we deceive not our selves. For we are apt to think, that if we have been
Baptized into the Name of Christ, and read the Scriptures, and frequent the
Assemblies of Gods People, whether publicly only, or also privately, and are
persuaded of the Goodness and Truth of that Reported in the Gospel; and in some
sort receive His Grace, and profess to know God, that we are certainly in a
good and happy estate and condition; when as notwithstanding all this, though
we be in these respects of the Called, we may not be Chosen: Men may be
Baptized, and yet be in the Gall of Bitterness, and Bond of Iniquity, Acts 8.
13, 23. Men may be Hearers of the Word and no Doers, and so deceive their own
selves, Jam. 1. 22. Men may Believe in vain, and receive the Grace of God in
vain, 1 Cor. 15. 2. 2 Cor. 6. 1. Men may profess to know God, and yet in Works
deny Him, being abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good Work
reprobate, Tit. 1. 16. Oh therefore! Let none of us deceive our selves, in
thinking our selves to be something when we are nothing. But let every one of
us prove, and approve his own Work, and then he shall have his rejoicing in
himself alone, and not in another, Gal. 6. 3, 4. Let every one of us so receive
the Grace of God to purpose, that we may be not only of the Called, but of the
Chosen ones also. And this leads us to the Affirmative Answer to the Question
before propounded (having spoken so largely to the Negative, to show, who are
not the Chosen.) viz.

2. The Election here spoken of is a being severed, or gathered out of the
World in which men at first are; out of the State Principles, Ways, and Works
of the World into Christ Jesus: And so the Elect are such as for the Excellency
of the Knowledge of Christ do suffer the loss of all things, and count them but
dung, that they may win Christ, and be found in Him, Phil. 3. 4, 9. 10. Such
they are who are the Called according to purpose; such as so Answer the Call,
and End of God in Calling them, as that they come unto and walk in Christ
Jesus, and after His Spirit: Consider and compare Romans 8. 28. with Ver. 33, 34.
and Ver. 1. The Elect or Chosen are such as come unto Christ, and so come, as
that they forsake all that they have for His sake, that they may have this
Pearl of great Price: So it appears in this Parable plainly. The Kings Oxen and
Fatlings being killed, and all things ready, he sends forth his Servants first
of all to the First-bidden Guests, to call them, saying, Come unto the Marriage
namely, to Christ, and that Provision in Him, as is before shown: These were
Called, but not Chosen; they came not to Christ that they might have Life: But
instead thereof, they made light of the Marriage, and Marriage Feast, and
Invitation thereto; And (came not, but) went their ways, one to his Farm,
another to his Merchandise; and the Remnant took His Servants, and entreated
them spitefully, and slew them: But when the King heard He was wroth, etc.
because they were not Chosen: They did not so highly value Christ as to prefer
Him before the things of this World, and come unto Him, though they were thus
Called, Mat. 22. 2, 4, 8, 14. The King then sends forth His Servants unto the
Gentiles, to Invite them to come to the Marriage and to gather them into the
House, which accordingly they do: And these generally come, and so are the
Called; but amongst them some are not Chosen; the man was not, which had not on
a Wedding Garment, and so all like unto him: Namely, such as though they come,
in some sort, into the House, as the First-bidden Guests refused to do, yet
they let not go their own Righteousness, which are as filthy Rags, that they
might have the Righteousness which is through the Faith of Christ, even the
Righteousness of God by Faith, that Robe of Righteousness, Phil. 3. 9. Isa. 61.
10. Or they so receive not the Grace of God, as in coming to Christ to be
Justified And Cleansed (as Dan. 8. 14.) from their Iniquities and Idols, and
conformed to the Mind and Image of Christ; but while they pretend to seek to be
Justified by Christ, they themselves are found Sinners, as Gal. 2. 17. And
still remain altogether, or in a great measure, unsanctified in Heart, and
unreformed in Life, while yet they profess to be Christ's Disciples, and
believe His Gospel. These though of the Called, as the First-bidden Guests were
not so fully, yet are not Chosen, or Elect ones: And abid^ng in this condition
will have their portion in the Lake, where their Worm dies not, and their Fire
is not quenched, Ver. 8. 14. By all which it plainly appears, that the Elect
are such as come to Christ, and so come to Him, as to deny themselves, and
prefer Him before, and part with all for His sake.

And this is also confirmed by the like Parable, and our Saviors Instructions
in Luke 14. Where also, after the Supper was prepared, the Servant is sent
forth to say to them that were bidden; Come, for all things are now ready: And
they all with one consent began to make excuse: The first said unto him, I have
bought a piece of Ground, and I must needs go and see it, I pray thee have me
excused, And another said, I have bought five Yoke of Oxen, and I go to prove
them, I pray thee have me excused: And another said, I have Married a Wife, and
therefore I cannot come. So the Servant came, and showed his Lord these things.
Then the Master being angry, said unto his Servant, go out quickly, and^. to
Invite others. And after he had signified his great displeasedness with those
who refused to come to Christ when Called, saying, None of those men which were
bidden shall taste of my Supper, he turned, and said unto the great multitudes
that went with him; If any man come unto me, and hate not (comparatively) his
Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and Sister's, yea,
and his own Life also, he cannot be my Disciple. And whosoever does not bear
his Cross and come after me, cannot be my Disciple. And -- whosoever he be of
you that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14. 16,
21, 24, 26, 33. Which confirms what we have said, and is agreeable to the
Parable we are considering, and shows, that these are the Chosen ones who so
come unto, and after Christ, as that they sell all that they have that they may
be made partakers of Him: And others that so do not, but prefer other things in
general, or something else in particular before Him, however they may be
Called, or of the Called, yet are not, while so doing, of the Elect of Chosen
Generation, or the Subjects of God's Election: As we have often said.

But, God assisting, we shall speak hereto a little more particularly and show:
What Election and Elect signify in Scripture: And so we say,

First, Election does properly and frequently signify, a Choosing out, or
Taking out some from others: And the Elect or Chosen are such as are Chosen out
of, or from others, and so it is here. And for our Understanding and Usefulness
of the proper and direct Signification of these Words and Things, we shall
propound and give Answer from the Scriptures to these five following Queries,
viz.

Que. 1. What is the Argument propounded for the effecting this Election?

Answ. The Grace or Love of God manifested, and everlastingly commended to us
in this, that He sent the Son, the Savior of the World, even of Mankind: And
according thereto Christ came into the World, and was made Flesh, and was made
Sin, and by the Grace of God tasted Death for every man; and is raised again
for their Justification: And has Redeemed them from the Curse of the Law, and
obtained all the Fullness of Grace and Truth into Himself for them. This Grace
as discovered, and made known to us by the Ministry of the great Kings Servants
in and by the glorious Gospel of the Blessed God, is the Argument propounded
for Electing men. So in this Parable; to the end the Invited Guests might come
into Christ, and so be the Subjects of God's Election, the King commands His
Servants to tell them: Behold, I have prepared my Dinner, my Oxen and Fatlings
are killed, and all things are ready, Come to the Marriage, Mat. 22. 3, 4, 8,
9: with Luke 14. 16, 17. To this also agrees what the Apostle Paul says; even
so then there is a remnant according to the Election, or Out-chusing of Grace:
A remnant like unto the seven thousand men in Elias his days, who had not bowed
the knee to Baal; not Idolaters and False worshippers as the Elect, some men
speak of may be and continue a considerable time: But such as are freed from,
and chosen out of such polluted ones, and pollutions; And that, not by Works of
Righteousness which they had done, but by the Grace of God which is Saving, or
brings Salvation to all men, Romans 11. 4, 6. And so the being Saved, viz. From
men's Sins and Idols, is the same with this being Elected, or Outchosen; compare
and consider 2 These. 2. 10, 12. with Ver. 13. And it is by the same Means or
Argument effected, viz. By the Grace of God; as the Apostle signifies to the
Ephesians: For after he had declared what polluted ones they were in Times
past, namely, before they heard and received the Word of Truth; he then puts
them in remembrance how they got an escape from their Pollutions: By Grace ye
are saved. And again, By Grace ye are saved through Faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the Gift of God: Not of Works lest any man should boast, Ephesians.
2. 1, 2, 5, 8, 9. with Romans 11, 6. Yea, the Lovers of God, and God's Elect, are
signified to be the same Persons, compare and consider Romans 8. 28. with Ver.
33. Now, How come men to be Lovers of God? Certainly, by the Grace or Love of
God, even His first Love discovered to them, as the Apostle John says: He that
Loves is Born of God, and knows God -- for God is Love: But how does this
appear, and whereby i^ i^ evidenced that He is Love? In this was manifested the
Love of God, because that God sent His only begotten Son into the World, that
we might live through Him. -- He sent the Son the Savior of the World. -- And
we have known and believed the Love that God has to us, God is Love, etc.
Hereby is our love made perfect; even through the Knowledge and Belief of His
Love, and that He is Love. And what Love of God is the producer of our love to
Him, is also declared by the same Apostle: We love Him, because He first loved
us. It is the Manifestation and Discovery, not of any delightful,
distinguishing Love of His, but of that great Love wherewith He loved us, and
all Mankind; whereby we are begotten to the Love of Him, and therein made of
the Chosen and Elect Generation, 1 John 4. 7, 10, 16, 19. with Ephesians. 2. 4, 5.
And so it appears, that the Argument for effecting this Election is, the Grace
of God to Manward discovered in the Gospel of Christ.

Que. 2. What is the way owned and approved of God in or through which men are
Elected?

Answ. The way of His owning and approving is, the Sanctification of the
Spirit, and belief of the Truth, when, and as discovered to them: That is, Men
are then Chosen, when they so with the Heart believe the Word of Truth, and
Grace of God therein discovered, as that thereby they are Sanctified and
Cleansed in the Spirit of their Mind, and devoted unto God, and not before. To
this purpose the Apostle Peter speaks: Elect according to the foreknowledg
(or Fore-approbation) of God the Father (according to that way fore-owned of
Him) in, or through the Sanctification of the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1. 2. To which
agrees also that of the Apostle Paul to the Thessalonians. We are bound to
give thanks always to God for you, Brethren, beloved of the Lord, because God
has from the beginning (viz. of their Gospels coming to them, as 1 These. 1. 5.
and 2. 13.) Chosen you to Salvation, through or in the Sanctification of the
Spirit and Belief of the Truth: Whereunto He also Called you by our Gospel,
etc. 2 These. 2. 13, 14. No man therefore while he abides in his Ignorance,
Unbelief, and Disobedience of God is Elected or Chosen; nor until he be in some
measure Washed and Sanctified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit
of our God 1 Cor. 6. 9, 11.

Que. 3. Out of what are men Elected, or Chosen?

Answ. Out of the World which lies in Wickedness, or in the Wicked one, 1 John
5. 19. And of which, until they were Chosen out, they were as well as others;
and not only in it, but also of it: They sometimes walked according to the
course of this World, according to the Prince of the power of the Air, the
Spirit that now works in the Children of Disobedience: Amongst whom we also
had our Conversation in times past in the Lusts of our Flesh. -- And were by
Nature Children of Wrath, even as others, says the Apostle Paul of both
Gentiles and Jews, who were after Chosen out of this sad condition, Ephesians. 2.
1, 3, 5. To this purpose speaks our Savior unto, and concerning his Disciples:
Ye are not of the World, but I have [Chosen you out of the World.] And, I have
manifested thy Name unto the men which thou gave me [out of the World,] John
15. 19. and 17. 6. In both which places it is plainly Intimated, that time was
that they were (not only in the World in their Persons, for so they still were,
nor did our Savior pray to His Father to take them out of it in this sense,
John 17. 11, 15. but also they were) of the World, as to their State,
Condition, Fellowship, and Demeanor; and during that time they were not
Elected, or Chosen out of it. For Gods Elect and Chosen ones, and the world are
opposed the one to the other, and the former hated by the latter: As also our
Savior often times signifies in such expressions as these. If ye were of the
world the world would love his own, but because ye are not of the world, but I
have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you, John 15. 18,
19. Ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice, Chap. 16. 20. I pray
for them, I pray not for the world, but for them that thou have given me out of
the world: I have given them thy Word, and the World has hated them, because
they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world, Chap. 17. 9, 14, 16,
20, 21, 23. 1 John 3. 1, 13. And so the chosen ones are such as are separated
and severed from others in their state, pollutions, evil principles, and
manners. And so [Seperated] and [Chosen] are used indifferently, and put one
for another in our Types, whom we are instructed to behold, 1 Cor. 10. 18. As
whereas in Deuteronomy. 10. 8. it is said: At that time the Lord [seperated the Tribe
of Levi, -- to minister unto him: It is thus rendered, Chap. 21. 5. and 18. 5. 2 Chronicles. 29. 11. The Sons of Levi shall come near, for them the Lord thy God has
[chosen] to minister unto him: So again, in one place it is said: I am the Lord
your God which have [seperated] you from other people: Ye shall therefore put
difference between clean Beasts and unclean. -- And ye shall be holy, for -- I
have [severed] you from other people, that ye should be mine: In another place
upon a like occasion it is thus said: The Lord thy God has [chosen] thee to be
a peculiar people unto himself: -- Thou shall not eat any abominable thing.
Consider and compare Levit. 20. 24, 26. with Deuteronomy. 14. 2, 3, etc. And so they
are a chosen Generation who are called (not only whom God is calling, but who
are eventually called) out of darkness (out of the darkness of this world, and
out of their ignorance and unbelief) into his marvelous light. Compare 1 Pet.
2. 9, 10. with Chap. 4. 3. Such as are delivered out of the power of darkness,
and translated or removed into the Kingdom of Gods dear sons, Col. 1. 13. with
Acts 13. 22. This is that out of which men are chosen, even out of themselves,
and out of the world and power of darkness.

Que. Into and in whom are Men chosen?

Answ. Into, and in Jesus Christ; as the Apostle says, Who has [chosen us in
him,] Ephesians. 1. 4. As we have seen before: The Elect are not chosen in the first
Adam, nor in themselves, but in Christ, who is the prime Elect, unto whom God
has given the pre-eminence and first-ship in all things, Isa. 42. 1. Col. 1.
18, 19. Romans 16. 13. And who is the Root and Foundation of Election. To this
purpose the Apostle Peter speaks. To whom coming (to wit, unto Christ) as
unto a living stone, -- chosen or elected of God: Ye also as lively stones are
built up a Spiritual House: Ye are a chosen Generation. It is here signified,
that in order of Nature however, and of Time also, Christ is first of all an
Ele^t chosen stone, an Elect foundation and Corner stone: And those that come
unto, and are built on him, are reckoned after him: And though before they were
not chosen, yet now they are an Elect Generation, Kind, or Offspring, 1 Pet. 2.
4, 5, 6, 9, 10. with Isa. 28. 16. And hereby it appears, both that some who
were before out of Christ, and so not Elected, afterward were brought into him,
and then chosen in him, and reckoned after him. Compare Ephesians. 2. 11, 13. with
Chap. 1. 1, 4. As well as also, that some are Elected and chosen before other
some, because some are in Christ before others, Romans 16. 7. So in our Types of
old: Abraham was chosen before his Seed. God chose him when he was in Ur of the
Chaldees, Neh. 9. 7. But he chose his Seed after him, Deuteronomy. 4. 37. and 10. 15.
Ezekiel. 20. 5. The Lord has chosen Zion, even Jesus Christ first of all; who
came and shall come out of Zion, Psalm. 14. 7. And who sits now in our Nature
on Gods holy Hill of Zion, Psalm. 2. 6. And in whom God dwells, and will dwell
for ever, John 14. 10, 11. Col. 2. 9. And secundarily those that are born in
Zion, Christ's Children, who come unto him, and so are born of the Law and
Doctrine of Christ, which proceeds from Zion, Psa. 87. 5. And who trust in the
Lord, such as are good and are of upright hearts, Psalm. 125. 1, 5. and 132. 11,
13. Even Zion, whom no man cares for, to wit, Christ, who is disallowed indeed
of men, and those that are brought into, and born of, and walk in Christ, has
the Lord chosen, and being chosen in Christ, they are called into Gods
marvelous Light; for Christ is the Light of the World, the Sun of
Righteousness, and Fountain of Light, 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10. Psalm. 36. 9. And so also
are chosen and called into the Grace of Christ, into his special and peculiar
favor, and are the subjects of that, Gal. 1. 6. to which afterward.

Qu. 5. Unto what are the Elected chosen?

Answ. Unto Obedience, and sprinkling of the Blood of Christ; namely, that as
Children of Obedience they should not fashion themselves according to their
former lusts in their ignorance: But as he who has called them is holy, so
they should be holy in all manner of Conversation: And that their Hearts might
be sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and their Consciences from dead works, to
serve the living God, and their bodies washed with pure Water, 1 Pet. 1. 2.
with Heb. 10. 22. and 9. 14. He has chosen them to be an holy people to
himself; Ephesians. 1. 4. thus it was said to our Types: Ye shall be holy unto me, for
I the Lord am holy and have severed you from other people, that ye should be
mine, Levit. 20. 26. And again: The Lord has chosen thee to be a peculiar
people unto himself, above all the Nations upon the Earth; a peculiar people
Zealous of good Works, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. and 14. 2. with Tit. 2. 14. Hence an Elect
Generation and Holy Nation are put together, 1 Pet. 2. 9. And as they are
chosen in Christ, in the sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth,
as has been said: So the end also is, That they should be holy and without
blame before him in love: Ephesians. 1. 4.

And so he has chosen them to be, and continue a Spiritual House, an
Habitation for himself through his Spirit, 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5. And his House they
are, who hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the
end, Heb. 3. 6, 14. The Lord has chosen Zion, be has desired it for his
Habitation. This is the rest for ever: here he will dwell, for he has desired
it, Psalm. 132. 13, 14. And as in our Types he did choose the Temple to be a
place of Habitation, in some sense, for himself, whence it was often called the
House of God, etc. 2. Chron. 7. 12. 16. So now those that come unto, and are
built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief Corner Stone, they grow unto an Holy Temple in the Lord, Ephesians.
2. 20, 21. 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. They are, and to that end he has chosen them,
that they might be the Temple of the Living God: As God has said, I will dwell
in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my
people, 2 Cor. 6. 16, 18.

He has chosen them to bear his name unto, and before others, and to render
his praise glorious. And as in former times God did choose the Temple, that his
name might be there forover, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. So he has chosen them that come
unto Christ, that they might be a Spiritual Priesthood, to offer Sacrifices,
and hold forth the Word of Life to others, and so be Instruments of good unto
others: So it is said of Paul after he was Converted. He is a chosen Vessel (or
a Vessel of Election) unto me, to bear my name, etc. Even to be Christ's Witness
unto all men of what he had seen and heard: To the End he might be an
Instrument for opening the Eyes of the blind, both Jews and Gentiles, and
turning them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, that
they may rereive the forgiveness of their sins, and Inheritance among them that
are sanctified (and so chosen) through faith that is in Christ, Acts 9. 15. with
Chap. 22. 14, 15. and 26. 16, 18. And this is his end also more generally in
choosing others, that they might be Instruments of good to those that as yet are
not chosen: As the Apostle Peter signifies: Ye are an Elect Generation, a
Royal Priesthood, etc. That ye might show forth the Praises. If Him that has
called you out of Darkness into His mavelous Light. -- That whereas others
speak evil of you as of evil doers, they may by your good Works which they
shall behold, glorify God in the day of Visitation, 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10, 12. So
Simeon elsewhere declared, how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to
take out of them a People for His Name; and so to Build again the Tabernacle of
David which was fallen down, etc. That the residue of men might seek after the
Lord; and together with them be happy also in finding Him, Acts 15. 14, 17.
with Isa. 55. 6, 7, 8. Mat. 7. 7, 8.

And ultimately, He has Chosen them, that they might obtain the everlasting
Glory of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. So the Apostle Paul says, God has
from the beginning Chosen you unto Salvation, etc. 2 These. 2. 13, 14. And
again, I endure all things for the Elects sake, ( viz. for Christ's Bodies
sake, which is the Church) that they also may obtain the Salvation which is in
Christ Jesus, with eternal Glory, compare 2 Timothy 2. 10. with Col. 1. 24. and
Ephesians. 3. 13.

And so God's Elect here spoken of are such, as by the discovery of the Grace
of God in Christ by the Gospel are brought in, and prevailed with to believe
through Grace; And in that believing Sanctified by the Spirit; Chosen out of
the World into Christ; delivered out of the power of Darkness, and Satan, and
removed into the Kingdom of Gods dear Son; that they might be; and continue to
be (and accordingly in some measure they are) a special People unto Him here,
an holy People, an Habitation for God who is their Portion, to show forth His
Virtues, and be to Him for a Name, and a Praise, and a Glory, for the good of
the residue of men among whom they are set and preserved: And might hereafter,
and being faithful to the death shall, Inherit that Inheritance incorruptible,
and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in the Heaven for them, who
are kept by the Power of God unto Salvation, etc. 1 Pet. 1. 2, 5.

And so indeed Gods Elect are such as are redeemed by the Blood of Christ, out
of others amongst whom they dwell, and of whom sometimes they were, Rev. 5. 9.
10. Hence whereas in one place it is said, They that were with the Lamb, were
such as were redeemed from the Earth, and from among men: In another it is
said, They that are with the Lamb are Called, and Chosen, and Faithful, compare
Rev. 14. 1, 4. with Chap. 17, 14. And so, the Lord has set a part for Himself,
or (as the Vulgar Translation reads it) Chosen to Himself the man that is
Godly; Even such as Worship him in Spirit and in Turth, Psalm. 4. 3. -- And this
is the first sense of Election, A Choosing out.

2. To Choose, does sometimes in Scripture signify the same with Appoint, or
Command: And so to be Chosen, does signify, one who Obeys, or Observes the
Commands, or Appointment of another: So it is taken, 2 Samuel 15. 15. David's
servants said unto the King; Behold, thy servants are ready to do whatsoever my
Lord the King shall appoint, or [ Chuse] as in the Margin. So again, 1 Samuel 19.
38. Whatsoever thou shall require, or [Chuse] of me, that will I do for thee.
And thus it may be well here also taken in this place: Many are Called, viz.
Unto Christ by the Gospel, in the faithful Ministration thereof by his
Servants. Many are by the King commanded to come, but few are Commanded, Ruled,
or Appointed by Him; but too many of them are Unruly and Disobedient to the
Gospel; or though some yield feigned Obedience unto Him, and after a sort
receive His Grace, yet they receive it in vain: So it is in this Parable: The
King sent forth his Servants to call them that were bidden to the Wedding, and
they would not come: They would not have the Man Christ Jesus to Reign over
them. Again, He sent forth other Servants, when all was actually done and
prepared to say unto them; Come unto the Marriage: But they made light of it,
etc. And though the man that had not on the Wedding Garment came into the
House, yet he came not after the Appointment of the King; he did not from the
Heart obey that form of Doctrine delivered in the Gospel, Mat. 22. 3, 4, 5, 8,
13. This is His Commandment and Appointment, and that which He requires of us
in the Gospel, when it is Preached to us; That we believe on the Name of His
Son Jesus Christ, and love one another. But the most to whom the glad tidings
of the Gospel are Reported, and unto whom these Commandments are given by the
Lord Jesus, will not come to Christ that they might have Life: And they are
therefore condemned because they obey not the Gospel, in believing on the Name
of the only begotten Son of God, 1 John 3. 23. with John 3. 18. Romans 10. 16.
and 2 These. 1. 8, 9. God is faithful in Calling men in due time, to the end
they might come to the Knowledge of the Truth: But alas, few there are who
receive and obey His Commandment, but the greatest part remain sons of Belial
in Heart, such Persons as will not take Christ's Yoke upon them, nor learn of
Him, though His Yoke be easy, and His Burden light, and His Commandments are
not grievous; But give a withdrawing, or backsliding shoulder: And so remain
unruly, and uncommanded Persons, such as will do whatsoever goes forth out of
their own Mouth; and will not be appointed and ordered by Him, and the Light
and Instructions of His Grace, which teaches that denying ungodliness and
worldly Lusts, we should live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present
world, Zech. 7. 11. Jer. 44. 16, 17. 1 These. 5. 14. Tit. 2. 11, 12. And this
understanding it well agrees with, and is suitable unto the former sense given.

3. Chosen, or Elect, signifies choice ones, and such as are more Excellent
then others, more Precious and Eminent then others. Hence we have [Chosen and
Precious] twice joined together, and both opposed in one Verse to disallowed, 1
Pet. 2. 4, 6. So Chosen and Despised are opposed the one to the other, Jam. 2.
5, 6. So whereas in one place it is said, A good Name is rather to be [Chosen]
then great Riches. In another it is said, A good Name is [Better] then precious
Ointment, compare Prove. 22. 1. with Eccles. 9. 1. To signify, that such
Persons or Things are the Subjects of Election which are better then others.
Thus it is said of Christ's Spouse: There are threescore Queens, and fourscore
Concubines, and Virgins without number. But my Dove, my undefiled, is but one,
she is the only one of her Mother, she is the choice, pure or elect one (as
some read it) of her that bare her. She is a choice, elect, and excellent one,
one that excels all others whatsoever, Cant. 6. 8, 9. So where we read, With
the pure thou will show thy self pure: It is thus rendered by others, With the
Elect thou will be Elect, Psalm. 18. 16. So [Chosen] oftentimes signifies,
Choice, or Excellent, whether Persons or Things, Exodus 14. 7. and 15. 4. Psalm.
78. 31. Ezekiel. 24. 5. So it is here also; Those who are chosen out of the World
by the out-chusing of Grace, and so Ruled and Commanded by the Gospel, they are
indeed the precious Sons of Zion, in comparison of whom the residue of men,
though Called, are yet Vile, Refuse persons, Psalm. 15. 4. The Righteous is more
excellent then his Neighbor, even such an one as comes unto, and believes in,
and puts on Christ for his Righteousness, to Cover, Cleanse, and Conform him to
His Will and Image, Prove. 12. 26. The Lover of God, the Elect one, is the most
Excellent person, Luke 1. 3. distinguished from, and preferred before all
others, and is allowed of God; the Saints are the Excellent ones, 1 Pet. 2. 4.
Psalm. 16. 2, 3. Born of more excellent Seed then others, even of incorruptible
Seed, 1 Pet. 1. 2. 23. Of a more excellent Father, even of God in Christ, 1
John 4. 7, 9. Ingraffed into Christ, and made partakers of him, and are one
spirit with Him; and shall in due time inherit gloriously, and are now by Faith
Heirs of the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, James 2.
5. And so, many are Called, but few are Chosen; choice Ones: The greatest part
will be refused and disallowed of God, because of their own stubborn refusal
of, and disobedience to Christ.

4. Elect, or Chosen, does signify in Scripture, Beloved, or Loved, with a
delightful and peculiar manner of Love: So it is said, The Sons of God saw the
Daughters of men that they were fair, and they took them Wives of all that they
chose, viz. delighted in, or were well pleased with, Genesis 6. 2. So these two
words, Chosen and Delighted in, are used indifferently: They have Chosen their
own Ways, and their Soul delights in their abominations, Isa. 66. 3, 4. So
whereas in the Prophet Isaiah, it is thus said: Mine Elect in whom my Soul
delights: That Scripture is thus read and rendered by the Evangelist Matthew:
My beloved, in whom my Soul is well pleased, compare Isa. 42. 1. with Mat. 12.
18. Thus again, Is it such a Fast as I have [Chosen?] Will thou call this an
[Acceptable] day? Chosen and Acceptable, or Well-pleasing, are the same: And
Chosen signifies a Delight, or Delightsome day unto the Lord, Isa. 58. 5, 6,
with verse. 13. So chosen in the Lord, and beloved, or beloved in the Lord, are
used indifferently by the Apostle, Romans 16, 8, 12, 13. So it is here also; Many
are called, but few are chosen, few beloved, or delighted in; no more than come
to Christ, for they are beloved in him the beloved one, Romans 16. 8. Ephesians. 1. 6.
Indeed God loves all men, while it is called to day, with a love of pity and
compassion, with a love of merciful kindness, and has abundantly manifested
it, in that he has given his only begotten Son to be the Savior of the World,
Joh. 3. 16. and 4. 42. And as is evident in what he does unto them through
Christ: Thus he loves them who hate him, and has therefore propounded himself
as an example to be imitated by us, to the end we might so see and follow him,
as to love and be merciful to our Enemies, and bless them that curse us, etc.
Matthew. 5. 44, 45. Luke 6. 27, 35, 36. He so loves all men, that he is not
willing that any man should perish, but that all should come to repentance,
Ezekiel. 18. 23, 31, 32. and 33. 11. 1 Timothy 2. 4, 6. 2 Pet. 3. 9. But yet, though
he love them thus, and is pitiful and compassionate toward them, and has no
pleasure in the death of him that dies, but rather that he should turn and
live, yet notwithstanding he cannot delight in them that still abide in their
ignorance and unbelief of the Gospel, and are Enemies to his Son: But
contrarily, he hates them with such an hatred as is opposed to a love of
Well-pleasedness: He that believes not the Son shall not see Life, but the
wrath of God abides on him, John 3. 36. He is not a God that has pleasure in
wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with him: The foolish shall not stand in
his sight. he hates all the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5. 4, 5. So he says
concerning Ephraim: All their wickedness is in Gilgall, for there I hated them
for the wickedness of their doings, Hos. 9. 15. The wrath of God comes and
abides on the Children of disobedience, Ephesians. 5. 5, 6. Col. 3. 5, 6. And
therefore none such are delighted in, nor chosen, while so abiding and
coutinuing. They wearied the Lord with their words, who said, He delights in
them that do evil, Mat. 2. 17. As they now do who say, Such as are unbelievers,
Idolaters, Adulterers, profane persons, drunkards, and notorious sinners may,
while abiding such, be the elect of God; and loved of him with peculiar
distinguishing love, which is directly contrary to the Scriptures, as has been
said; which signify, that though God pity, and is compassionate to foolish
ones, yet he delights not in them: He has no pleasure in fools, Prove. 1. 20,
22, with Eccles. 5. 4. But now his Elect ones are such as he delights in, and
loves with peculiar manner of love: Hence the Elect are such as are said to be
beloved, Col. 3. 12. All his delight is in them that are chosen out of the
World, and keep his Commandments, and which are the excellent ones, Psalm. 16.
2, 3. They that are of a froward Heart are abomination to the Lord, but such as
are upright in their way are his delight, Prove. 11. 20. and 12. 22. All such
and only such as love Christ, the father loves with delightful love; (I speak
of such are come to years of capacity, and have the Gospel plainly declared to
them.) As our Savior himself signifies, saying: For the Father himself loves
you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God, such
he loves with such manner of love, as that he calls and owns them as his Sons
by faith: And if Sons then Heirs, John 16. 27. 1 John 3. 1. And such as these
Christ loves, and delights in: As he says, I love them that love me. And as
the father has loved me, so have I loved you, continue ye in my love. Prove. 8.
17. John 15. 9. But who are they that love Jesus Christ, and so are the
subjects of his, and his fathers peculiar love, his Elect ones, in whom he
delights? They are such as when called, come to, and are ruled by Jesus
Christ; such as he not only commands, but also they are commanded by him, and
obedient to him, and so chosen; as in the second sense of the word [chosen]
before spoken to: So says our Savior himself; He that has my Commandments
and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and be that loves me shall be loved
of my father, and I will love him and will manifest my self to him. And again;
If any man love me he will keep my Word, and my father will love him, and we
will come unto him, etc. Once more; If ye keep my Commandments ye shall
continue in my love, even as I kept my fathers Commandments, and abide in his
love, John 14. 21, 23. and 15. 9, 10. 1 John 2. 3, 5. and 5. 2, 3, 2. John 6.
Truly God so loves his Son Jesus Christ, because he laid down his life for us
that he might take it up again, that he loves all them that love him with a
delightful love; they are his chosen ones, with whom he is well pleased: He
gives unto them Eternal Life, John 3. 16, 18. Jam. 2. 5. And he so loves his
Son, that he hates, and cannot delight in them that are his Enemies, and hate
him: He will beat down his foes before his face, and plague them that hate him,
Psalm. 89. 23. John 3. 36. Psalm. 16. 3. 4. And therefore while they abide such,
being not lovers of Christ, they are not of the elect or chosen Generation,
Job. 14. 24. Paul was not so while he was anememy unto him (...) persecuter of
them that called upon his name: But he with others, found favor, and was made
accepted in the beloved one, in coming unto, and believing in him, Ephesians. 1. 6.
with Luke 1. 28. 30 --

5. And lastly: By [Chosen ones] in our types are often meant and signified
such as were soldiers, and were pithced upon and employed to fight the
battles of the Lord against their enemies: or more generally, such as fought
against their enemies: Military men, are hereby meant, and sons of valor, who
were endued with courage and strength to go forth against, and contend with
their Adversaries: such are often called Elect, or chosen ones: so Joshua Chose
out Thirty Thousand mighty men of valor to go up against Ai, Joshua 8. 3. So
David gathered all the chosen men etc. 2. Sam. 6. 1. And, Abijah set the
battle in array with an Army of valiant men of war, even four hundred
thousand chosen men; Jeroboam also set the battle in array against him with
Eight Hundred Thousand chosen men, being mighty men of valor. 2 Chronicles. 13. 3.
17. So often time it is taken in this sense. Judge. 20. 15. 16. 34. Psalm. 78. 31.
etc. And thus also this sense may be accommodated to these words: few are
chosen; namely, few there are who betake themselves unto, and fight manfully
under the banner of Christ against their spiritual enemies with the weapons of
Gods warfarre: few there are who so love and cleave to Christ; as to endure
hardness as his good soldiers; to deny themselves, and take up their Cross, and
follow him: To watch, stand fast in the faith, quit themselves like men etc. 2.
Timoth. 2. 1-3, 4. 1, Cor, 16. 13, 14. Rev. 17. 14. Few love his gospel so
well, though called by the trumpet of it, as to leave the world, as it were,
and be valiant for the truth, earnestly contending for the faith, (...)
striving for the faith of the Gospel against the world, and against that sin
that dwells in them, and those fleshly lusts after their Merchandise and
Farms, etc. And against the Devil: And so, in this consideration; they are not
chosen men. But this sense may not so well as the former suit with the scope of
this place; And therefore it is the more briefly spoken unto.

Thus we have also spoken unto the Affirmative part in the first thing
propounded, to be considered from the latter part of this verse, and showed who
are Gods elect ones: namely, such as are by the grace of God chosen out of the
world into Christ, and abide in him: such as are commanded appointed, and ruled
by his law the law of faith: such as are more excellent then others, choice
ones, precious in his sight and account: such as are the subjects of his
peculiar love, and delighted in by him: And such as come unto, and follow after
the Captain of our salvation, fighting the good fight of faith, and laying hold
on eternal life.

In a word; his people in a peculiar consideration, all hearty and unfeigned
beleivers, are the elect and chosen ones here inten^ed by our Savior: The
Nation, the blessed Nation, whose God (...) the Lord, is the people which he
has chosen for his own Inheritance. Psalm. 33. 12. and 105. 43. Such God has
chosen who are rich in faith, as Jam. 2. 5. hearken, my beloved brethren, has
not God chosen the poor of this world (but not all the poor, nor any that have
not faith, but such as are) rich in faith; and heirs of the kingdom which he
has promised to them that love him? And as in order of nature Christ, the
prime elect, and root of election, was first Gods servant, to finish the work
in own personal Body, which the Father gave him to do, before he was his Chosen
or Elect one, Isai. 42. 1. Phil. 2. 8, 9, John 3. 35. with chap. 10. 17. So
also as with respect to others who are Chosen in Christ, They are his Servants
before they are the Subjects of Election: hence the same order of expressions
is used frequently concerning them: As thou Israel my servant, Jacob whom I
have chosen, Isai. 41. 8, 9. and 43. 10. And again, Hear, O Jacob, my servant,
and Israel whom I have chosen: thus says the Lord that made thee, and formed
thee from the Womb, which will help thee; Fear not, O Jacob my servant, and
thou Jesurun (or righteous people) whom I have chosen, Isai. 44. 1, 2. and 65.
13. -- 15. And these only are Gods Elect and chosen ones, and the persons
intended in this Text we are speaking to, and such as abiding faithful unto
the death, shall in due time receive the Crown of life which God has promised
to them that love him, and look and wait for the appearing and coming of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, as his Grace teaches and instructs, Jam. 2.
5. with chap. 1. 12. Titus 2. 11, -- 13.

And what we have said of this Election or choosing, and who ar^ not, and who
are the subjects of Gods Election, as in the Scripture of truth plainly
appears, may be of usefulness to us. --

1. To preserve, or redeem us from that evil and hurtful Notion and Doctrine of
personal Election in a personal consideration, which some call the Gospel of
Election; In which Men think and teach, that God has from Eternity Decreed and
purposed a set determinate number of Persons in a personal consideration to
Believe and be saved: And that all such shall in due time be brought in to
Believe, and be Converted by an invincible and irresistible Power: And that Men
may be of this number, and the subjects of this purpose, who are Fornicators,
Idolaters, Adulterers, Effeminate, Abusers of themselves with Mankind, Thieves,
Covetous, Drunkards, Extortioners, etc. Yea, and Persecutors, Blasphemers, and
Injurious ones, while abiding such: Yea, that some abiding such till almost
their departure out of this world, are yet, and continue the Elect of God, and
his Chosen ones.

This is a very groundless, and Scriptureless, and Pernicious Doctrine; And
that which renders the Cross of Christ, foolishness. For if Men were absolutely
decreed to Salvation before the consideration of Christ's interposing himself,
and humbling himself to death, the Death of the Cross; This Decree might also
have been as righteously put into Execution without it: And so, as the Apostle
says in another case, which is as true in this; Christ dyed in vain, or
without any just cause; which thought and imagination is to be rejected by us,
as that which renders needless his precious Blood; And represents Gods love to
his only begotten Son to be very small, or indeed none at all; In that he put
him to so much grief, and spared not him, but delivered him up to death for our
offenses, when there was no Absolute necessity for it: And blemishes his Wisdom
also (not to speak of his other Atributes) Seeing, if this Doctrine were true,
God could have saved those he intends and resolves to save, without the death
of his Son; Without this blessed device which he devised, that his banished
ones might not be expelled from him, Gal at. 2. 21. Acts. 17. 2, 3. 2. Corinthians.
5. 14. Matthew. 26. 39-42. 2. Sam. 14. 14.

And this evil and dangerous Doctrine makes the Preaching of the Cross
foolishness also; and all the Commands, Instructions, Calls, Counsels,
Admonitions, and Reproofs thereof, useless or unnecessary: Seeing, such as
belong to this Election, as they speak, shall be brought i^ when Gods time
comes, by such a Power as cannot be resisted: (And such an one is not put forth
in the Gospel, 1 These. 4. 8. Acts 7. 51.) And therefore there is no necessity
of Preaching that as to them: And for all others, there is no necessity to
Preach to them, for they must inevitably go to Destruction, and Perish, do they
what they can or will to avoid and flee from it; If this ungodly Device and
Doctrine were true: And then, as their Elect must be brought in by an
irresistible Power, so they shall be preserved also to the enjoyment of eternal
Salvation hereafter, and cannot possibly miscarry: And then what need is there
of the Ministry of the Word to any? 1 Cor. 1. 18. 21, -- 25. Yea, this Device
hinders many that listen to it, from conversion, of turning to the Lord; in
leading them to neglect their hearing Wisdom, and watching daily at her gates,
and waiting at the Posts of her doors: For, as an eminent asserter of such like
Doctrines, and one of the most moderate ones also (though he greatly fault the
manner of propounding it, Yet] says, and thus speaks. [ Whether ye run or
sleep, whether ye receive the Word into your hearts, or reject it: ye shall all
be such as God who is invincible decreed ye should be; as God who is infallible
foresaw ye would be, this is indeed a most true doctrine.] And as I my self
have heard from more then one of the receivers and entertainers of this vision
of men's own hearts, this has led them thus to say. [ If The one of the elect,
God will bring me in, in due time, by an irresistible power, will I, nill I,
and till that time come I had as good sit at home, or walk after the
imagination of mine own heart, and sight of mine eyes. And if I be not of this
number, but one of the reprobates, what ever pains I take, or how diligent and
frequent soever I am in hearing, reading, praying, frequenting the assemblies
of Gods people, and using, his ordinances; yet I am sure in conclusion I must
have my portion in that lake of fire which is prepared for the Devil and his
Angels.] Or as one speaks publicly and plainly; without mincing it at all.
[ It is, says he, a certain truth, that whomsoever God has elected before the
foundation of the world, such cannot possibly perish: And he, whom he has
rejected cannot possibly be saved, though he do all the works of the saints.]
that is, though he repent and believe the Gospel, and persevere therein unto
the death. This is the fruit of this wicked and corrupt root, which persuades
men, that it is in vain to serve God, as with respect to the greatest part of
men. Mal. 3. 14. Or else some beleivers of it, and zealous pleaders for it, are
unacquainted with their beloved and fast holden opinion. and thus, and
otherwise also, this evil and erroneous doctrine opens the gap to all
profaness, licentiousness, and wickedness whatsoever.

This doctrine also exposes, and drives many men to desperation, And causes
to say, there is no hope: namely, such persons as dare not think themselves to
be better then others; nor judge themselves to be of this Chosen Number: And
even to wish they had never been, or that there were no God. And what the issue
and consequence of men's saying there is no hope is, the Scripture declares
unto us; that it makes men resolve they will Walk after their own devices, and
will do the imaginations, of their evil heart. Jer. 2. 25. and chapt. 18. 10,
11.

And others it leads to persumption, teling them, that it is altogether
impossible for them to miss of eternal life, however they behave themselves:
though they may so sin as to be frowned upon, or corrected here, yea to be
sharply chastised: yet they cannot possibly be unson'd, or disinherited: they
shall have peace in conclusion, though they walk after the imagination of their
own hearts, adding drunkeness to thirst as long as they can: These trust in
lying words; saying the temple of the Lord are we: And we still belong to the
election of grace, though we kill, steal, commit Adultery, swear falsely and
burn incense to other Gods: As they said. Jer. 7. 4-8. 9. Deuteronomy. 29. 18, 19,
20, etc. How contrary is this to the Scriptures of truth! Romans 11. 20 22. 1
Cor. 9. 27. John. 15. 6. Hebr. 4. 11. And the minding and considering what is
the election of God, and who are the subjects, of it, is proper and powerful
to preserve us from this device of men's evil hearts; And so from the evil
fruits thereof: or if we have been polluted therewith, to give us an escape
therefrom; As may be also further shown in what follows.

2. What has been said of Gods election, and elect ones, may be useful also,
to show unto us, that men's eternal states are not fixed in a personal
consideration, before they were borne. It is true indeed this is Gods purpose;
that he that beleiveth and is baptized shall be saved. And he that beleiveth
not (the gospel while and as it is preached to him) shall be damned. God has
determined and decreed, that such as unfeignedly believe his Gospel, and abide
faithful to the death, shall have eternal life: And such as abide impenitent,
and unbeleiving ones, or after they have believed turn aside to their crooked
paths, and abide therein to the end, shall be destroyed with an everlasting
destruction. And this was his purpose before men were born, John. 3. 14-18.
Mark 16. 15, 16. But this respects not men in a personal consideration, nor
necessitates one man to believe, or another not to believe: But it was purposed
without difference, or respect of persons. But, I say, respecting men in a
personal consideration, the doctrine of Gods election shows, that no man's
state is fixed or unalterable, before he came into the world, and much less
from eternity, or before the world was: No, nor while they are joined to all
the living, and the day of Gods grace and patience lasts. Indeed, when men
are cut off from the land of the living, then there is a great gulf fixed, so
as there is no passing from one state or place to another. Luke 16. 25. As the
tree falls so it lies (and so it shall rise and remain for ever.) Whether
it fall toward the South, or toward the North: In the place where the tree
falls there it shall be. Eccles. 11. 3. Those that dye in union with Christ
shall be so raised, and be ever with him: And those that dye in their sins and
out of Christ, shall be so raised, and perish for ever from his presence: And
the consideration hereof might awaken and Engage us all, that while it is an
acceptable time, and day of salvation, we receive the grace of God to purpose,
even to be saved thereby: For there is no work, nor device, nor Wisdom, nor
knowledge in the grave whither we are going. Eccles. 9. 10, And not to neglect
the present time; considering also, our times are in Gods hand, and we cannot
boast our selves of the morrow, for we know not what a day may bring forth. Our
times are in Gods hand: In his hand is the soul of every living thing, and the
breath of all mankind. And Behold he breaks down, and it cannot be built
again: he shuts up a man, and there can be no opening. If he cut off, and
shut up, or gather together, then who can hinder him? Prove, 27. 1. Job. 12. 10,
14. and 11. 10. T^y therefore if we will hear his voice, let us not barden our
hearts. Hebr. 3. 7, 8. But now while it is called to day; and while men are
joined to all the living there is hope: their states are not now unalterable.
but men may pass from one state to another, Such are at present out of Christ,
and so none of Gods Elect, but under the sentence of death and condemnation,
may be of God made in Christ, and so of the Elect, and chosen generation, And
shall so be if they abide not still in unbeleife, and disobedience to God, and
his Gospel: As our Savior signifies, and assures the truth of it with a
double asseveration. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word,
and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come
into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life: Or, out of death into
life; Out of a state of death, wrath, and rejection; into a state of Life,
Justification, the favor of God, and Election, John 5. 24. To which also
agrees what the Apostle John says; signifying that they were instances of the
truth hereof: We know that we have passed out of Death into Life, because we
love the Brethren, 1 John 3. 14. Men may now be delivered out of the Kingdom of
Darkness, and removed into the Kingdom of Gods dear Son, Coloss. 1. 13. Men may
now be turned from Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan unto God: And
in being so turned, they shall receive the forgiveness of their Sins, and
Inheritance among them that are sanctified by Faith in Jesus Christ, Acts 26.
18. This Doctrine of Gods Election, as it is declared to us in the Scriptures
of truth, is a sweet and comfortable Doctrine, agreeing with the whole Gospel
of Christ; It leads us to mind and consider the preciousness and necessity of
the Blood and Sufferings of Christ, without which there could have been no
Remission of Sins, nor Eternal Life; But all must have gone to Hell without
difference, or respect of Persons, 2 Cor. 5. 14. And that if Christ had not
been raised again, we had been yet in our Sins, and Preaching, Faith, and Hope
had been all in vain, 1 Cor. 15. 12. 20. It shows unto us, that the Gospel of
Christ is the Power of God, in which his Arm is put forth for pulling men, and
choosing them out of the world into Christ, And that such as obey it are
blessed, and such as reject it, judge themselves unworthy of Eternal life, 1
These. 1. 3, 5. 2 These. 2. 13, 14. Acts 13. 46. And so leads us to glorify the
word of the Lord. It shows unto us, that such as are Elect may possibly fail
of the Grace of God, if they abide not in Christ, John 15. 2. 6. 16-19. And so
instructs us, to pass the time of our sojourning here in fear: To have and
hold fast Grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with Reverence and Godly
fear, for our God is d consuming Fire; And so preserves us from
high-mindedness, presumption, and licentiousness, Heb. 12. 16-29. And it
assures us, that such as are at present of the world, and not chosen out of
it, and so none of Gods Elect, may be chosen, and shall be, if they with the
heart believe on the name of the only begotten Son of God, Joh. 15. 19. and 17.
6. Ephesians. 2. 2-5-8. 1. Pet. 2. 9, 10. Whereas that other Doctrine, that device
of such men's brains as are of no judgment in that particular concerning the
Truth, is a most comfortless, and heartbreaking Doctrine to the greatest part
of mankind; for it persuades them that men's states were fixed before they were
born: And the greatest part by far reprobated, or past by, before they had a
personal being; And that there is no hope for them, nor possibility of their
being saved; And that Gods end in all the mercies he bestows on ^en, and means
he vouchsafes to them, is but to leave them without excuse, and to aggravate
their condemnation, and render their sin more sinful, and their Judgment more
exceeding terrible. --

But this Doctrine of Gods Election agreeeth with, and is founded upon the word
of the beginning of Christ, Hebr. 6. 1, 2. 1 Cor. 3. 10, 11. In which are
declared glad tidings of great joy unto all people, because Christ the Savior
has taken the nature of Man upon him, of that kind or species of Creatures;
not as distinguished from another part of that kind; but as distinguished from
the nature of Angels which he laid not hold on, Luke 2, 10, 11. Hebr. 2. 14, --
16. And that be the Lamb of God bare the sin of the world of mankind, Jo^. 1.
29 And by the Grace of God tasted death for every man, Hebr. 2. 9. 2 Cor. 5.
14. And gave him self a ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2. 6. In which Doctrine we see
the cordialness of Gods heart to man-ward, And that he would have all men to be
saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth: The end of Christ's dying for all
men being, that they which live should not henceforth live to themselves, but
unto him that dyed for them, and rose again, 2 Cor. 5. 15. Tit. 2. 11-14. And
so be happy for ever. And to the end they might so do and be, Christ is the
true light that lights every man that comes into the world: And he is
therefore a light to them, that he might be for salvation to them, that through
him they might be saved from their sins, and from the wrath of God, and so out
of, and from that miserable condition and estate in which men are, while they
abide in ignorance and unbelief, Joh. 1. 9. with Acts 13. 47. Joh. 3. 17.

This Doctrine shows unto us, that such as are not chosen out of the world at
present, may be so hereafter, through the grace of God that brings salvation
to all men: (Though it also shows, that it is dangerous to neglect the present
opportunity.) And so it speaks good and comfortable words unto men, to the end
they might repent, and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance, Acts 26.
18, -- 20, -- 23. And is proper to comfort poor, dejected, despairing
creatures, who are greatly discouraged by that device of men, we have opposed;
Isai. 61. 1, 2. --

For some one may say; Oh! If I did but know my self to be one of Gods Elect
ones; If I did but know that I belong to the Election of Grace, then mine heart
would be quieted and comforted: This would be a lifting up to me now I am cast
down, and my heart disquieted within me: But alas! I fear I am none of Gods
Elect and chosen ones; I cannot find such and such frames and changes from
whence I might safely conclude that I am one of that number: Nay, I find so
much evil and wickedness in my self, that I may rather fear and conclude that I
am one of them that are rejected of God, and that I am not Elected, And then
what will become of me, I must perish for ever, and be everlastingly wretched
and miserable.

Well, What solid and certain comfort affords this devise of Absolute
election to such an one in such a condition? Certainly, no true or
Soul-quieting Consolation, and reviving? For,

1. It either says in general; though thou be never so wicked, yet thou
may belong to the Election of Grace at present, though thou know it not,
nor does it appear to any one else that thou do so: But by their own
Doctrine. 1. This is but a peradventure, and it is ten to one whether it be so
or no: And may not such a one much rather still continue fearful and doubtful,
then the Disciples might be so, when our Savior said, One of you shall betray
me, they all said, Lord is it I? is it I? Seeing that was but spoken of one in
twelve, whereas here twelve to one are not Elected or Chosen, according to
their own devise? And 2. This is comforting men with a lie, and so none of Gods
way of comforting; For this supposes that wicked ones may be, while such, the
subject^ of Gods Election, which is very false, as has been shown; And as may
be seen in Isai. 65. 11, -- 15. Where Gods Chosen are opposed to them that
choose that in which he delights not, even the wicked; Whereas Gods way of
comforting is with the Truth: Hence the Comforter ir said to be, the Spirit of
Truth, and so the Comforter, John 14. 16, 17. and 16. 26. --

2. Or they may answer more particularly, and say; Thy fear is a good sign that
thou art one of the Elect. But though it were (as indeed it is not) a good
sign, yet it is not a sure one: For the sinners in Zion may be afraid, and
fearfulness surprise the Hypocrite, Isai. 33. 14. --

But what says the Doctrine of Gods Election to such a despairing, sorrowful
one? It is proper to comfort all that mourn, and so such an one as we are here
speaking of, Isai. 61. 1, 2. Though it answer not with their speeches, (as, Job
32. 14.) Yet it declares good news, and true news to such an one; it daubeth
him not up with untemper'd mortar, nor tells him he may be one of Gods Elect,
though a wicked person, and unbeliever; But it assures him the contrary: And
yet shows him, both that while it is called to day he may through grace
believe; And in so doing, shall have a new name given unto him: And though
formerly he were not Elected, yet now shall be one of Gods Elect. This shows
that such as were not his People, may be his People; and that such as were not
beloved or Elected, may become beloved and Elected, which is the same as we
have showed, Romans 9. 25, 26. That such as were not his children, may become his
children, and shall so do, in believing in Christ, as the Scripture has said:
For, To as many as receive him, to them he gives the right and privilege to
become the Sons of God, even to them who believe on his name, Romans 9. 26. with
John 1. 12. 13. 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10. And thus God in his Doctrine does create the
fruit of his lips, Peace, Peace, to him that is far off, to such stout-hearted
ones as are far from righteousness: To the end they might forsake their
unrighteous ways and thoughts, and return to him, and he will have mercy upon
them, and multiply to pardon them, Isai. 57. 19. with chap. 46. 12, 13. and
chap. 55. 6, 7, 8. Therefore though this Doctrine says, Woe to the wicked, that
men might hear and fear, and not continue such: Yet it calls to the wicked,
look unto Christ and be ye saved: Come unto him and he will give you rest. And
to move them thereto, it assures men, that God has no pleasure, none at all,
neither secret nor revealed in the everlasting destruction of the wicked, while
it is called to day; As he has both said and sworn, and given his Son to be an
actual, clear, universal, and everlasting witness of the truth of it, Ezekiel. 18.
23. 30, -- 32. and 33. 10, 11. John 3. 16. and 12. 47. And so it propounds true
and encouraging Comfort to such a one, not to continue in his Iniquity, for in
so doing, it will be his ruin; but to come unto Christ, who is the root and
foundation of Election, in coming unto, and abiding in whom, he shall be
reckoned after him, and blessed with him to all Eternity.

Nay, Let me yet add further; This Doctrine of Gods election contains in the
womb of it, and proclaims with the mouth of it, encouragement and comfort to
such, as having been formerly ingrassed into Christ, the prime Elect, and root
of Election, and so made of the chosen number, have yet for their iniquity or
unfruitfulness, been cut off from Christ; And to whom God has given a Bill of
Divorce after they have been espoused to him; while they are joined to all the
living: that such as these might not utterly ^spaire, or be discouraged from
returning unto him: (Though indeed such iniquity as procures such an heavy
Judgment is highly provoking and dangerous.) For it assures, that while it is
the day of Gods, grace, and patience, in returning and rest, they shall be
saved. Isai. 30, 15. That he can righteously again choose such as after once
chosen, have been rejected, and refused by him, as it is said of Jerusalem; Cry
yet, (says the Lord unto the Prophet) The Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and
shall yet choose Jerusalem, Zech. 1. 17. And the Lord shall choose Jerusalem
again, Chap. 2. 12. Thus it is said concerning the Jews who were our Types, and
whom we are instructed to behold, 1 Cor. 10. 18. that some of the branches were
broken off from the true Olive Tree because of their unbelief. And yet, if they
abide not still in unbelief, they shall be graffed in, for God is able to graff
them in again, who had been, but at present were none of Gods chosen ones, Romans
11. 17. 23. with ver. 7. Thus also he commands the Prophet to proclaim these
words to such as he had put away, and to whom he had given a Bill of Divorce;
Return thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause mine
anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful says the Lord, and I will not keep
anger for ever: only acknowledge thine Iniquity, etc. Jer. 3. 8. 12, 13. He
has reserved this Prerogative to himself, that he can righteously show mercy
where Men cannot. If a man put away his Wife, and she go from him and become
another man's, shall he return to her again? shall not (not that man only, but
also) that Land be greatly polluted? (where such Iniquity is committed.) But
thou have played the Harlot with many lovers, yet return again to me, says the
Lord. And concerning such, He, as it were, bethinks himself how he may again
receive his former favor, and their former nighness. But I said, How shall I
put thee among the Children, and give thee a Land of desire, an heritage of
glory, or beauty of the Hosts of Nations? And I said, Thou shall call me my
Father, and shall not turn away from me, Jer. 3. 1. 19. And hence he thus
expostulateth with such as had sold themselves for their Iniquities, and for
their transgressions were put away; Wherefore when I came was there no man?
when I called was there none to answer? Is my hand shortened at all that it
cannot redeem? or have I no power to deliver? Namely, from all your
transgressions, and from that miserable condition you have brought your selves
into.) Behold at my rebuke I dry up the Sea, etc. The Lord God has given me
the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to
Him that is weary; even to such also as have wearied themselves in wandering
from Mountain to Hill, and forgotten their resting place, his hand is not
shortened at all, but he has still power to help, turn, pardon, and receive
such backsliding ones, Isai. 50. 1, 2, 3, 4. Such like comfort this Doctrine of
Gods Election propounds, and proclaims to poor sinful ones while it is
called to day; not to strengthen men in their Iniquity: But to allure them, and
prevail with them to come to him; that he may take away their iniquities, and
receive them graciously; that he may heal their backslidings and love them
freely, Hose. 14. 1, 2-4.

3. This doctrine of Gods election is also a monytory doctrine, to admonish and
warn us all, neither to reject the grace of God; nor to receive it in vain:
But so heartily to entertain and retain it, and yield up our selves to the
operation thereof, that we may now be saved from our evil thoughts and ways;
And bring forth fruit meet for him by whom we are dressed, that we may receive
further blessing from God. In the former use we have showed, that though at
present we be not, yet we may be chosen: But here we have to show, that we must
of necessity receive the grace of God to this end and purpose, or else we shall
be excluded the kingdom of Christ and of God, To this end Christ gave himself
for our sins, that he might deliver us from, or pluck us out of, or Choose us
out of, this present evil World, according to the will of God and our father,
Gal. 1. 4. with Matthew. 5. 29. and 18. 9. with 2 These. 2. 13. The whole world
lies in wickedness, or in the wicked one, and will be hereafter condemned, and
all that remain of it; needful therefore it is that we be saved from, and
chosen out of this untoward generation, 1 John 5. 19. with 1 Cor. 11. 32. God
indeed so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten son: But it was not
with a delightful well pleased love, as is before said: nor so as he ever
intended that it or any abiding in the state and fellowship of it, should
partake of eternal life and salvation: But to this end he so loved it, that
whosoever of it beleiveth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life,
John. 3. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. But unless men so receive the love of the truth as
to be saved, and Chosen thereby, while the day of Gods grace and patience is
vouchsafed and continued to them, they will be damned hereafter: not because
they were reprobated from eternity: for so no man was in a personal
consideration; nor because they had no true and saving grace afforded to them;
and for want thereof thereof they could do no better then they did: For the
saving Grace of God, or Grace of God that brings salvation to all men has
appeared: But because they believed not so as to have pleasure in the Truth,
but had pleasure in unrighteousness, Tit. 2. 11. 2 These. 2. 10, 12, 13. Oh!
this will be the Worm that will never die, but will gnaw upon them, and torment
their Souls for ever, that when God so loved them as to give his Son to die for
them, to deliver them from that so great a death as they were fallen under the
Sentence of, viz. the first death: And to obtain Eternal Life into the nature
of man for them, both which he has done by his Blood and Sacrifice: And that
he gave him to be a Testimony of Gods goodness and love to them in due time;
and so preached to their Spirits by his Spirit, that they might have been
saved: That notwithstanding all this they would not come unto Christ that they
might have life, but held fast deceit, and refused to return. Oh! that in due
time it may be so considered by us, that we may hearken diligently unto Christ,
and so receive the Word of God, as it is in truth the Word of God, that it may
work effectually upon us: So as we may not only be called thereby, but chosen
also: And so may flee from the wrath to come.

Quest. But some may say: The Elected are chosen by Christ, and cannot choose
themselves: Is there any thing then in order to this Election, or choosing
required of us, that we may be the subjects of it? What should we do?

Answ. It is true indeed, they are chosen by Christ who are elected, and cannot
choose themselves by any Wisdom, Strength, or Works of Righteousness of their
own: But it is also as true, that in those things appertaining to the Salvation
of the Soul in which they are Passives, yet there is somewhat required of them,
as God is preventing them with his Grace: As to say, They cannot beget, or
bring forth themselves, but the Work of the new Birth is the Work of God, John
1. 13. Jam. 1. 18. But yet it is signified, that something in order hereto is
required of Men, not in any wisdom, or ability of their own, for they have
none: But as God is preventing and assisting them with power and capacity;
namely to hear the Word of Truth, and to be hearty Believers and doers of it,
John 1. 12. 13. with Jam. 1. 18, 19, 22, 25. John 3. 3, 5, 7. So in the sense
before spoken of, Men cannot reconcile themselves to God, but it is the Work of
God by Christ to reconcile us to himself: And yet something is required of men:
Hence the Apostle says. We pray you in Christ stead be ye reconciled to God, 2
Cor. 5. 18, 20. So here; Though God in Christ be the first chuser, and by him
we are chosen; yet something is required of us in the strength he gives, that
we may be chosen out of the world, ruled by him, become choice ones, and be the
subjects of his peculiar love, etc. And though we find not this command any
where, Be ye chosen, in express words given unto us; yet we have the same thing
in other expressions given in commandment to us: As, Be ye saved, Isa, 45. 22.
And save your selves, Acts 2. 40. Whereby the same thing is intended as is
foreshewn, in comparing 2 These. 2. 10, 12. with verse 13. And, Be ye separate;
which in another Scripture is rendered, and read, Chosen; As also has been
noted by comparing Deuteronomy. 10. 8. with Chap. 18. 5. and 21. 5. And Levit. 20. 24,
26. with Deuteronomy. 14. 2, 3. 2 Cor. 6. 17. And we may see this is required of men
that they may be Chosen even to come to Christ, in which doing they shall be
made of the chosen Generation, though formerly they have not so been. As also
has been said before, and may be seen in comparing 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5. with verse
9. 10. And to the end we may come unto Christ, and so be chosen, and plucked out
of the world; needful it is,

1. To hear the Word of Christ; this is the first, and one thing needful unto
the saving of the Soul, Luke 10. 39, 42. It is good and needful for us to
choose this good part: As God is speaking to us, and opening our Ears, even to
hear in hearing: For says, in which men are chosen, comes by hearing, and
hearing by the Word of God, viz. by the Gospel of Peace, and glad tidings of
good things, Romans 10. 14, 15, 17. with 2 These. 2. 13. It is the work of the
Father by his Spirit, to glorify Christ, and to bear witness of him: He
speaks excellent things unto us concerning him, and the opening of his lips
are right things. And together herewith he both gives unto men capacity of
hearing, and calls upon them to hear, Prove. 8. 4, 6, 17, 20. He says; Hearken
diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your Soul delight it
self infatness: Incline your Ear, and come unto me, hear, and your Soul shall
live, Isa. 55. 1, 3. Let every man be swift to hear, viz. the Word of Truth,
Jam. 1. 18, 19, The hour is coming, and now is, says our Savior, that the
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God and they that hear shall live, John
5. 25. And this is the first Branch of the description of him that passes from
death to life, from an Estate of wrath and misery, into a state of favor and
blessedness; he that hears Christ's word, John 5. 24.

2. Needful also it is, that we learn of the Father, that we may be Chosen,
not only that we hear, as that is distinguished from learning: But that also
we heartily embrace his heavenly lesson and doctrine: So, after Wisdom had
called upon men first of all to hear, she after says also; Receive my
instruction and not Silver, Prove. 8. 6. -- 10. Indeed God teaches many that
are not taught by him, and so they deprive their souls of good, Isa. 48. 17,
18, But it is needful, to the end we may be elected, that we receive the
instruction of our Heavenly father, even to buy the truth, and not sell it:
even to buy it with an undervaluing, and parting with, and forsaking all that
we have, that we may be made partakers of Christ, Prove. 23. 23. with Luke 14.
33. And every one that is taught of God, every one that has heard and learned
of the father comes unto Christ. Job. 6. 45. with Matthew. 22. 3, 4, 5. And so
shall be chosen, and a subject of Gods election. And let no man be discouraged
from coming unto Christ in this way, because of his former vileness and
wretchedness; for though he be the chief of sinners that comes, yet him that
comes he will in no wise cast out, but will receive such an one graciously: he
will choose him, and not cast him away, Isay 41. 9. with Joh. 6. 35. And as the
wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men who hold the truth in unrighteousness; so as persisting
in such like iniquity he will at last reject such, and give them up to a
reprobate mind: Reprobate Silver shall men call them (who after all means used,
yet will not come to Christ, who is the rest and way to it) because the Lord
has rejected them, Romans 1. 18, 28. Jer. 6. 16, 17, 30. So also all such as
hear the joyful sound sounded forth by the Father in the Gospel, and receive
his instruction so as to come unto Christ. Such shall find rest, Mat. 11. 28,
29. Their Souls shall live, Isa. 55. 3. And they shall have fellowship and
partnership with Jesus Christ, in him be chosen, and after him reckoned; And
shall, abiding in Christ, inherit the Kingdom which God has prepared for them
that love him, and look, and wait for his coming from Heaven, 1 Cor. 1. 8, 9.

Yea, this Doctrine of Gods Election may also admonish and warn them who are in
Christ Jesus, not to depart from him. Upon this presumption, that the Elect
cannot possibly be deceived: For certainly, it is possible for them so to be,
and they will certainly so be if they abide not in Christ by Faith and Love: As
our Savior says, If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a Branch, and
is withered, and men gather them, and they are cast into the fire, and they are
burned, John 15. 6. In which words our Savior signifies, that such as have
been ingraffed into himself, who is the true Vine, by his Father the
Husbandman, may not abide in Christ, but may so depart from him, as not only to
be cast into the fire, which a man may be, and yet be plucked out again, as a
brand out of it, Jude 23. But also be burned; that is, he may finally perish.
And to the same purpose the Apostle speaks to the believing Romans, who were
in, and did stand in the Root of Righteousness: Thou stand by faith, be not
high minded, but fear; for if God spared not the natural Branches, take heed
also lest he spare not thee. Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God,
on them which fell severity; but toward thee goodness, if thou continue in his
goodness, otherwise thou also shall be cut off, Romans 11. 20, 22. Men, as before
we have seen, are the subjects of Gods election, in coming unto, and abiding in
Christ. And in him all the Promises of God are Yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. And
if we be Christ's, then are we Abraham's Seed, and Heirs according to Promise:
And so an elect Generation, Gal. 3. 29. with Deuteronomy. 7. 6, 9, 10. and 10. 15. And
they who dwell in this secret of the most high, shall abide under the shadow of
the Almighty, Psalm. 91. 1, 12. They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount
Zion, which cannot be removed, but abides for ever: And the Lord will do good
unto those that be good, and to them that are upright in their hearts: But as
for such as turn aside (out of the path of the just) to their crooked paths,
the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity; but peace shall be
upon Israel, Psalm. 125. 1, 4, 5. with Psalm. 73. 1. Therefore the Apostle Peter,
writing to them who were elect according to the foreknowledge of God the
Father, and had obtained like precious faith with the Apostle, exhorts them to
give diligence to make their calling and election sure; for says he, If ye do
these things ye shall never fall; plainly signifying to us, that otherwise they
might and should fall, 1 Pet. 1. 2. with 2 Pet. 1. 1, 10. Those that are with
Christ on Mount Zion, are such as are Called, and not only so but Chosen; yea,
and not only Chosen; but faithful also: Faithfully following the Lamb
wheresoever he goes, Rev. 17. 14. with Chap. 14. 1, 4. Oh that we may never
say, We are the Elect of God, and our Mountain is so strong settled that we
shall never be moved, however we demean our selves: But that we may be of the
Sheep of Christ, and abide such, hearing continually the voice of our
Shepherd, and following him; for to such as so do he will give Eternal Life,
and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of his hand;
neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things
present, nor things to come: Nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature,
shall be able to separate them that love God, and keep his commandments, from
the love of God, which is (for ever in Christ Jesus, John 10. 27, 28, 29, with
Romans 8. 28, 33, 39.

And so much to the first Particular, in which we have endeavored from the
Scriptures to show, what is not, and what is Gods Election; and who are not,
and who are the subjects of it. And now we come to show,

2. That few of the many that are called are chosen: as our Savior here
plainly affirms: But few of many, (as Jer. 42. 2.) even of the many which are
called by the Servants in the plain Preaching of the Gospel, as it is now
revealed: For that our Savior speaks of and intends such, by the [ Many] here,
we have before shown; and desire that may be considered, and what is contained
in the three Cautions foregiven. Now of these many who have the Scriptures of
Truth amongst them, which have been spoken and recorded by the Servants, the
extraordinary Servants of the great King, viz. by the Holy Prophets, and
Apostles of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And amongst whom also are some
of his Servants preserved and continued, even such as have believed on Christ
through the Apostles word, he here says, Few are chosen, few comparatively to
those so called; Few to the many who say they are Jews and are not. There are
threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins without number: But my
Love, my undefiled is but one, says our Lord Jesus: She is the only one of
her Mother, she is the choice and chosen one of her that bare her, Cant. 6. 8,
9. In this sense also it is true, and may be thus taken; As the Lilly among the
Thorns, so is Christ's love among the Daughters; one Lilly among many Thorns,
one Love amongst many Daughters, other Professors, Churches, and Societies,
Who swear by the Name of the Lord, and make mention of the God of Israel, but
not in Truth, non in Righteousness; for they call themselves of the Holy City,
etc. Cant. 2. 2. Isa. 48. 1, 2. And as was also fore-prophesied. In that day,
seven women (Churches, or Congregations) shall take hold of this one Man, Jesus
Christ, (1 Timothy 2. 5.) saying, we will eat our own Bread, and wear our own
Apparel, (as the Man did that had not on the Wedding Garment.) Only, let us be
called by thy name (Christians) to take away our reproach, Isa. 4. 1. Many
cleave unto him by flatteries, Dan, 11. 34.) And few heartily receive, or
faithfully and constantly walk and abide in him unto the end: So that, ^t may
be applied to these chosen ones, the Israel of God, which was spoken of Israel
after the flesh, a Type of the Spiritual Seed. The Lord did not set his love
upon you, nor choose you, because ye were more in number than any people, for ye
were the fewest of all people; not counted worthy in respect of the smallness
of their number to be reckoned amongst the Nations of Professors, Deuteronomy. 7. 6,
7. Christ's flock of actual believers, and upright followers of Him, is a
little flock. Luke 12. 32. I still mean, as compared with the many or
multitudes which are called, and in some sort also, the called. And so much our
Savior gives us to understand in His Parable which He spoke in His personal
Ministration. In one He says, The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Net that
was cast into the Sea, which gathered of every kind, some good, and some bad.
Mat. 13. 47-49. And in another He more plainly and evidently signifies, that
of the many to whom the Gospel is preached, but few comparatively obey it from
the heart, or continue so to do.

One sort of the hearers of the Kingdom He compares to the Way-side ground,
and and like to it many abide: The word has little or no entrance into, or
impression on them, in respect of any willing reception of it from them. The
sower indeed sows his seed in the hearts of this first sort of ground, And
did they suffer it to take place in them, and enter into, and abide in their
hearts, they should believe and be saved: But they understand it not, consider
it not, set not their hearts to it, open not to let in this blessed seed, which
would convert them in so doing; but letting it lie above ground, it is open
unto, and fit to be taken away by the Fowls; And the wicked one comes, and
catches away that which was sown in the hearts of such, lest they should
believe and be saved: Of this sort so abiding it may be said; It is a People of
no understanding, therefore He that made them will not have mercy upon them,
and He that formed them will show them no favor, Matthew. 13. 18, 19. with Luke
8. 11, 12. Isa. 27. 11.

Another sort of hearers He likeneth to stony places, or to the rock: they hear
the word of the Kingdom, and the glad tidings therein declared: And in some
measure understand it: And so are not like unto the Way-side hearers; for anon,
or immediately with joy they receive and gladly entertain it: And do believe
for a while what is therein reported, That Christ is indeed the Savior of the
World: But these have no root in themselves; they suffer not the word to sink
deep enough to break the stone or rock at the bottom, and to effect in them an
honest and good heart, which it would do, were it with the heart believed. Is
not my word like as a fire, says the Lord, and like an bammer that breaks
the rock in pieces, Jer. 23. 28, 29. this is powerful to convert and change the
Soul, Psalm. 19. 7. But they suffer it not to take root downward, but still
retain some stone at the bottom, some design or enterprise of theirs unbroken:
And though possibly in hearing this word gladly, they do many things which it
is effecting in them, part with many things thereby reproved, and do many
things which are good in themselves, yet there is still some one beloved
iniquity or other which they will not let this good and powerful word mortify
and root up; some lust or idol remains at the bottom of their hearts, which
hinders the seed from sinking deep enough, and and so in conclusion the Word
becomes unfruitful. Herod knew John the Baptist was a just Man, and an holy,
and observed him (or kept him from danger) and when he heard him he did many
things, and heard him gladly: But when John reproved him for Herodias his
Brother Philip's Wife, and said, it is not lawful for thee to have her; he
turned not at this reproof of God's instruction; he suffered not the word of
God to purge out and root up this iniquity, but was angry with this faithful
reprover, and first put him in Prison, and afterward caused him to be
beheaded, Mark 6. 17-20. Ezekielis hearers said one to another, Come, I pray
you and hear what is the word that comes forth from the Lord: And they come
unto thee, says the Lord, as the People comes, and they sit before thee as My
People, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them; For with their
mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after their Covetousness: And
^e thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice,
and can play well on an instrument: for they hear thy words but they do them
not: For still from the least to the greatest of them every one was given to
Covetousness, Ezekiel. 33. 30-32. Jer. 6. 12. Thus it is with too many now in our
days; they hear the glad-tidings of good things brought to them in the Gospel
of peace; and by and by they receive them with gladness; And they are persuaded
that the word of Christ is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance;
And they marvel at the gracious words therein contained, and wonder that every
one does not give credit thereto. But still they believe in vain; and though
they have some love for what they hear, yet they love some thing reproved
thereby rather and better; they hold fast a lie in their right hand, while the
truth is but in their left; they set and keep up some stumbling block of
iniquity in their hearts; some intemperance, or uncleanness, or strife, or
covetousness, or pride, etc. And by the deceitfulness of that sin which does so
easily beset them, they harden their hearts like an Adamant stone, so that the
word sinks not deep enough into them; And this is afterward made apparent: For
when tribulation or persecution arises for the word, by and by they are
offended: As immediat^y at first they received the word of the kingdom with
joy; so immediately in time of trial and temptation they are offended, and fall
away. -- Joh. 3. 19. 2 These. 2. 10. Isa. 44. 20. Matthew. 13. 20, 21. with Luke
8. 13.

A third sort of hearers appear in conclusion to be like the thorny ground,
they are such as hear the word, and receive the seed: And, it may seem, for
sometime receive it to purpose, and it brings forth fruit in them. These
understand as the Way-side hearers do not: These have some root in themselves,
as the Stony-ground hearers had not: These bring forth fruit; but afterward
without any good reason or cause, they go out and depart from Christ Jesus, and
from the mindfulness of His Grace and Gospel, and abide not faithful unto the
death: These endure not unto the end, though at first they did run well: They
continue not rooted and grounded in the Faith: They abide not in Christ
steadfast and unmovable, but forsake the Lord the fountain of living waters,
and wander out of the way of understanding, and turn aside to their crooked
paths, after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through the
Knowledge and Doctrine of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; And so are like
Birds that wander from their Nests: they are removed from him that called them
into the Grace in Jesus Christ: And after they have clean, and indeed, escaped
from them that live in error, yet they sin willingly, and err from, and
forsake the right way, in which abiding they should be saved: But they go
forth, Luke 8. 14. and then the Thorns enter in, Mark 4. 19. They were not
there always: they were, it may seem, rooted out and cast forth by the Plow of
the Gospel: And had they abidden in Christ they had been still preserved from
them. For, Whosoever abides in Him sins not; He keeps Himself that the
wicked one touches him not, in whom the seed of God remains, 1 John 3. 6, 9.
with Chap 5. 18. But going out, the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness
of riches, and lusts of other things enter in, and choke the Word, and it
becomes unfruitful; namely, in conclusion, they bring no fruit unto
perfection, none to the harvest; And so none which will abide and appear on
their account in the day of the Lord Jesus Christ. These may endure some of
them a considerable time, and even almost, though not altogether, unto the
harvest: And how far soever they go, or how long soever they continue; yet not
enduring unto the end, not overcoming and keeping Christ's Works unto the end,
but going out and departing from Him, and so persisting, all their
righteousness shall not be remembered, but for their iniquity that they have
committed they shall dye for it: there is no reaping if men faint, how long
soever they have exercised themselves in well doing, Matthew. 13. 22. with Mark
4. 18, 19. 2 Pet. 2. 18-20. Gal. 6. 9. Ezekiel. 33. 12, 13. Rev. 2. 26-29. Now the
just shall live by faith, but if he (at any time) draw back, Gods Soul will
have no pleasure in him, Hebr. 10. 38. with ver. 26. Those that died for their
unbelief and murmurings, when they were almost come to the borders of the Land
of Canaan, fell short of the typical rest, as well as they who were upon the
same account cut off presently after they came out of Egypt, though they had
continued longer in following the Lord, and endured much more hardship then the
latter: Even so such as have put their hand to the Plow, and continued it there
a good while, and suffered many things, will yet-deprive themselves of the
reward, if they bring not forth fruit unto the end: All their former hearing,
believing, professing, well doing and suffering, will in conclusion be in vain
to such as these, Gal. 3. 4. Phil. 2. 12-16. Luke 9. 62. Oh that the
consideration hereof may admonish and provoke us all, To be steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing (in thus doing
and continuing) our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord: But Christ will
present us in the body of His flesh, unblameable and unrebukeable, if we
continue in the faith rooted and grounded, and be not moved from the hope of
the Gospel, etc. 1 Cor. 15. 58. Col. 1. 22, 23. Gal. 6. 9. so shall we not be
like the thorny-ground hearers.

Lastly, Some there are who receive the Word into the good ground, even such as
hear the Gospel and understand: And therein they are better then the first sort
of hearers compared to the way side. And they receive the seed in an honest and
good heart; and therein they are preferred before the second sort of hearers,
who are compared to the stony ground. Yea and also they keep it, and bring
forth fruit with patience and perseverance: In a patient continuance in
welldoing, they seek for Glory and Honor, and immortality: And unto them in
due season God will render eternal Life, Romans 2. 6, 7. These all bring forth
fruit unto perfection, though not all alike; but some an hundred fold, some
sixty, and some thirty: Yet they continue keeping the seed, the good Word of
God, and suffering it to bring forth fruit in them, and to make them fruitful
even unto the end. And herein they are differenced from, and do more worthily
then, the third sort of hearers, compared to the thorny ground. Though they
indeed for some time, yea possibly for some considerable space of time, some of
them however, did retain the word of the kingdom; but before the harvest came
they grew weary, and fainted in their minds, and so deprived themselves of that
reward of the inheritance of which otherwise they might and should have
partaken: And so are compared to, and in conclusion, become like the thorny
ground; compare Matthew. 13. 18-23. with Mark 4. 14-20. and Luke 8. 11-15.

Now in this Parable our Lord confirms the truth of what He affirms in the
Parable we are considering a part of; to wit, that few of the many who are
called are chosen: Among the many hearers of the word of the kingdom, there
were three sorts that in conclusion received the grace of God in vain: And one
sort only that received and retained the love of the truth to be saved thereby:
Our Savior in this Parable of the several grounds, speaks not of the heathen,
who have not the Oracles of God committed to them, nor the Gospel of Christ
plainly preached among them: nor of such as hear such instructions as cause to
err from the words of knowledge, and such foolish ones as have not the lip of
knowledge: For no good fruit can be expected from such foolish persons, and
such Doctrines: And therefore the Holy Ghost has councelled us to go from the
presence of such vain talkers; and to cease to hear such instructions which are
so hurtful, Prove. 14. 7. and 19. 27. But He speaks of such persons as were
hearers of the good Word of God, the word of Truth, the Gospel of our
Salvation, which was spoken unto them, and sown in the hearts of them by the
good sower, the Son of Man: And yet amongst these hearers there are but few who
are the called according to purpose: Oh how few are there that are indeed
redeemed from the Earth, and from amongst men, and who faithfully cleave unto,
and follow the Lamb that was slain whithersoever he goes!

And the Reason why there are so few chosen is not (as we have said, and may
again also show) because the most were reprobated, or past by in a personal
consideration from Eternity: Or because, no true and saving Grace was
vouchsafed unto them, for both these are false: But because they strive not, or
abide not striving to enter in at the strait gate: But against all the
discoveries, convincements, reproofs and operations of the Spirit in the
Gospel, walk on in, or return again unto, the broad way, in which there are
such multitudes who hold fast deceit, and refuse to come unto Christ in His
way. So much our Savior signifies when He says unto His Disciples, Enter ye
in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leads
to destruction, and many there be that go in thereat. Why so? Because strait is
the gate, and narrow it the way which leads unto Life, and few there be that
find it, Matthew. 7. 13, 14. And again, when one said unto Christ, Lord, are
there few that be saved? (Though our Savior gives not a direct Answer, yet He
signifies in His Answer, That few comparatively are so; and intimately
declares, That men's not being willing to enter in at the strait gate, or not
to do it in the present time, is the Reason: For) He said (not to him only that
propounded the Question, but indefinitely) unto them that heard Him: Strive to
enter in at the strait gate, for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in
and shall not be able, Luke 13. 22-24. He does not here signify that there was
no gate, for such as in the event go to destruction; nor that it was not
opened, but plainly gives us to understand that there was a gate, and that it
was so opened that any man might enter therein, Joh. 10. 9. Yea that it was
held open all the day of Christ's mediation, in that it presently follows;
when once the master of the House is risen up, and has shut to the door, etc.
Luke 13. 25. clearly implying, That the door was not shut until that time, to
wit, while the day of God's Grace and Patience is continued, and men are joined
to all the living: But He evidently signifies that the reason why few are
saved is, because they strive not, or will not strive to enter in at this
strait gate, Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32. The gate is indeed strait; A Man in entering must
deny and renounce himself daily, his sinful and fleshly lusts that war against
the Soul: his wisdom, righteousness, will, designs, and enterprises: his
covetousness and love of the World, and the things thereof: his desires of
vainglory, praise, and honor of Men, and friendship of this World: his ease
and pleasure: his inordinate affection to nearest and dearest relations, yea
and to his own life also; Yea and whatsoever does hinder him, or would turn him
aside from coming unto, and following after Jesus Christ. And the way is narrow
which leads unto life; it is an afflicted, persecuted way, and those that
walk in it must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God, Acts 14.
22. They that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer Persecution, 2 Timothy
3. 11, 12. Christ's Disciples and Followers, I mean such as are His Disciples
indeed, shall be hated of all Men for His name sake: not only of profane ones,
though they will be the song of the Drunkards, and the byword of base nameless
Men, who are viler then the Earth: but also the appearingly righteous and
zealous ones will reproach and villifie them, and the Doctrine professed by
them, and cast out their names as evil for the Son of Man's sake; their Mothers
Children will be angry with them, Cant. 1. 6. their Brethren will hate them,
Isa. 66. 5. And the Sons of the Sorceress, the seed of the Adulterer and the
Whore, such as are begotten of diverse and strange Doctrines, will sport
themselves against them, and make a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue against
them, Isa. 57. 3, 4. so that in coming unto, and following after Jesus Christ,
they can expect nothing but frowns, cruel mockings, reproachful words and
gestures, scoffings, afflictions and persecutions from all that are not of
their own company: He that is not with them is against them: so that they that
will come after Christ, must not only deny themselves, but also take up their
cross daily and follow him. For God has predestined and foreordained that
all that are lovers of Him, who are the called according to purpose, and so
Gods Elect ones, should be conformed to the Image of His Son, that He might be
the firstborn among many Brethren: That as He was despised and rejected of
Men, a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with grief, so they also should be made
like unto Him, and drink of the same cup whereof He drank, Matthew. 16. 24, 25.
Luke 9. 23, 24. Romans 8. 28, 29-33. Now because most of them who are called by
the Gospel when they hear this saying are offended, crying out in their hearts
at least, This is an hard saying, who can hear it? as they Job. 6. 60. and will
not strive to enter in at this strait nor walk in this narrow way which is so
persecuted; hence it comes to pass that Christ's flock of actual and unfeigned
believers is a little flock, and small amongst the thousands of such as are
called, and call themselves by the name of Christ. And so we have seen the
truth of our Saviors saying in this place, else where confirmed, and have
considered and showed the reason thereof, why few of the many called ones are
chosen.

And this assertion and instruction of our Saviors, That few are chosen, may
be of usefulness unto us.

1. To show unto us how little reason they who hear and believe the Gospel with
the heart, have to glory or boast of the multitude of them that come amongst
them, and who are called thereby: seeing they know from the testimony of
Christ, that of those many to whom the joyful sound is proclaimed, few
unfeignedly entertain it, or yield up themselves to the saving operations of
it. Indeed it may be matter of gladness to them, that many do come to hear the
Gospel of peace: for how can Men believe on Christ, if they hear not the
Doctrine concerning Him? But when they wisely consider, That many who are
called by the Gospel are only so, and will not come to Christ that they may
have life, it occasions sadness unto them, and keeps them sober, and preserves
them from glorying in the numerousness of them who come amongst them. Other
persons who glory in appearance, and not in heart, are apt to be lifting up,
and priding themselves in their great companies, and in the many hundreds that
come to hear the doctrines of such as consent not to wholesome words, the Words
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine according to Godliness. But alas,
for those who are indeed the Disciples of Christ, they have so many occasions
of sorrow and fighing presented to them, even amongst such as are professedly
one with them, that instead of boasting of their numbers, rivers of Waters run
down their eyes, because such keep not Gods Law, Psalm. 119. 136, And sometimes
those who are in any good measure upright, are ready to take up that wish of
the Prophets: Oh that we had in the Wilderness a lodging place of Wayfaring
Men, that we might leave the generality of our Brethren professedly, and go
away from them, as Jer. 9. 2, 3. For though, as the Apostle says, they have
all heard, and many of them oftentimes heard, the Gospel of Christ; yet they
have not all obeyed the Gospel, for Isaias says, Lord who has believed our
report? Romans 10. 14-16-18. Joh. 12. 37, 38. Oh how few are there who from the
heart obey that form of Doctrine that has been delivered to them! The Kingdom
of Heaven, in the gracious and spiritual administration of it, is like to a Net
cast into the Sea, that gathers of all kinds: But how few are willing to be
drawn out of their Elements into Jesus Christ! And to forsake, and go on to
forsake all, that they may be and continue His Disciples indeed! Were this
considered, it would preserve them from glorying in their number, and cause
them rather to say; Woe is us, for we are as when they have gathered the
gatherings of summer, as the grape gleanings of the Vintage, there is no
cluster to eat, Mich. 7. 1, 2.

2. It might also awaken and provoke us all, To examine our selves in the Glass
of the Gospel, and see whether we ourselves are only of the many called, or
whether we be also of the few who are chosen. Indeed, if all who are called by
the plain and faithful ministration of the Gospel were chosen also, we might
save our selves this labor, and rest secure and well satisfied, that we are of
the remnant according to the election of Grace: Or if the greatest part of the
called ones were elected also, it might nor so greatly concern us to search and
try our selves, and inquire so diligently into this matter: But when our Lord,
who is the truth it self, says, few of those invited by the Servants are
chosen, it greatly concerns us to try ourselves, that we may not think our
selves to be something when when we are nothing, and so deceive our selves;
which will be the saddest and miserablest cheat and of the most pernicious and
everlastingly destructive consequence that ever was, Gal. 6. 3, 4. Examine your
selves whether ye be in the Faith, prove your own selves; know ye not your own
selves that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? 2 Cor. 13. 5. What
a sad thing will it be for us to sport our selves in our self-deceivings, as
too many do? 2 Pet. 2. 13. Better it is now for us to deal faithfully with our
selves, then to flatter our selves, or be flattered by others to our endless
and eternal misery and calamity. Come we then to the light of the Lord, the
Gospel of Christ, and therein and thereby we may see our selves, whether we be
chosen no, Even he that is an hearer of the word and not a doer, is like unto a
man that beholds his natural face in a Glass; for he beholds himself: Even
as a man may see his natural face in a Glass, and see whether it be clean and
free from spots and pollution or no: so a man that is only called by, and an
hearer of the word of Truth, may see himself, and see what manner of person he
is, Jam. 1. 22, 23, 24. He may see whether he be chosen out of the World by the
Grace of God, or whether he be not, but still remain in, or be turned back
again into the World, and so is at present rejected of God, and not loved with
peculiar manner of love: As the Apostle intimates, 2 Cor. 13. 5. And if by
this Glass we see we are hearers, and of the called only, Oh let us give no
rest to our eyes, not slumber to our eyelids, until we so receive and retain
the Grace of God which brings Salvation to us, that we may be chosen out. of
this miserable condition, and redeemed from amongst Men, that it may be well
with us for ever, and we may not perish with the World. And if it appear that
we are of the number of those who are chosen, that we still abide and continue
in the Doctrine of Christ, that we may have both Father and Son, 2 John 9.

Inq. But some may say, how may we know whether we be of the chosen number or
no? declare a little more particularly how we may know it.

Answ. Those who are indeed chosen do know that they are of God, and that the
whole World lies in Wickedness, as 1 John 5. 19. by keeping His Commandments,
as the Apostle says, Hereby we know that we know Him, and are in Him, if we
keep His Commandments, 1 John 2. 3-5. And he that keeps His Commandments
dwells in Him, and He in him, chap. 3. 24. that is to say, in more and
plainer words; His Commandments are, That we believe on the Name of Jesus
Christ, and love one another as He has given us Commandment, 1 John 3. 22-24.
He that has and keeps these, has right unto the tree of life, and shall
enter in through the gates into the City, even into the new Jerusalem, Rev. 22.
14. that is to say, they do know they are chosen.

1. By this, That the Faith they have received, is the Faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and according thereto, they believe with the heart that good report the
Father has given of Christ in His Word and Sayings; in which He has
testified; That He sent the Son into the World, not to condemn the World, but
that the World through Him might be Saved: And so they believe on the Name of
the Son of God, Joh. 3. 16-18. they have their Faith begotten by, closing with,
and founded on, not Men's Doctrines, or their own Thoughts and Imaginations,
which they know to be corrupt and evil: But they have received and retain for
their Faith, nothing else then the Word of God and Testimony of Jesus, which
was witnessed by the holy Prophets in former times, and is now revealed to us
by the Apostles of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: And so they believe on
Christ as the Scripture has said and testified of Him; and not as Men in their
Glosses and Interpretations speak of Him. They call no mere Man whatsoever
their Rabbi, nor own any to have dominion over their Faith but Jesus Christ,
and God in Him: He is their only Lawgiver in this respect, the Father of their
Spirits, the Lord of what they believe: And so according to His testimony they
believe Him to be the Son of God, the Savior of the World, the only Foundation
of Faith and Hope, the only Fountain of all the fullness of Grace and Truth, the
only Bread and Water of Life, the only door of approach of God, the only Lord
of our Faith and Consciences, the only High Priest and Mediator between God
and Men: And according hereto, they come unto and depend on Him in His way, for
bottoming all upon Him, for receiving all from Him, for living continually by
Him and to Him, for approaching to God through Him, and expecting and waiting
through His Spirit for His perfecting all that concerns them, etc. And so they
hold forth this word of Life in Word and Conversation. And he that thus
believes on the Son has the Witness in Himself, and gives not God the lie,
but has set to His Seal that God is true in all He has testified of His Son,
1 Job. 5. 10, 11. Job. 3. 33. And in receiving this Testimony of Jesus, they
receive also therewith certainly and undoubtedly the Spirit of Gods Son, Gal.
3. 2-5. which Spirit bears Witness with their Spirit, with their enlightened
mind and judgment, that they are the Sons of God, Romans 8. 16. And hereby they
know that they dwell in Him, and He in them, because he has given them of His
Spirit: And they have seen (in the light, and by the evidence thereof) and do
restifie, that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the World, 1 John
4. 13, 14. with 2 Cor. 13. 5.

2. They also know they are chosen by this, that this Faith works in them by
Love, Gal. 5, 6. and therein is efficacious in them. And so they are
distinguished from, and preferred before such as say, they have Faith, and have
not its works, and so believe in vain: But this Testimony of Jesus being
received by them, not as the word of man, but as it is in truth the word of
God, it works effectually in them. From the knowledge and belief of Gods love
in Christ, His first love, they are begotten and prevailed with to love God,
even to love Him withal the heart and mind, and soul, and strength: And so to
love Jesus Christ, as to suffer the loss of all things, and count them but dung
in comparison of Him. It makes them willing to part with their Sins and Idols
for His sake, and prefer Him before all other things, which they may love with
a moderate affection, 1 John 4. 16-19. And this love of God in Christ known and
heartily believed by them, begets them unto, and effects in them a
delightful love to those who are begotten of Him, and that not in word and in
tongue only, but in deed and in truth: And by this they know that they are
passed out of death unto life, because they love the Brethren: And hereby they
know they are of the truth, and can assure their hearts before God, 1 John 3.
14. 18-19. and 5. 1. And also they are taught and led of God by this love of
His to the love of all men, even to love them with a love of pity and
compassion, and to testify love to them according to their needs, as they have
opportunity, Mat. 5. 44, 45. He that says, I know Him, and keeps not His
Commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in Him: But whosoever keeps His word
(in Faith and Love) in him verily is the Love of God perfected: hereby know we
that we are in Him, 1 John 2. 4, 5. And so hereby we may know whether the Grace
of God has its electing efficacy upon us. And so also on the contrary, we may
be assured we are not of this chosen Generation, if we reject the testimony of
God concerning His Son, 1 John 5. 10, Joh. 14. 21-24. or receive it in vain,
and are not saved and sanctified thereby; But however we profess to believe the
testimony God has given of His Son, yet while we love darkness rather then
light, and imprison the truth, professed by us in unrighteousness, we believe
in vain, and so persisting, shall miserably deceive our selves, Joh. 3. 19.
Romans 1. 18. Jam. 1. 22. In this the children of God are manifest, and the
children of the Devil: Whosoever does not righteousness (believes not with the
heart the record God has given of His Son, 1 John 2. 29. with chapt. 5. 1, 10.
and 4. 6.) is not of God, neither he that loves not his Brother, 1 John 3. 10.
These two, Faith and Love being had and kept by us, to wit, The Faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and Love wrought thereby, we herein keep the Commandments of
God; and have the new Creature, and are in some measure new Creatures, compare
1 Cor. 7. 19. with Gal. 5, 6. and chapt. 6. 15. And he that is called by, and
an hearer of the Gospel, may in the Glass of the perfect law of liberty behold
himself, that he is at present none of Gods elect, if he have not the Faith of
God, and our Lord Jesus; if he believe not with the heart the word of God and
Testimony of Jesus, so as to work effectually in him in some measure: Or if he
has not this love begotten, produced and continued in him, by this faith, as
has been said, Jam. 1. 22, 23-27.

And hereby also we may discern and know the Election or non-election of other
persons; so as to have, or not have, delightful love toward, and fellowship
with them that come amongst us; As the Apostle Paul says, not only of himself,
but also joins with himself Silvanus and Timotheus, in this knowledge of
others: knowing brethren beloved your Election of God; (to wit, by their work
of Faith, and labor of Love, etc.) For, says he, our Gospel came not unto you
in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, etc. And ye became
followers of us, and of the Lord, having received the word in much affliction
with joy of the Holy Ghost, etc. And they were also taught of God to love one
another, and all Men: Hereby they knew the election of these Thessalonians:
first it was the Apostles Gospel which was heartily received by them; and that
not as the word of men, but as the word of God: And this wrought effectually in
them, to turn them, and they did turn unto God from all their Idols, 1 These. 1.
3, 4-10. and 2. 13. and 3. 12, 13. and 4. 9, 10. And whatever zeal men may
have, or whatever reformation be wrought in them, or whatever profession they
make, or conversation they have: Yet if they hear, and embrace not Gods Words,
if they receive not the Faith of Christ as His Faith, they are not of God, Joh.
8. 47. 1 John 4. 6. Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the Doctrine of
Christ has not God, 2 John 9. On though men do in some sort believe the Word
of God and Testimony of Jesus; yet if this be not yielded up unto, and suffered
to work effectually in them, they do believe in vain, and they are vain men, 1
Cor. 15. 2. Jam. 1. 26, 27. and chapt. 2. 14-20, 22, etc.

Yea and by this Faith and Love, and the Fruits and Effects thereof, as being
held forth unto, and before others; even those who are of the World may know,
that those that walk in this Faith which works by Love, are Christ's Disciples
indeed, and so Gods Elect ones: they are Christ's Disciples known and read of
all Men, being by these two, manifestly declared so to be, even to such as hate
them, and therefore make war with them which keep the Commandments of God, and
have the testimony of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 3. 2, 3. with Rev. 12. 17. and 14.
12. By this shall all men know that ye are My Disciples, says our Savior, if
ye have Love one to another, Joh. 13. 34, 35. But we shall add no more to this
use.

3. In that the Elect and chosen ones of God are few, it shows unto us the
wonderfulness of Gods care concerning them, and protection over them, in
preserving such an handful amongst so many enemies: They are like a Lilly
amongst many Thorns, Cant. 2. 2. like a Turtle Dove amongst a multitude of
birds of prey, Psalm. 74. 19. And yet they are and shall be preserved, because
they have a strong redeemer, and a careful and faithful Shepherd, who will
keep them and preserve them from this generation that hates them, and that for
ever, Psalm. 12. 7. If it were not the Lord who were on their side, they may
always say: if it were not Jehovah who is on their side, when men rise up
against them; they had been often swallowed up quick, when men's wrath was
kindled against them, Psalm. 124. But God is for them, and who then can be
against them? Romans 8. 31-33, 34. The Lord is their Shepherd, and they shall
want no good thing: And their Salvation is of the Lord, He is their strength in
the time of trouble: And He shall help them and deliver them, He shall deliver
them from the wicked, and save them because they trust in Him, Psalm. 23. and
37, 39, 40. And hence also,

4. This instruction contains consolation and encouragement in it against cause
and occasion of fear and discouragement: That the Elect are few, causes fear
to them: hence they are encouraged and strengthened against their fear
occasioned by the smallness of their number. Fear not little flock, Luke 12.
32. fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye few men of Israel, Isa. 41. 14. But that
these few are chosen, chosen out of the World, choice ones in Gods account, and
loved with delightful, well pleased, everlasting love, this is proper and
powerful to strengthen them against the fear of evil; And to encourage them to
lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees. Hence such
encouragements and consolations are propounded to them as these: thou art My
servant. I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away: fear thou not, for I am
with thee, be not dismayed, for I am thy God, Isa. 41, 8, 9, 10-14. Hear now, O
Jacob My servant, and Israel whom I have chosen: Thus says the Lord that made
thee and formed thee from the Womb, which will help thee: fear not, O Jacob My
servant, and thou Jeshurun whom I have chosen: fear not, neither be afraid,
Isa. 43. 1-5. and 44. 1. 2-8. The smallness and littleness of their number
might occasion them to think God will take no notice of them: But the
consideration of what is here affirmed of this small company, that they are
chosen, chosen of God and precious in His esteem, is encouraging unto them: He
will take them, though but one of a City, and two of a Family, and will bring
them to Zion, Jer. 3. 14. Thou have a few names even in Sardis which have not
defiled their Garments: And they shall walk with me in White, for they are
worthy, says our Savior, Rev. 3. 4. And though He sift the Nations among whom
they are like as Corn is sifted in a sieve: Yet shall not one Corn, no not the
least Grain, fall to the Earth, Amos 9. 9, 10. And that they are chosen may
cause them to lift up their head against the evil and fear of their Enemies;
And assure them that God will avenge them in due time. Who shall lay any thing
to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifies, etc. -- Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? nay in all these
things we are more then Conquerours through Him that loved us, and whose Elect
we are, Romans 8. 33-37-39. And shall not God avenge His own Elect, which cry
unto Him day and night though He bear long with them? I tell you, says Christ,
He will avenge them speedily, Luke 18. 7, 8. Yea though they are few in number,
yet because they are chosen, they may be confident God will provide what is
good for them while they are here in this World: And hence our Savior says,
Fear not little, little flock, fear not Enemies, fear not Wants and
Necessities, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom; And
therefore assuredly He will give you meat, drink and cloths, and no good thing
will He withhold from you in seeking His Kingdom rather then any other thing,
Luke 12. 31, 32, 33. with Jam. 2. 5.

5. Seeing that few of the called are chosen, it may preserve us from being
deceived by mystery Babylon (and any other like her) who flatters and persuades
others, telling them that she is the holy Catholic Church: And that such as
join themselves unto, and abide in Communion with her, are the true Sons of the
Church, and in a good and happy condition: And living and dying therein shall
be happy for ever. Alas, how plainly does it appear that she is miserably
mistaken, and such as listen to her; By what our Savior here speaks, and
speaks Prophetically of the Gentiles also, amongst whom few are chosen. It may
be more readily and reasonably believed, That very few amongst them are called
by the Servants in the plain and faithful declaration of the Gospel of Christ,
(seeing they steal away the word of the Lord, in the Records of them from the
people, as also others do in their vain and foolish interpretations and
glosses) then that many, or most of them are chosen, and shall hereafter
inherit eternal life. And it is good for us rather to mind what the Holy Ghost
says unto us, then to listen to her lies, dreams and delusions, who says, If
any man Worship the Beast, and his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead,
or in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is
poured out without mixture into the cup of His indignation: And he shall be
tormented with Fire and Brimstone in the presence of the Holy Angels, and in
the presence of the Lamb; And the smoke of their Torment ascends up for ever
and ever, etc. Rev. 14. 8, 9, 10, 11. and chap. 18. 4, 5, 6.

6. That few of the called are chosen, may be useful also to preserve us from
such, and such like sayings as these, viz. [Every man is bound by the
commandment of God to believe that he is chosen in Christ to Salvation;
especially he that professes Faith in Christ: And when we say every man is
bound to believe this, we except none, no not the reprobates, who neither at
any time do, nor can believe in Christ; And if the reprobate believe it not, he
sins most grievously of all.] Oh how Evil and Dangerous are such
expressions! And what occasion do such persons give to others to believe them
in nothing they say? These persons, who thus speak, deny that Christ died for
all, and yet they tell us [every man is bound to believe that he is Elected in
Christ:] And how falsely do such speak, as will appear, if we briefly consider?
1. That which is to be believed in this saying is a manifest lie, as with
respect to the most of men even amongst the called ones also, as is showed; And
so such persons even say in such like expressions, That most men are bound to
believe a lie. 2. It is supposed in this saying, that every one is bound to
believe that he is Elected in Christ [by the command of God.] In which saying
they first signify, That the God of truth does command men to believe a lie:
Oh foolish charge! And then also they belie Him in saying, they are bound by
His Command so to believe; when as He never commanded them, nor came such a
thing into His mind. 3. In this former saying also is intimated; That if the
reprobate do not believe he is Elected in Christ, he sins most grievously of
all: And so it is signified, the most heinous iniquity in the reprobates (as
they call them) is, that they believe not a lie; And for this they shall be
damned hereafter: How contrary is this to what is spoken in the Scripture of
truth! 2 These. 2. 10-12. And how contrary is this and such like sayings to our
Saviors Doctrine here! So that IN hope this brief mention of one, will render
that and its fellows sufficiently abominable and loathsome to us.

7. And lastly, Seeing few of the called are chosen, let it provoke us all so
to obey the heavenly call by the Gospel, that we may come out from among men,
and be separate, and touch no unclean thing, that He may receive us, and may be
a Father unto us, and we may be Sons and Daughters unto Him, who is the Lord
Almighty, 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. Oh let us not receive the Grace of God in vain! But
let us incline our Ears unto His call, so as to come unto Him, let us hear that
our souls may live, and He may make an everlasting Covenant with us, even the
sure mercies of David, Isa. 55. 2, 3. And to move us hereto, let us consider
the last thing propounded to be shown; namely,

3. That it is the great and inexcusable iniquity of those Men who are called
by the Gospel, in the faithful ministration of it by the Servants, that they
are not chosen: And such an one as is highly provoking to the great King. Thus
it plainly appears here in the foregoing verses: first it appears to be an
inexcusable iniquity, in that when the King came in to see the guests, and saw
there a Man which had not on a wedding Garment, He says unto him, Friend, how
came thou in hither not having a Wedding Garment? And he was speechless. He
was so silent to, or silenced by this Question, that he had not one word to say
for himself. If there had been none for him, he might readily have made that
reply; But this he could not do, for all things were ready. Or if he had not
been acquainted with it, and called to it, this might have been a considerable
excuse: But such a Plea he could not make; for he was called, and was one of
the called ones into the house. Or if he could not have put it on, or it had
been so far out of his reach that he could not come at it; this would have
furnished him with an Answer near at hand. But he was convinced that his
iniquity was altogether an inexcusable iniquity; And therefore he was like a
dumb man that opens not his mouth. Again, it plainly appears, that this
iniquity is highly and eternally provoking to the great King, by the judgment
which such as are not chosen are therefore sentenced unto, and shall in due
time have executed upon them. Then said the King unto the Servants, bind him
hand and foot (who was tongue-tyed before) and cast him into outer darkness,
there shall be weeping and gnashing of the Teeth, ver. 11-13. But why must he
be thus dealt with, and proceeded against? It follows as the Reason: For many
are called, but few are chosen: He must therefore perish for ever, because he
would not come to Christ that he might be chosen: Him that comes He will in no
wise cast out; but it appears this man came not to Christ to this end, in
that he was cast out: And therein his sin was written on his punishment; he was
thus severely judged because he was not chosen, compare Job. 6. 37. Matthew. 22,
13.

But as it appears here to be a great provoking and inexcusable iniquity that
men are not chosen, so we shall a little further demonstrate the truth hereof,
and show how it appears to be such an heinous, cloakless, and provoking
iniquity: And in so doing, I shall take the course which our Savior and the
Apostle sometimes do, to wit, say over again what I have said before, Joh. 14.
28. Gal. 1. 8, 9. Phil. 3. 1. And so,

1. It does appear to be a great and inexcusable iniquity that men are not
chosen during the day of Gods grace and patience, if we do consider what is
proposed to, and set before men by Christ's faithful Servants in their calling
them, and to which they are called that they might be chosen: they are called
unto Jesus Christ, to the fellowship of Gods Son Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 9. And
so

1. They are called unto the abasement and sufferings of Jesus Christ, to the
Marriage of the Son of the great King, in which the Lord has created a new
thing in the Earth, a woman has compassed a Man, Jer. 31. 22. Gods own Son was
made of a woman, and made under the Law: God made all our sins and trespasses
to meet together on him, and executed upon him the judgment of the World. He
was tormented for our Transgressions, bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was upon Him. It pleased the Lord to bruise Him, He
put Him to Grief: He was oppressed and He was afflicted: And God brought Him
into the dust of death. And all that which He endured, as it was inflicted on
Him, or permitted and ordered unto Him by the Father, it was for our sins and
offenses. ^e suffered for sins once, the just for us unjust ones; He was
delivered for our offenses; His Soul was made an offering for our sins. And
hereunto are men called first of all, to the end they might be chosen out of
this present evil World, Joh. 3. 14. 1 Cor. 15. 1-3. Gal. 1. 4. and 3. 1. and
in this abasement and Cross of Christ is shown unto Men.

The vileness and odiousness of their sins, and the necessity of their being
Washed and Sanctified therefrom, to the end they might lay apart all filthiness
and superfluity of naughtiness, as it is thus reproved and discovered. In the
Flesh of Christ, and in what He has suffered therein, God has wonderfully
condemned and judged against sin, and showed His utter and irreconcilable
hatred thereto, and abhorrency thereof, Romans 8. 3. This was the day of
vengeance of our God, in which He took vengeance on our iniquities in the
Person of His own Son, who knew no sin, but was Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, etc.
Isa. 61. 1, 2. And though His own Son cried out, My God, My God, why have Thou
forsaken Me? Why art Thou so far from helping Me, and from the Words of My
Roaring? Yet His God was so Holy, one of such pure Eyes as that He could not
endure Iniquity, and therefore He spared Him not, but delivered Him up for our
Offenses, Psalm. 22. 1-3. with Romans 8. 32. and 4. 25. Herein He has manifested
the exceeding sinfulness of sin, that it might be abhorred and abstained from
by us; in that it could not possibly be purged away by the blood of Bulls and
Goats, nor by any Offerings and Sacrifices of the Law, Heb. 10. 1-4. But Christ
must come into the World to suffer for them; and all His Sufferings would not
avail, unless He dye for them: it was not one drop, nor twenty drops of His
Blood would make peace for us, but Christ must needs Suffer, and lay down His
Life for us, Acts 17. 3. It was otherwise impossible for our sins to be
satisfied for, and purged away, Matthew. 26. 39, 42. For without doubt, the
Father, who so infinitely loved His own Son, would not without an absolute
necessity have pleased thus to have dealt with Him. Herein brightly and most
clearly appears the odiousness of our sins unto God. And unto this Cross of
Christ are men called by the Gospel that they might look unto Him who was
Crucified for them, and be saved from their sins, Isa. 45. 22. with Gal. 3. 1.
And those that do thus come unto it, as called by the Gospel, are made willing
to hate and deny that which is so displeasing and abominable to God, and which
is rendered so to be in the Blood of Christ, which is therefore also called, the
Blood of Sprinkling, Heb. 9. 14. and 10. 22. and 12. 24. To this purpose the
Apostle Paul says, How shall we that are dead to sin (by the death of Christ)
live any longer therein? Know ye not that so many of us as were Baptized into
Christ, were Baptized into His Death? into His personal Abasement, Sufferings
and Death, whereto He was Abased, and which He suffered for our sins, 1 Pet. 3.
18. And how shall we then continue in sin! God forbid; let not such a thing be
ever done by us: The beholding sin in the Blood of Christ did fill them with an
abhorrency and detestation of their sins, Romans 6. 1-3. And by the precious
blood of Christ, the Apostle Peter signifies, the Believers to whom he wrote
were redeemed from their vain conversation, in which sometimes they walked,
when they walked in Lasciviousness, Lusts, Excess of Wine, Revellings,
Banquettings, and abominable Idolatries, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. with chapt. 4. 3.
Hereby they were called out of Darkness, out of themselves, who were sometimes
darkness, and out of their sinful and polluted condition and ways, into Gods
mavelous light, and so were made of the elect and chosen generation, 1 Pet.
2. 9. with Ephesians. 5. 8.

Yea and in the cross of Christ, the vanity and emptiness of our Idols is
discovered to us, and therefore it also evidenceth the great iniquity of those
men who prefer vain things before the Lord of Glory.

Herein is made known and shown unto us the vanity and unprofitableness of the
world, and the riches thereof, In that we were not redeemed with corruptible
things as Silver and Gold, but with the precious Blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 18,
19. They that trust in their Wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of
their riches: none of them can by any means redeem his B^other, nor give to God
a ransom for him, Psalm. 49. 6-8.

In the Cross of Christ is also discovered to us, the bruitishness of our
Wisdom and Knowledge; In that this Wisdom was not found in the land of the
living, how we might be redeemed and brought back to God, from whom we were
banished, Job 28. 12-21. 2 Samuel 14. 14. nay, not only so, but our judgment
stood cross and contrary to that blessed way and means which God has in His
Wisdom and Pity found out and devised, that His banished might not be expelled
from Him, Joh. 12. 31. and 16. 11.

And herein the Honor and Glory of this World is manifested to be vain, and
without ^vail, as to our acceptance with God; in that Christ refused it, and
was made as the filth of all things: His Visage was marred more then any man's,
and His form more then the Sons of men: He received not Glory from men, but He
was a reproach of men, and despised of the People, Joh. 6. 15. and 5. 41. Isa.
52. 14. and 53. 2, 3. Bsal. 22. 6, 7.

Herein is declared to us, That the friendship of this World is enmity with
God: In that our Lord Jesus was hated and villified by the World, disallowed,
rejected and refused by the men of it, as one that was judged altogether
unworthy, and unmeet to be loved and delighted in by them, Joh. 7. 7. and chap.
15. 18. and 17. 14. 1 Pet. 2. 4.

Herein we may see the unprofitableness of our own works of Righteousness, and
of all we can do or perform in any wisdom and strength of our own, to justify
us and render us acceptable in the sight of God, in that Christ must needs have
suffered: For if Righteousness could have come by the Law, then Christ died in
vain, Gal. 2. 21. The Holy Spirit in Glorifying Christ, and taking of His
things and showing unto us, does convince the World of Righteousness, and shows
unto us the vanity and unavaibleness of ours, in that He is gone to the Father,
and we see Him no more, Joh. 16. 10.

And such a discovery of the vanity of our Idols are we called unto in the
Sufferings of Christ, That no flesh might glory in the presence of God, 1 Cor.
1. 29-31. but that through His Cross the World, in the Riches, Wisdom, Honor,
Glory, Customs, Fashions, Friendship, Righteousness, etc. might be Crucified
unto us, and we to the World, Gal. 6. 14. That we might not love the World, nor
the things that are in the World, 1 John 2. 15. And indeed in the Cross of
Christ God has wonderfully stained the pride of all our gloryings, and brought
into contempt all the honorable things of the Earth and World, that we might
not set our hearts upon them, nor glory in our enjoyment of them, nor covet
after them, nor trust in them; seeing they were not crucified for us, nor
contributed any thing to our being delivered from that so great a Death, under
the sentence whereof we were fallen, nor to the procuring and obtaining eternal
Redemption for us, 1 Pet. 1. 23-25. with Isa. 40. 6-9. 1 Cor. 1. 13.

2. Yea, and unto Christ are men called by His faithful Servants in their
preaching to them the Gospel, as unto one in whom all things are ready and
prepared for them, Mat. 22. 4. Luke 14. 17. Even all things appertaining unto,
and in which consists the Kingdom of Heaven: and so unto such things as are
infinitely better then our Sins and Idols: unto those spiritual blessings in
Heavenly things, wherewith God has blessed us in the Person of His Son, Ephesians.
1. 3. unto Him are we called who is the desire of all Nations; In whom there is
that which may answer unto, and satisfy all their desires: And in whom is to
be found by way of eminency and excellency, that which they desire after, and
seek for, in wrong objects, and in such crooked Paths as in which they can find
no peace, Hag. 2. 7. To Him are men called, in whom there is fatness to delight
their Souls; a river of pleasures of which they may drink, and drink
abundantly; In whom are hid all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Psalm.
36. 7, 8. Col. 2. 3. In whom is everlasting Righteousness and Strength, Prove.
8. 18. Isa. 26. 4. with whom are Riches and Honor, Prove. 3. 16. yea Glory and
Honor that has Immortality joined with it, Romans 2. 7. In Him dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily, And in Him is all compleatness prepared for us,
Col. 2. 9, 10. Unto Him all things are delivered of the Father, even all that
the Father has is His, Luke 10. 22. Joh. 16. 14, 15. And so He is evidenced to
be more precious then Rubies, yea, that all the things men can desire are not
to be compared unto Him: In whose right hand is length of days, even Life for
evermore; And in whose left hand are Riches and Honor, Prove. 3. 13-16. And
therefore is the excellency of Him, and the preciousness and compleatness of
that provision in Him declared and made known to us, To buy us off from those
things which are sinful and unprofitable; And to make us willing to come unto
Christ, and for his sake to deny our selves, and take up our Cross and follow
Him, that we might be of the very Elect. He sets before us in the Gospel His
all things, that we might forsake our all things, all that we have, That Christ
might be the Portion of our Souls,, Luke 14. 17-26-33. He does hereby outbid
all other things, and renders them evil and unprofitable, that we might for
this treasure hid in a field, when discovered to us, and found by us, sell all
that we have, and buy that field, Mat. 13. 44. Hence He calls: hear, for I
will speak of excellent things, such things as far excel those things you are
apt to set your Hearts upon: and the opening of My Lips shall be right things.
-- Receive mine instruction, and not silver, and knowledge rather then choice
gold: for Wisdom is better then Rubies, and all the things that may be desired
are not to be compared unto it. -- Riches and Honor are with Me, yea durable
Riches and Righteousness, My fruit is better then Gold, yea then fine Gold, and
My Revenue then choice Silver, Prove. 8. 6-10-20, 21.

Now then, for Men to prefer their sins and vanities before Christ: To prefer
their sinful lusts and pleasures; or their Oxen, Farms, Merchandise, Wives,
Righteousness, or any other of their own things before Him, in whom God has
prepared such an excellent and incomparable feast; And in whom is such a true,
complete, and eternally blessed and glorious provision of eternal Life, and all
Spiritual and Eternal Blessings: And to do thus also after they have been
called unto the Sufferings of Christ, in which is given such a clear discovery
of the odiousness and abominableness of men's lusts and iniquities unto God; And
therefore also of the absolute necessity of their being washed and cleansed
from them, without which they must be everlastingly unhappy and miserable: And
in which Cross is also clearly manifested the vanity and worthlessness of all
those objects and things in which naturally they are seeking rest, contentment,
and happiness to their Souls. Yea, and to do so, after they have been called
unto Him, in whom are, and are discovered to them, infinitely better things
then any of those, for the sake whereof they pollute themselves, and by which
they are hindered from coming to Christ that they might have Life, and be the
Subjects of Gods Election; What can such desperate and unreasonable folly be,
but an highly provoking iniquity to the King, who loves His Son so
inconceivably dearly, and hates sin with an everlasting hatred? And what else
can this be in such unworthy refusers and slighters of such Grace, but an
inexcusable iniquity? What is this iniquity less then that found with the Jews,
who preferred a Murderer before the Lord of Glory? seeing such prefer such
things as will tend to their everlasting destruction before Him: yea in some
respects it is much greater: And yet how do many who cannot speak of their evil
without the greatest dislike and detestation, yet justify their act, in
overpassing the deeds of those evil ones, as Jerusalem is said to have
justified her Sister Samaria, Ezekiel. 16. 51, 52. Be astonished O ye Heavens at
this, says the Lord, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate: For My
People have committed two Evils, they have forsaken Me the Fountain of living
Waters, and hewed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns, that can hold no Water,
Jer. 2. 12, 13. and 17, 13. Such a blessed object are men called unto by the
Gospel; And such is the Nature of Men's iniquity who come not unto Christ, and
therefore are not chosen; because they prefer lies and vanity before their own
mercy. And thereby it appears, their sin is exceeding sinful, greatly
displeasing, and wholly inexcusable that they are not Elected; If we further
also take in and consider what follows.

2. That the called are not chosen, appears also to be a great iniquity, if we
consider the plainess and revealedness of the call, as compared with that which
was in former times vouchsafed. Christ by His Servants has now used great
plainess of speech; and not as Moses which put a vail over his face; to
signify the vailedness and darkness of that ministration in former times, 2
Cor. 3. 12, 13. The mystery that was hid from Ages and Generations is now made
manifest and revealed unto His Holy Apostles and Prophets by His Holy Spirit,
as formerly it was not made known unto the Sons of men, Col. 1. 25, 26. with
Ephesians. 3. 3-5. God having one Son, His well-beloved, He sent Him forth last of
all, and spoke unto us by His Son, whom He has appointed Heir of all things;
and reserved this Honor for His Son, that by Him in His Personal ministration,
and by the ministration of His Apostles, the true light should shine more
brightly and clearly then it did in former Ages: He has come a light into the
World, who is the Sun of Righteousness: And by Him the Gospel has been
preached according to the Revelation of the mystery, Romans 16. 25, 26. so as now
in the Gospel of Christ, as now revealed, Jesus Christ is evidently set forth
as one that has been crucified for us: His Sufferings, the greatness and
preciousness of them, are brightly pourtrayed before us, therein, Gal. 3. 1.
And we all with open face may behold in this glass (in this most clear medium)
the glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. And now the Grace of God which brings
Salvation to all men has appeared, and been brightly manifested, as in former
times it was not: It was witnessed in former times in the Law, and by the
Prophets: But in this was manifested the Love of God, because God sent His only
begotten Son into the World, that we might live through Him, Tit. 2. 11. 1 John
4. 9, 10. and answerably, sin is now rendered more odious then it was in former
times, especially the sin of the World upon a new account: The Holy Spirit,
says our Savior, shall convince the World of sin: of sin, because they
believe not on Me, Joh. 16. 8, 9. As also now the holy spirit is poured forth
upon all flesh, to wither it, and to stain the glory and goodliness of it, Acts
2. 17. 1 Pet. 1. 23-25. 1 Cor. 1. 17-20-29. Yea now there is a more plain
declaration and discovery of the Subjects of Christ's Redemption, and of the
love of God therein, then formerly was given forth, to wit, that it is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, That Christ Jesus came into the
World to save sinners, sinners indefinitely, without exception or exclusion of
any, 1 Timothy 1. 15. That Christ by the Grace of God tasted Death for every man:
And gave Himself a Ransom for all: And is the Savior of the World. Heb. 2. 9.
1 Timothy 2. 6, 7, Joh. 4. 42. and 12. 47. 1 John 4. 14. And on this ground Christ
by His Servants does beseech men, and persuade them not to entertain or retain
evil and hard thoughts of Him, but to come unto Him, as the Apostle Paul says,
He has committed unto us the ministry of Reconciliation, to wit, That God was
in Christ reconciling the World unto Him not imputing their Trespasses to them.
-- Therefore we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by
us, we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15,
18-20. and 6. 1. Now then, by how much the more the greater light and clearer
revelation is now vouchsafed to Men in the Gospel as now preached, and by which
Men are called unto Christ, by so much the more their iniquity is inexcusable,
and more highly displeasing unto God. Hence our Savior says, It shall be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment then it should be for
them that rejected Christ and His Gospel, as it began to be Preached in the
time of His Personal ministration, Mat. 10. 14, 15. and 11. 20-24. Yea it will
be more tolerable for Gods People in former times, who sinned under that dark
and dreadful ministration of the Law, as the Apostle signifies. Therefore
(because God has spoken to us in these last days by His Son) we ought to give
the more earnest heed to the things we have heard, lest at any time we should
let them slip: for if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every
transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward: How shall
we escape if we neglect so great Salvation, which at the first began to be
spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard Him, etc. Heb.
1. 1-3. and 2. 1-4. And again, He that despised Moses Law died without mercy
under two or three Witnesses: of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall
he be counted worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God? etc. Heb. 10.
28, 29. and 12. 15-25-29. This is the condemnation, that Light is come into the
World (as in former times it did not) and Men loved Darkness rather then Light,
etc. Joh. 3. 19. In the times of Men's ignorance God winked at them: but now
(when through the tender mercy of our God the day spring from on high has
visited us; to give Light to them that sit in Darkness, and in the shadow of
Death) He commands all Men every where to Repent: And they who will not so
do, that they may believe and come to Christ that they may be chosen, will be
more severely proceeded against, and dealt with in the day of Wrath; and
Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God; who will render to every one
according to their works, and according to the means vouchsafed: And so Wrath
will be rendered to the Jew, and so we may say to the Christian first; and also,
and after unto the Gentile, Acts 17. 30, 31. Romans 2. 4-8-12-16. Luke 12. 47, 48.

3. Their iniquity who are called by the Gospel, as now preached, and not
chosen, appears to be highly provoking, and altogether inexcusable, if we
further consider the powerfulness of the call in and by which they are called,
and by which they might be chosen also. Men are not only called with an outward
call, as we have before said; but lo He sends forth His Voice therein, and
that a mighty Voice: and speaks by His Spirit to the Spirits of Men, 1 Pet. 3.
18, 19. with Genesis 6. 3. And by this Voice of His He does awaken them, and cause
them to hear, to the end they might come unto Christ, that they might be made
of the Elect Generation. He now speaks unto the dead Souls of Men, and His
Voice is to the hearts of them, whose Voice all that are in the Graves shall
hear, and shall come forth. It is the same Almighty Voice that is now sent
forth for converting the Soul, as will be to raise the dead out of their Graves
hereafter, but not put forth in such a manner, I mean, not irresistibly: nay
indeed as to the effecting the former it is called, the Voice of the Son of
God; As to the effecting the latter, it is said to be, the Voice of the Son of
Man, Joh. 5. 25, 27, 28. And indeed the powerfulness of the voice of Christ, in
its preventing operation in the Gospel, appears to be propounded by our
Savior, to remove such a jealousy as might arise in Men's Hearts to their own,
or others discouragement, as with respect to their utter importency and
helplesness in themselves. Hence when our Savior had directed to the way and
means how Men might now have their states altered, and be made of the chosen
Generation, who were not so formerly, in saying, Verily, Verily, I say unto
you, He (whoever He be) that hears My word, and believes on Him that sent
Me, has everlasting Life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed
out of Death into Life: lest any one should discouragingly say; Alas, herein is
signified to us, that Men are naturally dead, and destitute of all Spiritual
Life, and how then should they hear; To this our Savior adds; Verily,
Verily, I say unto you the hour is coming, and now i^, when the Dead shall hear
the Voice of the Son of God, and they that hear (as they are thus prevented)
shall live. In which saying, though He still signifies, and gives us to
understand, that Men are in and of themselves Dead, and so have no free will or
inclination to any thing that is spiritually good, yet He both intimates that
the Voice of the Son of God accompanies His Word; And also, that it does so
not only in His Personal, but also, and rather more powerfully, in His
Spiritual Ministration to the end of the world, to enable dead ones to hear,
that they might hear and live, Joh. 5. 24, 25. and 7. 37-39. When persons are
asleep, and dead in sins and trespasses, He then in and by His call in His
Gospel, by the Ministry of His Servants, awakens them, and rouzes them out of
that sad condition; Wherefore He says, Awake thou that sleep, and arise
from the Dead, and Christ shall give thee Light, Ephesians. 5. 13, 14. It is indeed
certainly true, That all Men are naturally helpless in themselves, and can
neither will nor do any thing of themselves, as of themselves that is
spiritually good: But it is also as true, That the Grace of God does bring
Salvation to them in due time: And Christ lights every Man that comes into
the World: He opens the Eyes of the Blind in due time, and unstoppeth their
Ears in and by His Spirit in His Gospel, and is turning Men from Darkness to
Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God; And then in the power and capacity
given unto them by Him, they might hear and see and be converted: And it is
Men's rebellious iniquity that it is not thus with them, Tit. 2. 11. Joh. 1. 9.
and 5. 25. Acts 26. 18. Ezekiel. 12. 2, 3. It is verily true, That no Man can come
to Christ, except the Father who has sent Christ draw Him, Joh. 6. 44. But it
is also as true, That God in and by Christ, in due time, does draw them that
come not; He draws all Men to Himself, Joh. 12. 31, 32. He draws them who
refuse to come with cords of a Man, and bands of Love: And because He knows
what a Yoke is upon them, without the removal whereof they would be hindered,
therefore He takes off the Yoke on their Jaws, etc. Hos. 11. 3, 4, 5. And since
Christ has finished the work which the Father gave Him to do in His own
personal body on the Earth; since He laid down His Life, and is raised again;
He has now gloriously, and most immeasurably received the promise of the
Spirit in the Nature of Man: And has more abundantly poured it forth on His
Servants in their faithful declaring the Gospel then in former times: so that
the Gospel is called, the Ministration of Spirit and Life, yea, and the Spirit
also, 2 Cor. 3. 6-8. Phil. 2. 16. So that it is only Men's own wilful and
stubborn refusal and rejection of the power of Christ in the call, which
hinders their coming unto, and being chosen by Christ: they close their Eyes
(when opened) and stop their Ears, lest they should see with their Eyes, and
hear with their Ears, and understand with their Heart, and should be converted,
and He should heal them, Mat. 13. 15. And this also shows unto us how
provoking and excuseless an iniquity it is, that the called are not chosen.

4. And lastly, This also further appears so to be, if we consider the good
will and gracious intention of the Caller, in calli^g Men by His Gospel; whose
love and gracious heart toward sinners is most clearly manifested, and
perpetually commended to us in the Cross and Sufferings of Christ, Romans 5. 6-8.
Joh. 3. 16, 17. Heb. 2. 9. He therefore calls and stretches forth His hand,
that they might come to the Feast He has prepared for them. He does not
therefore call, that He might leave Men without excuse; though they will be so,
they will be Speechless who are disobedient to the Gospel: nor is His end in
calling them, to aggravate their condemnation; though their condemnation will
be aggravated, who when they are thus called unto the most High, will not at
all Exalt Him, Hos. 11. 2-4-7. But He therefore declares His Gospel to them,
and therewith councelleth them to come unto Himself, that they might listen
unto and obey Him, that it might go well with them for ever. Thus our Savior
graciously acquainteth the Jews, who sought to kill Him, with His gracious end
in Speaking and Preaching the Gospel unto them: These things I say that ye
might be saved, Joh. 5. 16-34. And by His Apostles the Gospel was Preached
according to the Revelation of the Mystery; and according to the Commandment
of the Everlasting God made known to all Nations for the Obedience of Faith,
Romans 16. 25, 26. He (i^deed) that hates dissembleth with his Lips, and lays
up deceit within Him: When he speaks fair, or makes his voice gracious,
believe him not, for there are seven abominations in his heart, Prove. 26.
24-26. But far be it from us thus to think of the Almighty, who is a God of
Truth and without iniquity, just and right is He, Deuteronomy. 32. 2-4. He is not like
him that faith, Eat and Drink, but his heart is not with thee, Prove. 23. 6, 7.
He says not, come eat of My Bread, and drink of the Wine I have mingled, when
either He has prepared none for thee, or has no cordial desire and intention
thou should partake thereof: but His gracious will is, that thou should
be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth, Prove. ^. 1-5. with 1 Timothy 2.
4-6. And therefore He thus expostulates, Wherefore when I came was there no
Man? when I called was there none to answer? But how appears it that they did
not answer His call? This is declared to us in another Scripture; They did Evil
before Mine Eyes, and chose that in which I delighted not. In which is plainly
signified to us, that His end in coming and calling was, that they might have
done what was good in His Eyes, and chosen that in which He delighted, that so
they might have been of His chosen ones indeed. Compare and consider Isa. 50.
2. with chapt. 66. 3, 4. and chapt. 65. 12-15.

By all which it evidently appears, that it is their great iniquity who are
called by the Servants in their preaching the Gospel of Christ, that they
answer not His call who accompanies them, and so are not chosen: This is that
iniquity which is so greatly provoking unto the great King, that He thus
threatens to deal with such as are guilty of it: Therefore will I number you
to the Sword, and ye shall all bow down to the slaughter, because when I called
ye did not answer: when I spoke ye did not hear, but did evil before Mine Eyes,
and did choose that wherein I delighted not. Therefore behold My Servants (My
chosen ones who did answer My call) shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: Behold
My Servant^ shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty: Behold My Servants shall
rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed: Behold My Servants shall sing for joy of
heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and ye shall howl for vexation of
spirit. And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto My chosen, etc. Isa. 65.
12-15. with Prove. 1. 24-32. and Mat. 22. 13, 14.

And it appears to be an inexcusable iniquity, that those who are so called are
not chosen: There will be no Cloak for their sin. They cannot plead that Christ
never dyed for them, or that saving Grace was not afforded to them; for both
these are false, as we have said and shown: But they will be convinced in the
day of the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God, that their Destruction
and Non-election was wholly of themselves: And therefore they will be found
speechless, as the Man was who had not on the Wedding Garment.

Let the consideration then of all said, move and prevail with us all so to
receive the Electing Grace of God, that we may be of the number according to
the Election of Grace. And let us not listen to such desperate sayings as these
[If I be Elected no sins can bereave me of Heaven; if I be Reprobated no good
deeds can help me to Heaven.] But be we well assured, that the Scripture
speaks of none as the Subjects of Gods Election to Salvation, while they
continue in their natural condition and filthiness: nor of any Reprobated
before they were born, or Christ Preached by His Spirit to their Spirits: But
all Men, while it is the day of Gods Grace and Patience toward them, may,
through His Grace which brings Salvation to them, come to Christ, the prime
Elect one, and root of Election, and so be reckoned after Him. God has given
His Son to be the sign of His Gracious heart toward all sinners; And to that
End has given Him by His Grace to taste Death for every Man, and has raised
Him again from the Dead for their Justification; And has given them Eternal
Life, and this Life is in His Son: And sent Him in the Gospel to open their
Eyes, and to bring forth the Prisoners out of the Prison, and them that sit in
darkness out of the Prisonhouse; that in obeying Him they might be called out
of Darkness into His mavelous Light, and therein be of the chosen Generation,
Isa. 42. 1-7. with 1 Pet. 2. 9. Oh let none of us reject His Grace, nor receive
it in vain: But let us, who are hearers of the word of truth, so look into the
perfect law of Liberty, and continue therein, that we may not be forgetful
hearers, but doers of the work, that we may be blessed in our deed, both now,
and unto the day of Eternity. Oh! that we may not deceive our own Souls, in
making a trade of hearing, and yet secretly prefer our Lusts and Idols before
Him unto whom God has given the preeminence in all things: If we should thus
do, what shall we say when God rises up? And when He shall judge the World in
Righteousness, what shall we answer Him? Others may say for themselves, (though
unprofitably and wickedly) we knew thou art an hard and austere Master, Reaping
where Thou have not Sown, and Gathering where Thou have not Strawn. They may
say our Teachers persuaded us that Christ died not for all, and we knew not
whither He died for us: nor was there any true and saving Grace vouchsafed to
us, if it had, we should have done better. But thus, according to that judgment
you profess to believe, you cannot plead. You have heard and been called by the
Gospel of Christ, the doctrine according to Godliness: And if you be not also
chosen, you know it is only your own iniquity; And therefore you know there
remains nothing but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery
Indignation, which shall devour all them that obey not the Gospel. Your Mouths
have been already, and often stopped by the Gospel, so as you cannot but confess
that God is not willing with your Perdition; And if you Perish, your
Destruction will be altogether of your selves. Oh then! laying apart all
Filthiness and superfluity of Naughtiness, receive with Meekness the ingraffed
word, which is able to save your Souls. Oh that when it is too late, you may
not take up that complaint; How have we hated Instruction, and our heart
despised Reproof! And we have not obeyed the voice of our Teachers, nor
inclined our Ears to them that instructed us. If it should be so with any of
us, this will gnaw upon us to all Eternity, that when we were assured from Gods
Testimony of Gods good will toward us, and that Christ wrought Redemption for
us, and through the discovery thereof was powerfully Redeeming and Choosing us
from the Earth, and from amongst Men, yet willingly and wilfully we, by
observing lying vanities, did forsake our own mercy, Jonah 2. 8. That we for
love to our sins and vanities, the sinfulness and vanity whereof we saw in the
Cross of Christ, and when infinitely better things were proposed to us, should
yet in our hearts love Darkness, and the Devil, rather then Light and Christ.
How can our heart endure the remembrance hereof! Or how can our hands be strong
when He shall plead with us! Oh consider this ye that forget God, and spend
your money for that which is not Bread! And so consider the terror of the
Lord, as evidenced in the Cross of Christ, that the time past of your life may
suffice you to have wrought the will of the Gentiles: And that now you incline
your ear, and come unto Him who calls you by His Servants, that you may hear,
that your Souls may live, and He may make an everlasting covenant with you,
even the sure mercies of David. Oh! be not like to them, unto and concerning
whom the Lord says: stand ye in the ways and see, and ask for the old Paths,
where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your Souls:
but they said we will not walk therein. Also I set Watchmen over you saying,
hearken to the sound of the Trumpet, but they said we will not hearken. For be
we well assured, if such iniquity be found with us, and persisted in by us,
that we will not come to Christ, who is the rest; nor hearken unto, and obey
the Trumpet of His Gospel; if we will not be chosen, after all means used, and
patience exercised, He will at last say of us as He did of them: The Bellows
are burnt, the Lead is consumed of the fire, the Founder melts in vain, for
the wicked are not plucked away. Reprobate silver shall men call them, because
the Lord has rejected them, Jer. 6. 16, 17-29, 30. Consider what is said, and
the Lord give us understanding in all things.

The END.
Books Printed for* and Sold by Benjamin Southwood, at the Star next to
Serjants-Inn in Chancery Lane.
THE Brazen Serpent, or Gods grand design for Man's Salvation; a practical
discourse according to the Primitive Doctrine, in 4o. by John Horn of Linn
Regis. Needful Council for Lukewarm Christians, being a consideration of some
part of the Message sent to the Angel of the Church of Laodicea; a seasonable
discourse according to the Primitive Doctrine, in 4o. by Charles Phelpes of
Lynn Regis. The wonderful Councellor, his Council and Charge to his Disciples
to have Salt in themselves, that by the powerful and seasoning Efficacy
thereof, they might have Love, Peace and Unity one with another; a blessed
searching Discourse according to the Primitive Doctrine: whereunto is annexed
some considerations on Rev. 22. 14. To do His Commandments, in 8o. by Thomas
Moor, Sen. Englands Improvement Revived, a Treatise of Husbandry by Land and
Sea, The Planting of Trees, Orchards and Gardens, with the several ways of
improving all sorts of barren and wast Grounds, and enriching all Earths; with
two Chains to plant Seeds or Setts by, and Hops. The nature and virtue of
Trees, Plants, and Herbs, and their phisical directions. Also the ordering of
Cattle, and observations about Sheep, with many remarks never before extant, in
4o. experienced in thirty years practice, by John Smith, Gent. The reward of
the Wise, and the fruitful Christians future Blessedness, being a Funeral
discourse at the burial of Mr. Thomas Moor Sen. in 8o. by John Horn of Lynn
Regis. The object of Love, wherein it is manifested, and wherein it is to be
perceived by us at all times, to the end we may love one another, in 8o. by
Charles Phelpes of Lynn Regis. Instructions for Children into the chief Grounds
of Christian Religion, with the great mysteries of Redemption, Faith, Works,
Law, Gospel, yea, and of Predestination, Election, Reprobation, being opened,
therein agreeable to Scripture, and most conducing to the promoting of
Godliness, by John Horn of Lynn Regis: the second Edition somewhat abbreviated.
A comfortable Corroborative Cordial against the fears and harms of Death,
affording directions how to live and dye. Run from Rome and beware of Babylon,
or brief notes upon the Beast, his Image, Worship and Mark, in 8o. by John Horn
of Lynn Regis.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3, l. 7, r. outer. p. 5. l. 13. r. made under. p. 11 l. 21. r. their. P.
19. 16. r. all, p. 24. l. 13. r. Apostle. P. 34. l. 30. r. is so. p. 39. 8. r.
amongst the. p. 50. l. 25. r. own. p. 55. l. 14. r. as are. p. 59. l. 28. r.
unavoidable. p. 81. l. 3. r. cannot. p. 84. l. 27. r. is it. p. 86. l. 15. r. 1
These. p. 89. l. 20. r. Son. l. 24. r. Que. 4. p. 90. l. 13. r. Elect. p. 106.
l. 6. r. enemy, for the r. and. l. 14. pitched. p. 107. l. 21 dele striving for
the Faith. ps 108. l. 11. r. Subjectr. l. 19. r. intended. l. 19 r. is. p. 109.
l. 3. r. in his. p. 112. l. 3. r. in. p. 114. l. 24. r. ing. l. 25. r. however.
p. 116. l. 2. r. as are. p. 118 l. 21. r. them. p. 121. l. 24. r. subjects, p
124. l. 23. r. despair. p. 126. l. 7. r. them into his. p. 139. l. 20 r. that.
p. 140. l. 9. r. Parables. l. 19. r. hearers of the word. p. 144. l. ii. r.
immediately p. 151. l. 4. r. Answer. p. 154 l. 8. r. strait gate, p. 158. l. 3.
r. Or no P. 160 l. 8. r. men's p. 163. i. r. into, p. 181. l. 3. r. abait p.
182, l. i. r. unavailableness. p. 189, l. 29. r. himself,


