A Phylosophical ESSAY, Treating Of The most Probable Cause of that Grand
Mystery of Nature, THE Flux and Reflux: OR, Flowing and Ebbing of the SEA.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. for L. Passinger, at the Three Bibles on the Middle
of London Bridge, 1673.

To the Learned and Judicious, Sir JOHN MARSHAM, OF Whoornes-Place in Kent,
Knight and Baronet, one of the Six Clerks of His Majesty's High Court of
Chancery.
SIR,
WHen the Sun opens the Curtains of the East, and Guilds and Enamels the
Fringes of the Firmament, with his early Beams, the lesser Lights resign
themselves up to his, and Muffle themselves up in their own Obscurity, as being
vanquished with an excess of Splendour; so the meaner and pettier Censures shall
look faint and dim, if You, that are the great Luminary in the Orb of Learning,
shall shed a propitious Beam and Influence upon this Crude Essay, which will
not only rescue it from the Virulency of Detraction, but so foment and improve
it, that it will Bourgeon and Flourish under your Protection; So that though it
owe its Birth to my Pen, it will Entitle its Verdure and Perfection to your
Candid Acceptance of it; Now it is offered up to Yours, from the hands of him,
who is,

SIR, Your most Affectionate Servant, Thomas Philipot.

A Brief DISCOURSE OF THE Most Probable Cause of that Grand Mystery of Nature,
The Flux and Reflux of the SEA.
THere is a huge Variety of Opinions, that Entitle themselves to have unwound
the cause of this Grand Mystery of Nature, The Flux and Reflux of the Sea; But
they are erected upon untenable Principles, and so entwined and Complicated,
that I may say of them, as Florus did of the Mountainous Inhabitants of the
Alps, Pluris erat Invenire quam Vincere; It is a greater Difficulty to trace
out, and unravell them, than to Subvert, or Dismantle them.

The First Opinion, Is,
OF Leonardus Lessius, who affirms, That the Motion of Reciprocation or
Replication, commonly styled, The Flux and Reflux of the Sea, Entitles its
Primitive and Original Causality, to the Supernatural Guidance and Managery of
an Angel; But if the strength of Man be seen in his Reason, and the strength of
Reason evidenced in his Judgment, and the strength of Judgment manifested in
his Knowledge, all these Three by this frail Opinion must be destroyed; for, who
will ever Attempt by a noble winnowing and Industrious Pursuit and Inquest
after the more eminent, but Cloudy and Abstruse Causes of Nature, to unlock the
Mysteries of them, which are laid up in her Gloomy Cabinet, when he can affirm,
that their Operation owes its Original Emanation, or Efflux, to the
Supernatural Conduct of an Angel, and this at last will become the Common
Sanctuary to Shelter a Universal Ignorance? Indeed, I do not Deny, but the Hand
of Gods special Providence is sometimes stretched out and extended to support
Nature when she is feeble and faint in her Operations, or else to Knit and
Twist Extraordinary Causes with Extraordinary Effects, when she is not able to
perfect and perform this union, and then only when she is Defective either in
her Strength or in her Light; But to do it always, and Assert that these
Extraordinary Efforts of Gods, special Providence^ are visibly manifested at
all Times, and in all seasons, is to Ravel and Discompose the Chain of Second
Causes, whose Operations are still Interwoven with the Concourse and
Concomitance of the First. But the Irregularity of this Opinion will further
appear by this Question, Why have not the Baltic, Euxine, and Caspian, Seas
this Flux and Reflux of waters, by this Angelical Motion; since they are as
Capable of it, as other parts of the Ocean abroad, that daily Receive it?
Besides, it is Absurd to imagine that Seas divided by such vast Intervals,
should at one and the same Instant swell into Tides, and fall into Ebbings, by
the Transport and Managery of one single Angel, and yet these waters being
equally moved, should produce such different Fluxes and Refluxes. And now I
hope by this time Wise Men will laugh at this Opinion, not in Applause, but
Contempt, of the Vanity of it.

The Second Opinion, Is,
THat of our Country man Lidiat who avers, that the Rlux and Reflux of the Sea,
owes its Primitive Efficiency to Subterraneous Fires, Fed and Fomented by a
stock either of Sulphurous or else of Bituminous Matter; But this Position of
his meets with so many Ruinous and Destructive Difficulties, that it is almost
impossible to Reconcile it to Truth; for it is by all Agreed, That the Flux and
Reflux of the Sea, is Periodical in its Revolution, and so determined, fixed
and certain: But if this Opinion of his should be Assented to, where there is
not this Collection of Sulphurous and Bituminous Matter (as on the Coast of
Norway, and other places) there would be no Tides at all. Besides, where this
Stock of Combustible Matter is wholly wasted and empair'd, The Flux and Reflux
of the Sea, must wholly cease: But then 2 dly. Why should not the Dead-Sea in
Palestine, or the Lake AsPhaltites, that has such an eminent congestion of
Bitumen transfused through the Bowels of it, be Capable of Prodigious Tides?
but this we know is Contradicted by all Experience. 3 dly. Why should not the
Baltic Sea that is replenished with many Bituminous particles (as appears from
the Generation of Amber, which most do Conclude to be a Coagulum or Concretion
of Salt, Sulphur and Bitumen, and which is frequently found upon the Coast of
Liesland, Curland, and Prussia) have these Tides and Ebbings which every one
knows to be contrary to all Observation? 4 thly. Why do not the Tides upon the
Coasts of Sicily and Naples, Swell to a very Important Height, since both their
Circumambient Shores, abound with such a Copious Quantity of Sulphur? But this
we know is evidently false, the Sea not Swelling upon those Coasts to a
Diameter of above three or four Foot when it is at the Highest. But last of
all, if you ask Lidiat, what Superior cause Produces these Subterraneous Fires,
he will tell you, that is the Reflection of the Beams of the Sun upon the Unequal
Superficies of the Sea? To this I Answer, That by the Consent of many eminent
Philosophers, the Rays of the Sun never operate by penetration upon that watery
Body above Fifteen Cubits, and so Impossible, where the Sea is of any
considerable Depth, to produce these Subterraneous Fires. And thus, I think, I
have Sufficiently disarmed his Opinion.

The Third Opinion Is,
THat The Flux and Reflux of the Sea, is caused by some prodigious Eddies and
Whirlepools, that suck and transport the Sea from the North to the South; and
from the South to the North; That there is such a vast whirlpool upon the coast
of Norway, is most certain, which is by Mariners Styled, The Navel of the Sea:
But, that there is such an one in the Southern Hemisphere to refund back the
Sea by a motion of replication, no Observations either of Ramusius, Linschoten,
or the more curious De-Leat have ever discovered to us, whose Searches and
Inquisitions into the Mysteries of the East-Indian and West-Indian Seas, were
never yet cavil'd or quarreled at: Besides, if there were any such in those
parts, upon the reciprocal return of the Southern waters toward the North,
that multitude of angry Circles, which discompose, by reason of that Voluminous
Whirlpoole, the face of the Norwegian Sea, would every 24 hours disband, and be
smooth, as the aspect of peace, and even as the margent of a Poole, when it is
not disordered into wrinkles by the rough breath of a ruder Tempest. But this
is Contradictory to the daily Observation of the Inhabitants that confined upon
the Fringes of this stupendous Whirlepoole.

Thus, I think likewise, this opinion, that is Supported by such feeble
Crutches, is at last overturned.

The Fourth Opinion.
BUt as some have found out a Navel, so Kepler has found out the Lungs of the
Sea: for he asseveres the Terrestrial Globe to be but one great Animal, and
that the Flux and Reflux of the Sea does proceed from the Sistole and Diastole,
or the Contraction and Expansion of dits Spacious Lungs: But then I ask; First,
Whether does this Motion Result, either from Air, or some Spirit? or Secondly,
Does it Issue either from a Sensitive or Rational Soul? And Thirdly, I enquire
upon what Coast these prodigious Lungs are Situated? And until the Abettors of
this wild Opinion (if there be any such) do give some Satisfactory Answers to
these Queries, this Opinion is Demolished by a bare Negation of it.

The Fifth Opinion, Is,
OF Picus Mirandula, that this Increase and Decrease of waters, is caused per
Mutuas and Benevolas Aquarnmd Allicientias; that is, by a motion of Aggregation
or Simpathetical Connection, by which water does vigorously endeavor to unite
and Conbince with water. But if this were granted, Streams would seek to
entwine with Streams and Lakes twist with Lakes, till at last, long before this
the world must have Suffered under the angry Baptism of a public Deluge.
Secondly; where there is this Motion of Aggregation or Connection, the Tides
would swell to an Important Height, as in the Caspian, Euxine and Baltic Seas,
where all Geographers that have displayed to us the Topography of those places,
have discovered to us that a multitude of huge Rivers do daily disembogue
themselves: And on the other side, those Seas that do not swell with the
Additional Supplies of very few or no Rivers, as the Norwegian Ocean, and
others, would have very little or no Tides at all; Both which are evidently
false, and repugnant to daily Observation: Therefore this Opinion of His,
established upon such frail principles, does easily shrink and languish into
its own Ruin.

The Sixth Opinion
DOes aver, that the Sea does entitle the Causality of its Flux and Reflux to
some Currents that either set from East to West, or from North to South: But if
this were assented to, the Red Sea, the Euxin-Sea and the Baltick-Sea, would
improve themselves to a huge Increase of Tides, considering all three are fed
by a Communication of perpetual Currents: but this is manifestly false, for the
Red Sea and Euxine have little or no Tides, and the Baltick-Sea none at all;
Therefore I wave this Opinion as altogether Erroneous.

The Seventh Opinion
ENtitles the Motion of the Earth, to be the Cause of the Motion of the Sea;
Those who abet this Opinion, affirm Three things.

First, That the Earth and Sea have but one Center to render the whole Globe
more regularly and Uniformly Orbicular, and so more apt for that Motion they
are designed to receive.

Secondly, They assert, that every part and particle of this Spherical body is
so tied and threaded together by a magneticall union, that it is Impossible
that the least Atome should start out of its natural situation, being fastened
and fettered to its station by so inexpugnable a Magnetism.

Thirdly, that its motion is circular; now the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, is
motus Transversus, or a motion of reciprocation and rejection, like water that
is justled and thrown from side to side in a Paile or Bowl: now, if it should
move circularly, every part would move so evenly and Magnetically, that there
would be no Flux or Reflux of the Sea at all. Secondly, since the Euxine,
Baltic and Caspian Seas are such Considerable parts of this Globous body, they
must move equally with it if it move at all; and then why have they not the
same Flux and Reflux as other Seas have, since they have the same Aptitude, or
natural intrinsique Capacity, to receive this Motion as other Seas have? But
that they have not Flux or Reflux at all is Demonstratively true. But whether
this Opinion be so or no I refer to the Scrutiny of the Judicious Reader:
Indeed, I could wish that those who defend the Motion of the Earth, would
produce more vigorous Arguments to fortify and secure their Thesis, merely to
Subvert the Popes Infallibility; one of whom, not many years since, by a Signal
Determination and Definition ex Cathedra, blasted it for Impious, and
Heretical, and Condemned the obstinate Assertors of it, to his truest
Purgatory, the Inquisition.

The Eight Opinion, Is,
THat the Sun is the Sole, Primary and Efficient cause of this Flux and Reflux;
that the Sun is a partial, Concurrent or Concomitant cause, I Affirm; But
that it is the sole and principal, I deny, and that upon these Foundations;
for, if it should be, the tides in the vast Wilderness of the Northern Seas,
would upon the Apogaeum, or Recesse of the Sun, shrink and Contract themselves,
for want of his Vigorous Excitation to a Considerable Decrease; and again, upon
his Perigaeum, or nearest Approach, swell to an Important Magnitude; Both which
are evidently false, for it is Generally observed, that about the Autumnall
Aequinox, and sometimes after, the Tides in those Seas abovesaid, are Improved
and Increast to an Extraordinary Height; and on the Contrary, about the Summer
Solstice, they suffer a sensible and visible Diminution and Decrease, rather
than any Augmentation: both which were absurd to Imagine, if the Sun was the
Sole Efficient cause.

Secondly, why should not the Caspian, Euxine, and Baltic Seas, be Capable of
this Motion, since they are also exposed to the Impressions of the Sun either
perpendicular, or by Vibration, when he is in or near his ^^irgaeum; But this
they have not, is Evident; and therefore the Sun is not the Prime, Sole and
Efficient cause of the Flux and Reflux of the Sea.

The Nineth Opinion, Is,
THat the Moon is the principal cause of this Marine Motion, that it is a
Subservient, Concurrent and Concomitant cause I shall Grant, but that it is the
sole Efficient I shall never affirm, for if it were it would universally and
equally move all Seas, especially when they are under its Perigaeum, and then
the Baltic, Euxine and Caspian Seas would be Capable of this Flux and Reflux
likewise, But that they are not is apparently Evident; I know it is objected
that the Moon has a principal efficiency in the Flowings of the Sea, because
it is observed, that when she is in her Sextile and in her full, Shellfish do
swell and Increase to an unusual Bull^ and Corpulency: But to this I answer,
that this is produced not by any direct Causality of the Moon, but only by
accident; for those great Tides, which Intervene at those Times transport with
them a large Quantity of Mud and Sullage, which treasure up a fat slimie
unctuous juice which shellfish greedily sucking in, by the supply of so
luscious an Aliment, enlarge themselves to that Dimension they arrive at at
those seasons.

The Tenth Opinion.
WHich I adhere to is, that there is a Vitriolated, Volatile or Armoniack Salt
or Spirit, that is wrapped up in the Bowels of the Sea and lies there clasped up
and Imprisoned in the Embraces of the fixed and Nitrous Sa^^, which upon its
Excitation, by the Agitation of the Superficies of the Sea, and the opening of
it by the combined and complicated Impressions of the Sun and Moon, dislodges
from its Enclosure, and ^^^ors itself up to the watery Margent, and drags along
with it, that Heap of waters we style the Flux, (though I do not Deny but that
it is something aided and assisted in this Operation by an Elater or Spring of
Air, that being rescued from its Compression and confinement, ascends up with
it,) and upon closing and Contracting its Face upon the Recess of those two
great Luminaries, shrinks back again, and with it pulls along, that mass of
waters it before had elevated, and this produces the Reflux. And this Opinion
is Supported by three Experiments: The First is that of Zuingerus a modern
Chemist cited by Fremondus in his Book of Meteors, who observed that some sort
of Chymicall oil of vitriol did ascend and descend in Times proportionate and
adaequate to the Flux and Reflux of the Sea. The Second is that of Athanasius
Kircherus in his Mundus Subterraneus, who there discovers to us, that an
Infusion of Sal Armonick lodged in an open Vessel and placed obliquely to
receive the Influence of the Moon, when she was in her Sextile, did Increase
and Decrease as if it held an equal Correspondence, by an uninterrupted Chain
of Atoms, with the Flowings and Ebbings of the Marine waters. The Third is that
of Gre atricks, Glasses, upon whose sides if you beat with Important onsets,
they resist their Impression, but break it at the Top, and it flies in pieces
with much violence and tumult; And the Reason is, because the Armoniack or
volatile Salt, that lay impriso^d, and cloistered up, in the claspings, and
Circumscription of the Nitrous or fixed Salt, finding it self, enfranchised and
redeemed from the strict Enclosures of those two rigid Adversaries, sallies
out, with an impetuous Eagerness, and that Eruption occasions that disorder and
concussion.

But I know it will be objected, why have not the Euxine, Baltic and Caspian
Seas their Flux and Reflux likewise, since it is probable their waters imprison
as great a stock of vitriolated, volatile, or Armonick Salt as other Seas are
entrusted with that have the same Vicissitudes; To this I answer that it is as
probable they have not; But suppose they had, yet its volatile Spirit is
checked and depres'd by that multitude of vast and deep Rivers, that
perpetually disgorge themselves into those Seas above said; And it is likewise
possible, that there is a Considerable Quantity of Sulphur, Bitumen, fixed and
Nitrous Salt, conducted along with there Currents, whose fixing Quality may
improve the Depression of the Vitriolated and Armoniack particles, and so benum
their Volatility that it is almost impossible for the united Influences of the
Sun and Moon, to excite their so stupefied Vigor. But if it be inquired how it
happens, since so many capacious streams disembogue themselves into those Seas,
that the neighboring Territories, do not suffer under a constant Inundation?
I answer, that the water that is treasured up in the Cells and Caverns of the
Earth, which it is probable here are more than ordinary copious, entice and
allure back the Marine waters, Per Motum Nexus by a Motion of Adherence,
Aggregation, union and Connection, and so by a continual Circulation, reimburse,
and new Stock the Rivers, with Additional streams which are daily paid in so
profuse a Tribute, to the vast Exchecquer of their watery Sovereign.

And thus have I as compendiously as might be wound up this Essay, yet I am not
so confident to believe but that posterity may by new Discoveries, and
Scrutinies for arts are not yet Solstice, nor knowledge in its Zenith) improve
it to greater Advantage of the public, than could be expected from this faint
Result of my Pen; In the Interim I shall desire the Reader, to acquiesce in
that Amicable and Ingenuous Determination of the Poet, -- Si quid
novisti^ectius istis, Candidus Imperti, Si non hic utere mecum.

FINIS.

