THE Pharisee Unmasked: IN A New Discovery OF THE ARTIFICES Used by ROMAN
CATHOLIC PRIESTS TO Convert Prisoners both at, and before the Time OF EXECUTION.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel; And are to be sold at his Printing House on the
Ditch-side in Blackfriars. 1687.

THE Pharisee Unmasked: IN A New Discovery of the Artifices used by Roman
Catholic Priests, to Convert Prisoners, both at, and before the Time of
Execution.
WE see now a days a sort of Men, who like the Crow in the Fable, with painted
Plumes and smooth Exteriors, cloak for a time the pernicious Sentiments of
their deluded Souls; but at the first opening of their mouths, are presently
discovered by their harsh and ill boading Tone.

The late most Royal and Gracious Declaration of Indulgence, granted by the
wisest and best of Princes, as the sweetest and most efficacious means, to
re-establish Love, Union, and good Intelligence amongst all his loving
Subjects, is their common Stumbling Block, which they no sooner hit against,
but they clearly show, who, and what they are: And tho it has the general
Applause and Approbation of Christendom, and all well-meaning Subjects; yet
they like venomous Spiders, endeavor to asperse it with the Poison, with which
they themselves abound.

What other reason can there be for this, than that being too much used to
bloody Executions, and to the bitter and doleful Groans of their fellow
Subjects, sinking under the weight of the cruellest Persecutions; the Music
was so sweet and pleasing to 'em, that now they are pinched, to see a Period
put to those Severities, which have been the cause of it.

One would think that all Pamphlets to this purpose should now cease; but here
up starts, when least thought of, a new Zealot, revived, as if it were from a
deep Trance, or awaked from heavy dumps, who, sorry it seems, not to have
sooner acted his Part upon that public Stage; invents a rare Stratagem to get
his place among the Actors. Tyburn, a place more fit for Mourning, than for
Mimick, and poor dying, or rather dead Persons, must needs be the Subject of
his Scene.

Since freedom of Conscience, says he, has been so liberally granted, every
minute Opinion has been emulous of Proselites. You need no more Expressions; we
understand full well your meaning, and what you would be at: It is that Freedom
of Conscience, and not the making of Proselytes, that touches you to the quick,
that venomous humor which it has engendered in your heart, has been too long
fermenting, and is now grown so ripe, that it must needs break out.

And who can but admire this Actors drifts, to cover his malice and the deep
rancour of his Heart with the plausible and specious pretext of tender Love and
Compassion to his fellow Christians? Such are those false Prophets of which we
are advifed to beware, who comes in sheeps clothing, yet in their hearts being
ravenous wolves, by good words and fair speeches deceive the simple. This Man
would persuade the World, that in this, he is only concerned for the Souls of
his fellow Christians; yet cannot pass without a severe Reflection upon Freedom
of Conscience, which is not only always emulous, as he says, but also most
efficacious for making Proselites, because it gives way to Truth to shine forth
with all her splendour: who thus appearing in her purest Robes and rich Attire,
is able to clear, and open the bemisted Eyes of her Spectators, if not diverted
by such false Guides, or overmaster'd by such specious, tho false Pretexts, as
he alleges, there needs no Force nor Threats, when she so appears, she alone
triumphs and gains the day.

Then again, our Actor not yet fully roused from his dumps, or if awake,
blinded by his Passion, confounds himself and betrays his own Cause, whereas,
as he pretends, out of tender Love and Compassion for Christian Souls, he
inveighs against Freedom of Conscience, as the cause of making Proselytes; and
yet at the same time, would have the World believe, that such Proselytes are
made by Force and Threats. Now where Freedom of Conscience is, what use can
there be for Force, or how can Threats prevail, where Liberty ensures and bears
the sway?

How come you great Zealot to mistake so soon; is it that the heat of your
pretended Love, and Compassion for Christian Souls, perverts your Sense and
Reason to that degree, that you perceive not manifest Contradictions, even in
your first Periods? But alas you care not by what means, so by any, either
right or wrong, you attain your ends: viz. to raise a cloud of dust, to disturb
the sight of those poor deluded Members of your Party; whom by too many and too
sad Experiences, you know to be more apt to give Credit to scurrulous
Pamphlets, tho stuffed with lies, so they lay any Aspersions upon Catholics, than
to the most Authentic Traditions of the universal Church of Christ, and the
Doctrine of the most eminent and famous Lights of the Primitive Times: these
Doctors with them do pass for doting Fools, and their Works for Engines forged
by Papists, to impose upon simple Men; whilst such Pamphlets they embrace, and
hold for undoubted Truths.

It is this easiness of his Party to adhere to new Inventions, which proved too
fatal to so many in later Ages, that encouraged this Man to divulge so
ridiculous an Imposture; and laying aside all Fear of God, not to scruple to
calumniat others with most notorious Falsities; So verifying by himself and
others his Associats in that Trade, that there are now indeed another sort of
fishers of men, than what our Savior made, who with other baits than that of
the Gospel, angle souls, and lead them blindfold to eternal ruin, and thus
subdue more by falsehood, than they convince by Truth and Reason.

But there is a generation of men, who, he says, call themselves Priests, who
have subdued more by Force than Persuasion, and caught more Souls by a Dilemma,
than they have confuted by true Logic. The Dilemma he here speaks of, I
suppose by what he said before, consists of Promises without Performance on the
one side, and of Force on the other; that of Promises without Performance has
so blunt a point, that himself lays no stress upon it; and for the other of
Force, which is a sharp point indeed, as it little agrees with that Liberty of
Conscience, which his Majesty has been graciously pleased to grant to all: So
the eagerness to keep up the Power of Persecution, by hindering the abrogating
of the Penal Laws and Tests, manifestly shows to whom that Horn belongs. But
why does he say A Generation of Men who call themselves Priests? Does he then
believe them not to be truly such? If so, what becomes of the Hierarchy of the
Church of England, which pretends no other Origin of that Priesthood and
Ordination she claims, above all other Reformed Churches, but the Validity of
that in the Church of Rome? But this I suppose is the least of his care; so he
may make Catholic Priests contemptible by false Insinuations, he cares not what
dirt he throws in his own Mothers Face. But finding no Advantage by his
Dilemma, he now proceeds to a Demonstration which he calls Dioti, a thundering
one indeed, and which promises more to the Auditors, than what he performs.

For Premises of this Demonstration, he brings in the first place, Mr. Smith
the Ordinaries Relation of the Confession, and Behavior of Sackvil, Herbert,
Pritchard, Grevil, and Snipe, executed at Tyburn the 16 of December last. I
stand not to question what this Relation contained, tho I am credibly informed
that it was not very sincere; yet at least there should have been left out of
it, the Confession and Behavior of Pritchard, and Grevil, both having been
brought up in the Catholic Faith, and therefore unlikely to have made any
Confession to the said Ordinary, unless they would fain persuade us, that
Persons brought up in the Roman Catholic Faith, would forsake it at the hour of
Death, as if elsewhere they hoped to meet with better Security for their Souls;
a thing of which I know no instance, nor believe the Author of the Pamphlet can
give any true one, I say (true) for finding him very expert in inventing things
no better grounded, I doubt not, but if he undertook it, he would suppose many:
whereas on the contrary, nothing is more frequent than for Protestants, when
they are in fear of Death, to embrace the Catholic Faith. As for Sackvil,
Herbert, and Snipe, if their Confession and Behavior had been sincerely
related, the World would be convinced, how great an Impostor this Man is, who
attaints them after Death, with the foul aspersion of feigned Conversion. But
whatever this Relation was, I leave it to any Man of Sense, to judge how
insufficient it is to form a Demonstration Dioti, unless to this Ordinary be
ascribed that Divine Prerogative, which to the Universal Church of God they
deny.

For a second Premiss, he brings a Reason no less ridiculous than the former. I
saw, says he, no such evidential tokens of a through Conversion in the dying Men
at the place of Execution. A rare way to satisfy those to whom he has
promised a Demonstration Dioti; which is as much as to say, upon my bare
assuring you to have seen no evidential tokens of Conversion, you are to hold
for an undeniable Truth, that there was no real one. But yet in this, his
Moderation may be commended, if compared with his former Insolence, inasmuch as
he assures us not to have seen any evidential tokens of the contrary; of which
if he had seen, I do not say evidential, but even the least appearance, he had
not failed to have taken hold of it, and rather increased than diminished, as
he did upon what happened to David Davies. To tread therefore in his own steps,
having particularly insisted upon this last, I also, ne ultra crepidam, will go
no further. But at the same time, let the World take notice, that the
vindication of this Person, is an Apology for all those who, to my knowledge
preceded him in the same way; for if there be any Difference, 'its rather in
the accidental than material part.

Now as well for the justification of this dead Man, who can speak no more for
himself; as also the Satisfaction of all weak and credulous Persons, who
perhaps would give credit to this so false a Calumny; and, not without reason,
be scandalized at such inhumane and rather heathenish, than Christian
Proceedings, which this Man has so diabolically invented; I think my self in
Duty and Conscience bound, to give a true and ingenuous Account of this young
Man's conduct, in his Preparation God to witness, that my Design herein, is not
to decline from the Truth, which if I happen to do, it will be rather for want
of Memory, than out of an intent to conceal one jota thereof: moreover that I
relate nothing but what for the most part, I have seen, and quorum pars magna
fui.

This David Davis then, whom this Man attacks even in his Grave, having
received Sentence of Death at the Old-Bayly, upon Monday the 16th of January
last, in the Morning, was visited by the Ordinary that same day in the
Afternoon; what Conference he had with him I know not, but this I know from
himself, that he was strictly charged not to admit of any Catholic Priests to
Discourse withal, as being sure, no doubt, that they had too convincing and
strong reasons to make out the justice of their cause, to be withstood by dying
persons, who already walking upon the borders of endless Eternity, and
surrounded with the frightful shades of Death, ought then or never, to lay
aside all human respects, and regard no other concern, but that of finding the
securest, nay the only (there being indeed but one) way to save their Souls.

But the Prisoner, knowing then no better, was easily persuaded, without
further examining the great consequence of that weighty business, to promise to
perform what was given him in charge; upon which he was removed from his Fellow
Convict, and locked up in a private Room; thereby, as I suppose, the better to
secure him from all occasions of any such Discourse, as had been forbidden him.

That same Afternoon resorted to the Prison one of those Eagles of Prey; as our
Zelot calls them, Eagles indeed, but whom neither profit, prejudice, or any
other sinister end, but only that love, and tender compassion, which true
Christianity obliges them to have for those inestimable Preys, (which cost no
less than the precious blood of Christ,) induce to fly into those loathsome and
dismal places, where nothing can be met with, agreeable to flesh and blood. He
came then to the Prisoner, not yet knowing what persuasion he was of, and there
had a Discourse with him for above an hour, of the absolute necessity of true
Faith, and the great importance of dying in the only way, which Christ has
prescribed for Salvation; by which though with much ado, he was persuaded not to
precipitate a thing of so great a consequence, without further examining, which
he promised to do; and thereupon one of his own Bibles being given him, he
found many things which soon made him more suspicious of his way.

Next morning being visited by the same Person again, he told him, that, to his
great satisfaction, he had spent the best part of the night in Reading, and
seriously pondering upon those places of the Bible, to which he had been
directed. He had instructions given him then and in the Afternoon following,
upon the due and necessary preparation for a good Death, and upon most of the
points of the Catholic Religion, by which he was more and more confirmed, so
far, that he declared he was resolved to be reconciled, in case he could not
get better satisfaction, and more convincing proofs from his Minister, who,
when he came, amongst many other means which he made use of to confirm him in
his way, assured him for the chiefest satisfaction, that he would save him
without the help of any Sacraments: This I had from the Prisoners own mouth.

In all which finding, no doubt, less satisfaction than he had received from
the Priest for the opposite way; he declared to him his mind, which was to die
in the Roman Catholic Faith, wherein he plainly saw better warrants for
Salvation. That very night after Prayers and Instructions he made his
abjuration, and was reconciled in presence of five persons, after being several
times questioned whether he had yet any doubt in those Points of Religion which
he then professed, and often warned that none can dissemble with God, and that
in matters of Conscience, and Religion, dissimulation is Damnation, to which he
constantly answered, that being upon his Death it was no time for him to
dissemble.

The night following being Execution Eve, after having had twice Prayers and
Instruction, upon the dispositions necessary for the due Receiving of the
Sacraments of Penance and the most Blessed Eucharist; he made a general, and as
it was manifest by his manner of declaring, a sincere Confession of all the
Sins of his Life, produced many Acts of Contrition, and detestation of his
sins; besought God Almighty with Sighs and Tears, through his Infinite Mercy,
and the Inestimable Merits of Christ, to forgive him his former offenses, with
repeated protestations of his steadfast resolution to offend him no more, not
only for the small time he had to live, but also if he had many years; after
which he humbly begged Absolution, which was given him by the Priest; having
before renewed his Profession of Faith.

Upon Execution day in the Morning after Prayers, Instruction, and Confession
of some things which, by a more serious reflection, he found upon his
Conscience; he received the Blessed Eucharist, protesting that he firmly
believed, what he saw so plainly and so often inculcated in the express words
of God, viz. that it was the True, and Real Body, and Blood of Jesus Christ.

Being brought to the place of Execution, the Priest examined him about his
immediate disposition for Death; he told him, that seeing it was the will of
God, he was willing to suffer that ignominious one, and besought God to accept
of it in satifaction for his sins. After which he recited the Lords Prayer, the
Belief, and Prayed out of a Catholic Prayer Book, of which he made use during
the time of his preparation for that last passage, the Priest made him renew in
brief his Profession of Faith, exercise several acts of Hope, Charity and
Contrition, after which he gave him the Absolution: all which lasted near upon
half an hour, which was a more than sufficient time to recant, if he had any
inclination thereunto, having moreover the Ordinary by him in the same Cart.
The Rope being fastened to the tree, The Priest asked him what he had to say to
the Assembly; he said in plain and distinct terms, to the hearing of many, to
whose Conscience I appeal, that he was sorry for his sins, desired all to take
Example by him, that he died a Roman Catholic, begged the Prayers of all good
Christians at that moment, to which he added that he desired all Roman
Catholics, if any then present, to pray for his Soul after Death.

If this be to die a Protestant, our Zealot has reason to hope, as he says he
does, that this young Man died an excellent one; but if the hope he has of his
own Salvation has no better grounds, I would advise him in time to look out for
some better.

But as the Devil is always busy, especially in these last moments, in
tempting Souls; there happened then an accident, which I suppose, together with
his own inveterate malice, has occasioned this Man's odious Pamphlet. The dying
man being last of all minded to declare then in public, as he often did in
private, that he died in Charity with all the World; he fixed his Eyes upon
some Person whom I suppose he knew in the Assembly, upon which he shed a flood
of Tears, and in great Emotion broke forth into these Words, I freely forgive
the whole World, except that Rogue N. who is the only cause of my Death, for I
die wrongfully, and with that he began to revile the Person named, to prevent
which, the Priest, who needed not to run to him, as this Man relates, for he
was actually standing with him, put his Hand upon his Mouth, and his Hat
between him and those Objects whose sight caused in him that transport, and put
him in mind of the Instructions before given him, the absolute necessity of
forgiving all, and made him sensible if he excepted one, he could expect no
forgiveness from God Almighty, who never forgives those that forgive not.

To this the dying Man replied, that what he had so rashly said, was not out of
hatred to the Person named, but out of love to some there present, his meaning
being to warn them, not to confide in the said Person. However the Priest for
greater Security made him renew his Acts of Charity and Repentance, and in
particular detest what he had said, lest any rancour might have been the cause
thereof: after which, he reiterated the Absolution, and made him declare again
to the Assembly how he freely forgave all, naming expressly him, whom he had
before excepted, whom then he prayed God to bless and prosper: Which being
done, the Priest committed him to God, gave him the Benediction and retired.

Now as to the matter of Fact by which this Pamphleteer pretends to evidence
clearly his supposed Imposture; I appeal to that cloud of Witnesses to which he
refers us, who have been not only Spectators afar off, as he seems to have
been, but also auditors both in this and other Occasions of the kind; whether
either from this last, or any other who preceded him in like circumstances,
they heard one word in that public place as much as tending to recant, or any
way able to justify this Man's odious Calumny: and I doubt not but amongst so
many, there will be found some unbiased Persons, who will be so just to their
own Conscience, as to declare the truth of what they have heard, and no more.

After all I leave it to the impartial Reader to judge, what Reasons, other
than pure Malice, could induce this Man to publish such an odious Aspersion,
and who by all this shows himself to be the Pharisee: and whether those who no
doubt for want of better means, fly commonly to lies and calumnies to maintain
their Cause, ought not if they were but Christians, nay, as he says, if they
were but Men, to be ashamed of such petty tricks. Whether also the Preparations
above mentioned, be not sufficient Dispositions for a good and happy Death,
especially in a Church wherein Salvation was never yet denied to be had, even
by the most learned and understanding Members of the Church of England, whose
Doctrine and Principles this Man shows himself to be ignorant of; when all his
Pamplet is grounded upon impossibility of Salvation for those who die in the
Communion of the Roman Catholic Church; in which he will doubtless be disowned
by the chiefest of his own Party; but thus he proves it to be true by his own
Example, that Ignorance, the blind guide of the blind, is always bold, etc.

Further I leave it to any understanding Man, who as much as pretends to any
true Religion, whether one, tho in his heart a Protestant (which in this
business is not as much as granted) yet dying with all the Preparations above
mentioned, belonging to another Church, with public Protestations, even at the
hour of his Death, of his real sincerity in that Communion, should not rather
be esteemed to die a Heathen, than any thing of a Christian; and therefore
rather to be disowned than gloried in, by all Protestants, if they are such as
think external Profession, and Practice any thing material to their Religion,
according to these Words of Christ, Whoever denies me before men, I will deny
him before my Father which is in Heaven. And therefore I hope this Gentleman
will cease to glory any further in his vain and groundless hope, of that young
Man's dying as good a Protestant as his fellow Sufferer Sinah Jones, whom he
canonizes as a true Elect.

In fine he exhorts his pretended true Pastors to visit those places wherein
men are more subject to temptations, if he had added Poverty, Famine, and all
other sorts of Miseries, even Death for want of Bread, he had done well; but I
suppose himself to be one that never took notice of any such things before, and
therefore to be one of those of whom our Savior speaks, who bind heavy
burdens, and lay them upon other men's shoulders, but will not move them with a
finger of their own.

Yet I am glad that his Pastors learn no worse Examples by Catholic Priests,
whom they usually paint with the foulest colors, even that of Idolatry, of all
Crimes the most detestable; than the due Exercise of their Functions, and the
Practice of those Works of Charity, to which it seems those of his own Party,
have been heretofore unaccustomed; otherwise what need had they to be called
upon thereunto by the grave Exhortation of this pitiful Pamphleteer? By which
it appears who are the true Pastors, and who the Cheats, according to the
criterium which our Savior himself has left us, Ex operibus eorum cognoscetis
eos: You shall know them by their works.

FINIS.

