A PLEA FOR THE Pardoning Part OF THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE KINGS OF ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed by H. H. for John Fish, near the Golden-Tun, in the Strand,
1682.

A PLEA for the Pardoning Part of the Sovereignty of the Kings of England.
IF Monarchy has been by God himself, and the experience of above 5000 years
and the longest Ages of the World approved (as it has) to have been the best
and most desirable form of Government.

And the Kingdom of England, as it has been, for more than 1000 years a well
tempered Monarchy, and the Sword and Power thereof was given to our Kings only
by God that rules the Hearts of them.

The means thereunto which should be the Power of Punishment and Reward, can no
way permit, that they should be without the Liberty and Prerogative of
Pardoning, which was no Stranger in England long before the Conquest, in the
Reign of King Athelstane, who did thereby free the Nation from four-footed
Wolves by ordaining Pardons to such Outlaws as would help to free themselves
and others from such villainous Neighbors, the Laws of Canutus also making it a
great part of their business to enjoin a moderation in punishments ad divinam
clementiam temperata to be observed in Magistracy and never to be wanting in
the most Superior, Ll. Canuti.
none being so proper to acquit the offense as they that by our Laws are to
take benefit by the Fines and Forfeitures arising thereby. Edward the
Confessors Law would not have Rex regni sub cujus protectione and pace degunt
universi, to be without it; when amongst his Laws which the People of England
held so sacred as they did hide them under his Shrine, and afterward precibus
and fletibus obtained of the Conqueror, that they should be observed, and
procured the observation of them especially to be inserted in the
Coronation-Oaths of our succeeding Kings, inviolably to be kept.

And it is under the Title of misericordia Regis and Pardonatio, declared, That
Si quispiam forisfactus (which the Margin interprets rei Capitalis reus)
poposcerit Regiam misericordiam pro forisfacto suo, Ll. Edwardi Confessor* p.
19.
timidus mortis vel membrorum perdendorum, potest Rex ei lege suae dignitatis
condonare si velit etiam mortem promeritam; ipse tamen malefactor rectum faciat
in quantumcunque poterit quibus forisfecit, and tradat fidejussores de pace and
legalitate tenenda si vero fidejussores defecerint exulabitur a Patria.

For the pardoning of Treason, Ll. H. 1.
Murder, breach of the Peace, etc. says King Henry the First, in his Laws, so
much esteemed by the Barons and Contenders for our Magna Charta, as they
solemnly swore they would live and die in the defense thereof, do solely belong
unto him, and super omnes homines in terra sua.

In the fifth year of the Reign of King Edward the Second, Rot. Claus. 5 E. 2.
indorso, m. 15.
Pierce Gaveston Earl of Cornwall, being banished by the King in Parliament,
and all his Lands and Estate seized into the Kings hands, the King granted his
Pardon, remitted the Seizures, and caused the Pardon and Discharges to be
written and Sealed in His Presence.

And howsoever he was shortly after upon his return into England, taken by the
Earl of Warwick and beheaded without Process or Judgment at Law, yet he and his
Accomplices thought themselves not to be in any safety, until they had by two
Acts of Parliament in the seventh year of that Kings Reign obtained a Pardon,
Ne quis occasionetur pro reditu and morte Petri de Gaveston, the power of
pardoning, being always so annexed to the King and his Crown and Dignity.

As the Acts of Parliament of 2 E. 3. ca. 2. 10 E. 3. ca. 15. 13 R. 2. ca. 1.
and 16 R. 2. ca. 6. seeking by the Kings Leave and License in some things to
qualify it, are in that of 13 R. 2. ca. 1. content to allow the Power of
Pardoning to belong to the Liberty of the King, and a Regality used heretofore
by his Progenitors.

Hubert de Burgh Earl of Kent Chief Justiciar of England, in the Reign of King
Henry the third, laden with envy and as many deep Accusations as any Minister
of State could lie under, in two several Charges in several Parliaments, then
without an House of Commons, had the happiness, Mat. Paris.
notwithstanding all the hate and extremities put upon him by an incensed
Party, to receive two several Pardons of his and their King, and dye acquitted
in the Estate which he had gained.

In the fiftieth year of the Reign of King Edward the third, Rot. part. 50 E. 3.
the Commons in Parliament petitioning the King, that no Officer of the Kings,
or any man, high or low, that was impeached by them, should enjoy his Place or
be of the Kings Council.

The King only answered, he would do as he pleased.

With which they were so well satisfied; Rot. part. 51 E. 3.
as the next year after, in Parliament, upon better consideration, they
petitioned him, that Richard Lions, John Pechie, and Alice Pierce, whom they
had largely accused and believed guilty, might be pardoned.

And that King was so unwilling to bereave himself of that one especial Flower
in his Crown; as in a Grant or Commission made in the same year to James
Botiller Earl of Ormond of the Office of Chief Justiciar of Ireland giving him
power under the Seal of that Kingdom to pardon all Trespasses Felonies, Rot.
Claus. 51 E. 3.
Murders, Treasons, etc. he did especially except and reserve to himself the
power of pardoning Prelates, Earls and Barons.

In the first year of the Reign of King Henry the fourth, Rot. part. 1 H. 4.
the King in the Case of the Duke of Albemarle and others, declared in
Parliament that Mercy and Grace belongs to Him and his Royal Estate, and
therefore reserved it to himself, and would that no man entitle himself
thereunto.

And many have been since granted by our succeeding Kings in Parliament, at the
request of the Commons (the People of England in Worldly and Civil Affairs as
well ever since, as before, not knowing unto whom else to apply themselves for
it.)

So as no fraud or indirect dealings being made use of in the obtaining of a
Pardon, it ought not to be shaken or invalidated, whether it were before a
Charge or Accusation in Parliament or after, or where there is no Charge or
Indictment antecedent.

The Pardon of the King to Richard Lions at the request of the Commons in
Parliament, as the Parliament Rolls do mention, although it was not inserted in
the Pardon, was declared to be after a Charge against him by the Commons in
Parliament, and in the perclose said to be per Dominum Regem.

And a second of the same date and tenor, with a perclose said to have been per
Dominum Regem and magnum Concilium.

John Pechies pardon for whom that House of Commons in Parliament was said to
intercede; only mentions that it was precibus aliquorum Magnatum.

15 E. 3. The Archbishop of Canterbury before the King, Rot. part. 15 E. 3.
Lords, and Commons humbling himself before the King Lords and Commons; desired
that where he was defamed through the Realm he might be larraigned before his
Peers in open Parliamenti unto which the King answered, that He would attend
the Common affairs, and afterward hear others.

5 H. 4. The King at the request of the Commons; Rot. part. 5 H. 4.
affirms the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Duke of York, the Earl of
Northumberland, and other Lords, which were suspected to be of the confederacy
of Henry Percy, to be his true Leige-men, and that they nor any of them should
be impeached therefore, by the King or his Heirs in any time ensuing.

9 H. 4. The Speaker of the House of Commons presented a Bill on the behalf of
Thomas Brook against William Widecombe, Rot. part. 9. H. 4.
and required Judgment against him; which Bill was received and the said
William Widecombe was notwithstanding bound in a 1000 pound to hear his
Judgment in Chancery.

And the many restorations in blood and estate in 13 H. 4 and by King E. 4 and
of many of our Kings may inform us how necessary and beneficial the pardons,
Rot. part. 38 H. 6.
and mercy of our Kings and Princes have been to their People and Posterities.

The Commons accuse the Lord Stanley in sundry particulars, for being
confederate with the Duke of York, and pray that he may be committed to prison:
to which the King answered, he will be advised.

William de la Poole Duke of Suffolk being in a Parliament in the 28 th year
of the Reign of King Henry the 6 th deeply charged by the Commons and not
demanding his Peerage but submitting himself to the Kings grace and mercy was
only banished for five years. Rot. part. 28 H. 6.


Whereupon the Viscount Beaumont* in the behalf of the Bishops and the Lords
required that the said Judgment without their assent might be no bar to their
privilege of Peerage, but no saving at all either requested or granted for, or
by the Commons.

And Pardons before Indictments or prosecution have not been rejected for that
they did anticipate any troubles which might afterward happen.

For so was the Earl of Shrewsbury's in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth for fear
of being troubled by his ill willers for a sudden raising of men without a
warrant to suppress an insurrection of Rebels.

Lionell Cranfeild Earl of Middlesex Lord Treasurer of England, being about the
18 th year of King James, accused by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for
great offenses and misdemeanors fined by the King in Parliament to be
displaced, pay 50000 l. and never more to sit in Parliament, was in the 2 d
year of the Reign of King Charles the Martyr, upon his Submission to the King
and payment of 20000 l. only, pardoned of all Crimes, Offenses and Misdemeanors
whatsoever any Sentence, Act, or Order of Parliament, or the said Sentence to
the contrary notwithstanding.

For whether the accusation be for Treason wherein the King is immediately and
most especially concerned, or for lesser Offenses where the people may have
some concernment, but nothing near so much or equivalent to that of the Kings
being the supreme Magistrate, the King may certainly pardon and in many pardons
as of Outlaries, Felonies, etc. there have been conditions annexed. Ita quod
stent recto si quis versus eos loqui voluerit.

So the Lord Keeper Coventry's in the Reign of King Charles the Martyr to
prevent any dangerous questions, touching the receiving of Fines and other
Proceedings in Chancery, sued out his Pardon.

The many Acts of oblivion, or general pardon; granted by many of our Kings and
Princes, to the great comfort and quiet of their Subjects, but great diminution
of the Crown revenue did not make them guilty, that afterward protected
themselves thereby from unjust and malicious adversaries.

And where there is not such a clause it is always employed by Law in particular
men's cases, and until the Sovereignty can be found by Law to be in the people,
neither the King or his people (who by their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy
are to be subordinate unto him) are to be deprived of his haute et basse
Justice, and are not to be locked up or restrained by any Petition, Charge or
Surmise which is not to be accounted infallible, or a truth, before it be
proved to the King and his Council of Peers in Parliament, and our Kings that
gave the Lords of Manors, Powers of Soke and Sake, Infangtheif, and
Outfangtheif in their Court Barons, and sometimes as large as Fossarum and
Furcarum, and the incident Power of Pardons and Remissions of Fine and
Forfeitures which many do at this day without contradiction of their other
Tenants enjoy, should not be bereaved of as much liberty in their primitive and
supreme Estates as they gave them in their derivatives.

And though there have been revocations of Patents during pleasure, of
Protections and Presentations, and Revocations of Revocations quibusdam certis
de causis, yet never was there any Revocation of any Pardons granted where the
King was not abused or deceived in the granting thereof.

For in Letters Patents for other matters Reversals were not to be accounted
legal, where they were not upon just causes proved upon Writs of Scire facias
issuing out of the Chancery, and one of the Articles for the deposing of King
Richard the 2 d. being that he revoked some of his Pardons.

The recep's of Patents of Pardon, or other things were ordained so to signify
the time when they were first brought to the Chancellor, as to prevent
controversies concerning priority or delays, made use of in the Sealing of them
to the detriment of those that first obtained them.

And the various forms in the drawing or passing of Pardons as long ago His
testibus, afterward per manum of the Chancellor or per Regem alone, per
nostre Main, vel per manum Regis, or per Regem and Concilium, or authoritate
Parliamenti, per Regem and Principem, per Breve de private. sigillo, or per
immediate Warrant being never able to hinder the energy and true meaning
thereof.

And need not certainly be pleaded in any subordinate Court of Justice without
an occasion or to purchase then allowance who are not to control such an Act
of their Sovereign.

Doctor Manwaring in the fourth or sixth Year of the Reign of King Charles the
Martyr being grievously fined by both Houses of Parliament, and made incapable
of any place or Employment; was afterward pardoned and made Bishop of St.
Asaph with a non obstante of any order or Act of Parliament,

So they that would have Attainders pass by Bill or Act of Parliament to make
that to be Treason which by the Law and ancient and reasonable Customs of
England, was never so before to be believed or adjudged, or to Accumulate
Trespasses and Misdemeanors to make that a Treason which singly could never be
so, either in truth, Law, right, reason or Justice.

May be pleased to admit and take into their serious consideration, that
Arguments a posse ad esse, or ab uno ad plures, are neither usual or allowable,
and that such a way of proceeding will be as much against the Rules of Law,
Honor, and Justice as of Equity and good Conscience.

And may be likewise very prejudicial to the very ancient and honorable House
of Peers in Parliament, for these and many more to be added Reasons, viz.

For former Ages knew no Bills of Attainder, by Act of Parliament after an
Acquittal or Judgment in the House of Peers, until that unhappy one in the
latter end of the Reign of King Charles the Martyr, which for the unusalness
thereof had a special Proviso inserted, That it should not hereafter be drawn
into Examples or made use of a President.

And proved to be so fatally mischievous to that blessed King himself, and His
three Kingdoms of England; Scotland and Ireland, as he bewailed in his
excellent Soliloquies, and at his Death, his consenting to such an Act, and
charged His Majesty that now is, never to make Himself or His People, to be
partakers of any more such Mischief procuring State-Errors.

The House of Commons if they will be Accusers, wherein they may be often
mistaken, when they take it from others, and have no power to examine upon
Oath, wild and envious Informations, and at the same time a part of the
Parliament, subordinate to the King, will in such an Act of Attainder be both
Judge and Party, which all the Laws in the World could never allow to be just.

And such a course, if suffered, must needs be derogatory and prejudicial to
the Rights and Privileges, and Judicative Power of the Peers in Parliament,
unparallelled, and unpresidented, when any Judgments given by them, shall by
such a Bill of Attainder, like a Writ of Error, or as an Appeal from them to
the House of Commons, be en^rvated or quite altered by an Act of Attainder
framed by the House of Commons, whereby they which shall be freed or absolved
by their Peers, or by that Honorable and more wise Assembly, shall by such a
back or byblow be condemned, or if only Fined by the House of Peers, may be
made to forfeit their Lives, Estates and Posterities by the House of Commons;
or if condemned in the Upper House, be absolved in the Lower, who shall thereby
grow to be so formidable as none of the Peerage, or Kings Privy Council shall
dare to displease them, and where the dernier Ressort, or Appeal, was before
and ought ever to be to the King in His House of Peers, or without, will thus
be lodged in the House of Commons, and of little avail will the Liberty of our
Nobility be to be tried by their own Peers, when it shall be contre caeur, and
under the Control of the House of Commons.

Or that the Commons disclaiming, as they ought, any power or Cognizance in the
matters of War and Peace, should by a Bill of Attainder make themselves to be
Judges and Parties against a Peer, both of the Kings Privy Council and Great
Council in Parliament, touching Matters of that Nature.

For if the Commons in Parliament had never after their own Impeachments of a
Peer or Commoner, Petitioned the King to pardon the very Persons which they had
Accused, as they did in the Cases of Lions and John Pechie, in the 51 year of
the Reign of King Edward the Third, whom they had fiercely accused in
Parliament but the year before, the Objection that a Pardon ought not to be a
Bar against an Impeachment might have had more force than it is like to have.

Neither would it or did it discourage the exhibiting any for the future, no
more than it did the many after Impeachments, which were made by the Commons in
several Parliaments, and Kings Reigns, whereupon punishments severe enough
ensued; For if the very many Indictments and Informations at every Assizes and
Quarter Sessions in the Counties, and in the Court of King's Bench at
Westminster, in the Term time, ever since the Usurpation and Reign of King
Stephen, and the Pardons granted shall be exactly searched and numbered, the
foot of the Account will plainly demonstrate, that the Pardons for Criminal
Offenses have not been above or so many as one in every hundred, or a much
smaller and inconsiderable number, either in or before the first or later
instance, before Trial or after, and the Pardons granted by our Kings, so few
and seldom, as it ought to be confessed, that that Regal Power only proper for
Kings, the Vicegerents of God Almighty, not of the People, has been modestly
and moderately used, and that the multitude of Indictments and Informations,
and few Pardons now extant in every year, will be no good Witnesses of such a
causelessly feared discouragement.

And it will not be so easily proved, as it is fancied that there ever was by
our Laws or reasonable Customs any Institution to preserve the Government by
restraining the Prince, against whom and no other the Contempt and Injury is
immediately committed from pardoning offenses against Him, and in Him against
the People to whose charge they are by God entrusted.

Or that there was any such institution (which would be worth the seeing if it
could be found or heard of) that it was the Chief, or that without it
consequently the Government it self would be destroyed.

To prove which groundless Institution the Author of those Reasons is
necessitated (without resorting as he supposes to greater Antiquities) to
vouch to Warranty the Declaration of that excellent Prince, King Charles the
First of Blessed Memory, made in that behalf (when there was no Controversy or
Question in agitation or debate touching the power of pardoning) in his Answer
to the nineteen Propositions of both Houses of Parliament, wherein stating the
several parts of this well regulated Monarchy, he says, the King, the House of
Lords, and the House of Commons, have each particular Privileges.

Wherein amongst those which belong to the King, he reckons the power of
pardoning, if the Framer of those Reasons might have been fair and candid, and
added the Words immediately following, viz. And some more of the like kind are
placed in the King.

And this kind of excellently tempered Monarchy, having the power to preserve
that Authority, without which it would be disabled to protect the Laws in their
Force, and the Subjects in their Peace, Liberties, and Properties, ought to
have drawn unto Him such a respect and reverence from the Nobility and Great
Ones, as might hinder the Ills of Division and Faction; and cause such a Fear
and Respect from the People as may hinder Tumults and Violence.

But the design being laid and devised to tack and piece together such parcels
of His said late Majesty's Answer, as might make most for the advantage of the
Undertaker to take the Power of Pardoning from the Prince, and lodge it in the
People, and do what they can to create a Sovereignty or Superiority in them,
which cannot consist with his ancient Monarchy, and the Laws and reasonable
Customs of the Kingdom, the Records, Annals and Histories, Reason, Common Sense
and understanding thereof, the long and very long approved usages of the
Nation, and Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy of those that would now not only
deny but be above it.

And would make the King, by some scattered or distorted parts of that Answer,
mangled and torn from the whole context and purpose of it, to give away those
undoubted Rights of his Crown, for which, and the preservation of the Liberties
of His People, he died a Martyr; the Author and his Party endeavoring all they
can to translate the Assent of the Commons required in the levying of Money
into that of the power of pardoning, and jumbling the Words and Sense of that
Royal Answer, cements and puts together others of their own to fortify and
make out their unjust purposes, omitting every thing that might be understood
against them, or give any disturbance thereunto.

And with this resolution the Author proceeds to do as well as he can, and
says:

After the enumeration of which, and other His Prerogatives, His said Majesty
adds thus; Again (as if it related to the matter of pardoning which it does not
at all, but only and properly to the levying of Money, Exact Collection of
Remonstrances, Declarations and Messages betwixt his late Majesty and the
Parliament, Printed by Order of the Commons in Parliament, 24. March, 1642.
wherein that Misinterpreter can afford to leave out His said Majesty's
Parenthesis (which is the Sinews as well of Peace as War) that the Prince may
not make use of this high and perpetual Power to the hurt of those for whose
good he has it, and make use of the Name of Public Necessity (which clearly
evidenceth that his late Majesty thereby only intended that part of his Answer
to relate to the levying of Money) for the gain of his private Favorites and
Followers to the detriment of his People.

Whither being come, our Man of Art or putter of his Matters together, finds
some words which will not at all serve his turn enclosed in a Royal Parenthesis
of his late Majesty, viz. (An excellent Conserver of Liberty, but never
intended for any share in Government, or the choosing of them that should
govern) but looked like a deep and dangerous Ditch which might Sowse him over
head and ears, if not drown him and spoil all his inventions, and therefore
well bethinks himself, retires a little, begins at An excellent Conserver of
Liberty, makes that plural, adds, etc. which is not in the Original, fetches
his seeze and leaps quite over all the rest of the Parenthesis, as being a Noli
me tangere, dangerous words and of evil consequence, and having got over goes
on until he came to some just and considerable expostulations of his late
Majesty, and then as if he had been in some Lincolnshire Fens and Marshes, is
again enforced to leap until he come to, Therefore the Power legally placed in
both Houses, is more than sufficient to prevent and restrain the Power of
Tyranny.

But not liking the subsequent words of his late Majesty, viz. And without the
Power which is now asked from Us, we shall not be able to discharge that Trust
which is the end of Monarchy, since that would be a total subversion of the
Fundamental Laws, and that excellent Constitution of this Kingdom, which has
made this Nation for many years both famous and happy to a great degree of
envy, is glad to take his leave with an, etc. and meddle no more with such
Edge-Tools, wherewith that Royal Answer was abundantly furnished.

But looks back and betakes himself to an Argument framed out of some
Melancholic or Feverish Fears and Jealousies, that until the Commons of
England have right done unto them against that Plea of Pardon, they may justly
apprehend that the whole Justice of the Kingdom in the Case of the five Lords,
may be obstructed and defeated by Pardons of a like nature.

As if the pardoning of one must of necessity amount to many, or all, in
offenses of a different nature committed at several times by several persons
(which is yet to be learned) and the Justice of the Nation which has been safe
and flourished for many Ages, notwithstanding some necessary Pardons granted by
our Princes, can be obstructed or defeated in a well constituted Government
under our Kings and Laws; so it may everlastingly be wondered upon what such
jealousies should now be founded, or by what Law or Reason to be satisfied, if
it shall thus be suffered to run wild or mad.

For Canutus in his Laws ordained that there should be in all Punishments a
moderata misericordia, Ll. Canusi.
and that there should be a misericordia in judicio exhibenda, which all our
Laws, as well those in the Saxon and Danish times as since, have ever intended,
and it was wont to be a parcel of good Divinity that Gods Mercy is over all his
Works, who not seldom qualifies and abates the rigor of his Justice.

When Trissilian Chief Justice, and Brambre Major of London, were by Judgment
of the Parliament of the Eleventh of King Richard the second, Hanged and
Executed, the Duke of Ireland banished, some others not so much punished, and
many of their Accomplices pardoned, the people that did not know how soon they
might want Pardons for themselves, did not afflict themselves or their
Sovereign with Complaints and Murmurings that all were not Hanged and put to
the extremities of Punishment; nor was Richard Earl of Arundel, one of the
fierce Appellants in that Matter, vexed at the pardoning of others, Rot parl.
21 R. 2.
when he in a Revolution and Storm of State was within ten years after glad to
make use of a Pardon for himself.

King James pardoned Sir Walter Rawleigh, the Lord Cobham, Sir Griffin Markham
with many others then guilty of Treason, and the Earl of Somerset and his Lady,
for the Murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, without any commotion in the Brains of
the rest of his Subjects, some of whom were much disturbed that he after caused
Sir Walter Rawleigh to be executed for a second offense upon the Score of the
former, not at all pardoned, but reprieved or only respited.

And therefore whilst we cry out and wonder quantum mutantur tempora, may seek
and never find what ever was or can be any necessary cause or consequence that
the five Lords accused of High Treason, and a design of killing the King, will
be sure to have a Pardon, if that the Pardon of the Earl of Danby, whose design
must be understood by all men rather to preserve him, shall be allowed.

Nor does an Impeachment of the House of Commons virtually, or ever can from
the first Constitution of it be proved or appear to be the voice of every
particular Subject of the Kingdom; for if we may believe Mr. William Pryn, one
of their greatest Champions, and the Records of the Nation and Parliaments, the
Commons in Parliament do not, or ever did Represent, or are Procurators for the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal and their numerous Tenants and ancient Baronies,
and those that hold or do now hold in Capite, nor for the many Tenants that
should be of the Kings ancient Demesne and Revenues, nor for the Clergy, the
multitude of Copyholders heretofore, as much as the fourth part of the Kingdom,
neither the great number of Lease-holders, Cottagers, Pryns 4 part of his
Register of Parliament Writs.
etc. that are not Freeholders, Citizens or Tradesmen, nor can all the Members
of the Body Politic be equally wounded in their Estates or concernments by the
vain imaginations, causless fears, and jealousies and bugbears of other
seditious or fanciful Men's own making.

And to men that have not yet proceeded so far in the School of Revelation as
to be sure of the Spirit of Prophecy, it may prove a matter of ill consequence
that the universality of the People should have occasion ministered and
continued to them to be apprehensive of utmost dangers from the Crown, from
whence they of right expect Protection.

And a Wonder next a Miracle, from whence the Premises to such a trembling and
timorous conclusion can be fetched, or how a People, whose valiant and wiser
Forefathers were never heretofore scared with such panick fears, nor wont to be
affrighted with such Phantasmes, should now suspect they can have no Protection
from the Crown, when some of them do at the same time labor all they can to
hinder it.

Or how it should happen in the long Rebellious Parliament that after Mr.
Chaloner a Linen Draper of London, was hanged for Plotting a Surprise of the
City of London and reducing it to the Kings obedience, honest Mr. Abbot the
Scrivener should be pardoned without any such discontent and murmuring of the
People, or that Oliver Cromwell should not be debarred of his Power of
Pardoning in his Instrument of Government, and be allowed to Pardon the Lord
Mordant for a supposed Treason against his usurped Authority; and our King
deriving his Authority, legally vested in Him and His Royal Ancestors, for more
than one thousand years before, may not adventure to do it without the utter
undoing and ruin of his Subjects in their Properties, Lives and Estates, by
His pardoning of some Capital Offenders: Or why it should not be as lawful and
convenient for the King to grant Pardons to some other Men, as to Doctor Oats
or Mr. Bedlow.

When no Histories Jewish, Pagan or Christian, can show us a People Petitioning
their Kings, that they would not Pardon, when all are not like to be Saints or
Faultless, and it will ever be better to leave it to the Hearts of Kings, and
God that directs them, than to believe Tyranny to be a Blessing, and Petition
for it.

And the most exact search that can be made, when it finds the Commons
petitioning in Parliament to the King or House of Peers, that they may be
present at some Trials there, upon their Impeachments, cannot meet with any one
President where they ever desired, or were granted such a reasonless Request,
pursued and set on by other Men's Designs to have one Man's Trial had before
another, and by struggling and wrestling for it, expose the King and Kingdom to
an utter destruction.

And therefore in those their fond importunities might do well to tarry until
they can find some Reason why the Lords Spiritual may not Vote or Sit as Judges
or Peers in Parliament, in the Case of the five-Lords, as well as of the Earl
of Danby.

Or any President that it is or has been according to Parliamentary
proceedings to have any such Vote or Request made by the Commons in Parliament.

Who neither were or should be so omnipotent in the opinion of Hobart and
Hutton and other the learned Judges of England, as to make a Punishment before
a Law, or Laws with a Retrospect, which God himself did never allow, but should
rather believe that Laws enacted contrary to the Laws of God and Morality, or
that no Aids or Help are to be given to the King pro bono publico, or that
there should be no Customs or Prescription, or that the King should be governed
by His People, would be so far from gaining an Obedience to such Laws or Acts
of Parliament as to render them, to be ipso facto null and of none effect.

When the King has been as careful to distribute Justice as his Mercy, without
violence to his Laws and well-inform'd Conscience has sometimes persuaded him
to Pardon, to do Justice, or to cause it to be done in a legal and due manner,
and is so appropriate to the Office and Power of a King, so annexed, appendant
and a part of it, as none but His Delegates are to intermeddle or put any
limits thereunto, and if it should not be so solely inherent in Him would be
either in abeyance or no where.

For the House of Commons are neither a Judicature or sworn to do Justice,
Prins Animad. upon Cokes 4 Instit.
and if they were, would be both Judges and Parties, and the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal are not as to particular proceedings sworn but merely consultive;
So as Justice can vest in none but the King, who is by his Coronation Oath only
sworn to do it, if His Right of Inheritance and greater Concernments than any
of His Subjects, did not abundantly engage and prompt Him thereunto; and is
therefore so every way, and at all times obliged to do Justice and Protect the
Lives, Estates, Peace and Liberty of His Subjects, as he is with all convenient
speed and have to Try or bring to Judgment, a Subject accused of Treason by the
Houses of Lords and Commons, both or either of them in His Court of King's Bench
before the Justices thereof, or by special Commission by a Lord High Steward in
or without the time of Parliament.

And the King may acquit (which amounts to a Remission or Pardon) by a more
Supreme Authority than any of His Judges (some particular Cases wherein Appeals
are, or may be brought, only excepted) do ordinarily by an authority derived
from no other, not to be debarred by probabilities, or possibilities, or by
consequences, not always to be foreseen or avoided.

For a Man pardoned for Manslaughter, may be so unhappy as in the like manner
afterward to be the death of five or ten more; 20000. Rebels pardoned at a
time as in the Insurrections of Wat Tyler, Jack Cade, etc. may be guilty of the
like Offense, twenty or forty years after: The Lord Mayor of London that has
an allowance of Tolls and Profits to take a care of the City and wholsomness of
Food, might be, as they are, too much careless and undo them in their Health
and well being.

The Judges may as those in the Reign of King Edward the First, and Thorp in
the Reign of King Edward the Third, be guilty of Misdemeanors, yet that is not
to bereave us of that good which better Men may do us in their administration
of Justice, our Kings have granted Privileges, to certain Cities and Towns not
to pay Subsidies, and granted Pardons as their Mercies and right reason
inclined them, in the course of their several Reigns for many Ages last past,
yet have not acquitted or left unpunished all the Offenders ever since, there
being a greater likelihood that they would not be so easy in pardoning, where
they were to gain so much by Attainders, Fines and Forfeitures.

And therefore panick and vain Fears, such as in constantem virum cadere non
possunt, should not be permitted to affright our better to be employed
Imaginations, unless we had a mind to be as wise as a small and pleasant
Courtier of King Henry the Eighths who would never endure to pass in a Boat
under London Bridge lest it should fall upon his Head, because it might once
happen to do so.

Our Magna Charta's and all our Laws which ordain no man to be condemned or
punished without Trial by his Peers, do allow it where it is by Confession,
Outlawry, etc. and no Verdict.

Did never think it fit that Public Dangers, such as Treason should tarry,
where Justice may as well be done otherwise without any precise Formalities to
be used therein.

For although it may be best done by the advice of the Kings greatest Council
the Parliament, there is no Law or reasonable Custom of England either by Act
of Parliament, or without, that restrains the King to do it only in the time of
Parliament.

When the Returns, Law-Days and Terms appointed and fixed, have ever given place
to our Kings Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, Inquiries, etc. upon special and
emergent occasions.

And notwithstanding it will be always advisable that Kings should be assisted
by their greatest Council, when it may be had yet there is no Law or Act of
Parliament extant, or any right reason or consideration to bind Him from making
use of His ordinary Council in a Case of great and importunate necessity for
the Trial of Peers by their Peers, before a Lord High Steward, attended by the
Kings learned Judges of the Law.

For Cases of Treason, Felony and Trespass, being excepted out of Parliament,
first and last granted and indulged Privileges by our and their Kings and
Princes, there can be no solid Reason or cogent Argument to persuade any man
that the King cannot for the preservation of Himself and His People, in the
absence or interval of Parliaments, punish and try Offenders in Cases of
Treason, without which there can be no Justice, Protection or Government, if
the Power of the King and Supreme Magistrate shall be tied up by such, or the
like as may happen, Obstructions.

So until the Honorable House of Commons can produce some or any Law,
Agreement, Pact, Concession, Liberty or Privilege to Sit and Counsel the King,
whether he will or no, as long as any of their Petitions remain unanswered
(which they never yet could or can) (those grand Impostures and Figments of the
Modus tenendi Parliamenta and the supposed Mirror of Justice, being as they
ought to be rejected) when the Parliament Records will witness that many
Petitions have, for want of time (most of the ancient Parliaments not expending
much of it) been adjourned to be determined in other Courts, as in the Case of
Staunton in 14 E. 3. and days have been limited to the Commons for the
exhibiting of their Petitions; the Petitions of the Corbers depended all the
Reigns of King Edward the First and Second, until the eleventh year of Edward
the Third, which was about sixty six years, and diverse Petitions not
dispatched, have in the Reign of King Richard the Second, been by the King
referred to the Chancellor and sometimes with a direction to call to his
assistance the Justices and the Kings Sergeants at Law, and the Commons
themselves have at other times prayed to have their Petitions determined by the
Council of the King or by the Lord Chancellor. And there will be reason to
believe that in Cases of urgent necessity for public safety, the King is and
ought to be at liberty to try and punish great and dangerous Offenders without
His Great Council of Parliament.

The Petitions in Parliament touching the pardoning of Richard Lions, John
Peachie, Alice Pierce, etc. and a long process of William Montacute Earl of
Salisbury were renewed and repeated again in the Parliament of the first of
Richard the Second, because the Parliament was ended before they could be
answered.

Anno 1. of King Richard the Second, John Lord of Gomenez formerly committed to
the Tower for delivering up of the Town of Ardes in that Kings time, of which
he took upon him the safe keeping in the time of King Edward the Third, and his
excuse being disproved, Rot. parl.
the Lords gave Judgment that he should dye, but in regard he was a Gentleman
and a Baronet and had otherwise well served, should be beheaded and Judgment
respited until the King should be thereof fully informed, and was thereupon
returned again to the Tower.

King Henry the Second, did not tarry for the assembling a Parliament to try
Henry de Essex, his Standard Bearer, whom he disherited for throwing it down
and affrighting his Host or disheartning it.

16 E. 2. Henry de bello monte a Baron refusing to come to Parliament upon
Summons was by the King, Lords and Council, and the Judges, and Barons of the
Exchequer then assisting committed for his contempt to Prison.

Anno 3 E. 3. the Bishop of Winchester was indicted in the King's Bench for
departing from the Parliament at Salisbury.

Neither did Henry the Eight forbear the beheading of His great Vicar General
Cromwell, upon none or a very small evidenced Treason, until a Parliament
should be Assembled.

The Duke of Somerset was Indicted of Treason and Felony, the second of
December, Anno 3 and 4 Edwardi 6. sitting the Parliament, which began the
fourth day of November, in the third year of His Reign, and ended the first day
of February in the fourth, was acquitted by his Peers for Treason, but found
guilty of Felony, for which neglecting to demand his Clergy he was put to Death.

In the Reign of King Philip and Queen Mary, Cokes 4 part of the Institutes.
thirty nine of the House of Commons in Parliament (whereof the famous Lawyer
Edmond Plowden was one) were Indicted in the Court of King's Bench, for being
absent without License from the Parliament.

Queen Elizabeth Charged and Tried for Treason, and Executed Mary Queen of
Scots her Feudatory, without the Advice of Parliament, and did the like with
Robert Earl of Essex her special Favorite, for in such Cases of public and
general Dangers, the shortest delays have not seldom proved to be fatally
mischievous.

And howsoever it was in the Case of Stratford, Archbishop of Canterbury in the
fifteenth year of the Reign of King Edward the Third, declared that the Peers
de la terre ne doivent estre arestez ne mesnez en Jugement, Si non en Parliament
and par leur Pairres, yet when there is no Parliament, though by the Common Law
their Persons may not then also be Arrested at a common persons Suit, they may
by other ways be brought to Judgment in any other Court.

And Charges put in by the Commons in the House of Peers, against any of the
Peers have been dissolved with it.

For Sir Edward Coke has declared it to be according to the Law and reasonable
Customs of England, Cokes 4 part of the Institutes Tit. Parliament.
followed by the modern practice, that the giving any Judgment in Parliament
does not make is a Session, and that such Bills as passed in either or both
Houses, and had no Royal Assent unto them, must at the next Assembly begin
again; for every Session of Parliament is in Law (where any Bill has gained
the Royal Assent, or any Record upon a Writ of Error brought in the House of
Peers has been certified) is and has been accounted to have been a Session.

And although some of this later quarrelling Age have Espoused an Opinion, too
much insisted upon, that an Impeachment brought by the House of Commons against
any one makes the supposed Offense, until it be Tried, unpardonable.

A Reason whereof is undertaken to be given, because that in all Ages it has
been an undoubted Right of the Commons to Impeach before the Lords any Subject
for Treason or any Crime whatsoever.

And the Reason of that Reason is (supposed to be) because great Offenses
complained of in Parliament, are most effectually determined in Parliament.

Wherein they that are of that Opinion may be entreated to take into their more
serious consideration;

That there neither is, nor ever was, any House or Members of Commons in
Parliament, before the Imprisonment of King H. 3. by a Rebellious part of his
Subjects, in the Forty ninth year of his Reign, or any kind of fair or just
evidence for it.

Factious designing and fond conjectures being not amongst good Patriots, or
the Sons of Wisdom ever accounted to be a sufficient, or any evidence.

Nor was the House of Lords from its first and more ancient original, entitled
under their King to a Judicative Power to their Kings, in common or ordinary
Affairs, but in arduis, and not in all things of that nature, but in quibusdam,
as the King should propose and desire their advice, concerning the Kingdom and
Church, in matters of Treason or public concernments, and did understand
themselves, and that high and honorable Court, to be so much forbid by Law,
ancient usage and custom to intermeddle with petty or small Crimes or Matters,
as our Kings have ever since the sixth year of the Reign of King Edward the
first, Rot. parl. 7 E. 1.
ordained some part of the Honorable House of Peers, to be Receivers and
Tryers of Petitions of the Members of the House of Commons themselves and
others, directed to the King, to admit what they found could have no remedy in
the ordinary Courts of Justice, and reject such as were properly elsewhere to
be determined, with an Indorsement of non est Petitio Parliamenti.

Which may well be believed to have taken much of its reason and ground from a
Law made by King Canutus who began his Reign about the year of our Lord, Ll.
Canuti, 16.
1016. Nemo de injuriis alterius Regi queratur nisi quidem in Centuria
Justitiam consequi and impetrare non poterit.

For certainly, if it should be otherwise, the reason and foundation of that
highest Court would not be as it has been hitherto, always understood to be
with a Cognizance only de quibusdam arduis, matters of a very high nature
concerning the King and the Church.

But it must have silenced all other Courts and Jurisdictions, and have been a
continual Parliament, a Jail-delivery or an intermedler in Matters as low as
Court Leets, or Baron and County Courts, and a Pye-Powder Court.

And the words of any Crime whatsoever do not properly signify great Offenses,
and that all great Offenses do concern the Parliament, is without a Key to
unlock the Secret not at all intelligible, when it was never instituted or made
to be a Court for common or ordinary Criminals.

For the House of Commons were never wont to take more upon them than to be
Petitioners and Assenters unto such things as the King by the advice of His
Lords Spiritual and Temporal should ordain, and obey, and endeavor to perform
them.

And an Impeachment of the House of Commons cannot be said to be in the Name,
or on the behalf of all the People of England, for that they never did or can
represent the one half of them, and if they will be pleased to examine the
Writs and Commissions granted by our Kings for their Election, and the purpose
of the Peoples Election of them to be their Representatives, Substitutes or
Procurators, it will not extend to accuse Criminals, for that appertained to
the King himself and His Laws, care of Justice and the Public; the Common
People had their Inferior Courts and Grand Juries, Assizes and Goal-Deliveries
to dispatch such Affairs without immediately troubling Him or His Parliament,
and the tenor and purpose of their Commissions and Elections to Parliament, is
no more than ad faciendum and consentiendum iis to obey and perform such things
as the King, by the advice of His Lords Spiritual and Temporal, should in
Parliament ordain.

For although where the Wife or Children of a Man murdered shall bring an
Appeal, the King is debarred from giving a Pardon, Ll. Inae, 6
because by our Saxon Laws derived from the Laws of God, they are not to be
disturbed in that satisfaction which they ought to have by the loss or death of
the Man murdered.

Yet the public Justice will not be satisfied without the party offending be
Arraigned and brought to Judgment for it, if the party that has right to
Appeal should surcease or be bought off, so as an Appeal may be brought after
or before the King has Indicted, and an auter foitz acquit in the one case
will not prejudice in the other, and where the Matter of Fact comes to be
afterward fully proved, and the Appeal of a Wife or Children of a Bastard
called filius populi, quia nullius filius, where only the King is Heir, cannot
vacate or supersede an Indictment of the Kings.

Neither is an Appeal upon a Crime or in criminal Matters, in the first
instance to be at all pursued in Parliament, by the Statute made in the First
year of the Reign of King H. 4. the words whereof are, 1 H. 4. ca. 14.
Item for many great inconveniences and mischiefs that often have happened by
many Appeals made within the Realm of England (to the great afflictions and
calamities of the Nation, as it afterward happened by the Lancastrian Plots
and Designs in that mischievous Appeal in Anno 11 of King Richard the Second)
before this time; It is ordained and stablished from henceforth, That all the
Appeals to be made of things done out of the Realm, shall be tried and
determined before the Constable and Marshal of England for the time being; And
moreover it is accorded and assented, That no Appeals be from henceforth made,
or in any wise pursued in Parliament in any time to come.

And therefore that allegation that the House of Peers cannot reject the
Impeachment of the Commons, because that Suit or Complaint of the Commons can
be determined no where else, will want a better foundation (an Impeachment of
the House of Commons, in the Name of all the People being no other than an
Appeal to the King in Parliament.)

And the Suit of such as might be Appellants in another place (being there
expressly prohibited) cannot be supposed to be the concern or interest of all
the People deserving or requiring satisfaction, or especially provided for by
Law to have satisfaction, unless it could by any probability or soundness of
Judgment be concluded that all the People of England, besides Wives, Children
or near Kindred and Relations (the necessity of public Justice and deterring
Examples) are or should be concerned in such a never to be fancied Appeal of
the People. And it will be very hard to prove that one or a few are all the
People of England, or if they could be so imagined, are to be more concerned
than the King, who is sworn to do Justice, unless they would claim and prove a
Sovereignty and to be sworn to do Justice, which though they had once by a
villainous Rebellion attacked, until Oliver Cromwell their Man of Sin, cheated
them of it; for God would never allow them any such power or privilege, or any
Title to the Jesuits Doctrine, which some of our Protestant Dissenters, their
modern Proselites, have learned of them, that the King although he be singulis
major, is minor universis.

And it is no denial of Justice in the House of Peers to deny the receiving of
an Impeachment from the House of Commons, when they cannot understand any just
cause or reason to receive it, and the Records, Rolls, Petitions and Orders of
Parliament will inform those that will be at the pains to be rightly and truly
directed by them, that Petitions in Parliament have been adjourned, modified or
denied; and that in the Common or Inferior Courts of Justice, Writs and Process
may sometimes be denied, superseded or altered according to the Rules of
Justice, or the circumstances thereof. And our Records can witness, that
Plaintiffs have petitioned Courts of Justice recedere a brevi and impetrare
aliud.

And it cannot be said that the King does denegare Justitiam, when he would
bind them unto their ancient, legal, well experimented forms of seeking it in
the pursuing their Rights and Remedies, and hinders them in nothing but seeking
to hurt others and destroy themselves.

For Justice no otherwise denied should not be termed Arbitrary, until there
can be some solid reason, proof or evidence for it.

When it is rather to be believed, that if the Factious Vulgar Rabble might
have their Wills, they would never be content or leave their fooling until they
may obtain an unbounded liberty of tumbling and tossing the Government into as
many several Forms and Methods, as there be days in the year, and no smaller
variety of Religions.

And they must be little conversant with our Records, that have not understood
that the Commons have many times received just denials to their Petitions, and
that some have not seldom wanted the foundations of Reason or Justice.

That many of their Petitions have adopted the Concerns and Interests of
others, that were either Strangers unto them, or the Designs of some of the
grand Nobility who thought them as necessary to their purposes as Wind, Tide,
and Sails are to the speeding of a Ship into the Port or Landing-places of
their Designs.

For upon their exhibiting in a Parliament in the 28 year of the Reign of King
Henry the Sixth, Rot. parl. 28 H. 6. n. 16, 17.
abundance of Articles of High Treason, and Misdemeanors, against William de
la Poole, Duke of Suffolk; one whereof was that he had sold the Realm of
England to the French King, who was preparing to invade it.

When they did require the King and House of Lords that the Duke (whom not long
before they had recommended to the King to be rewarded for special services)
might be committed Prisoner to the Tower of London, the Lords and Justices upon
consultation, thought it not reasonable unless some special Matter was objected
against him.

Whereupon the said Duke not putting himself upon his Peerage, but with
protestation of his innocence, only submitting himself to the Kings mercy, who
acquitting him from the Treason and many of the Misdemeanors* and for some or
them by the advice of the Lords, only banished him for five years. And that
thereupon when the Viscount Beaumont in the behalf of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal required that it might be Enrolled that the Judgment was by the Kings
own Rule, and not by their Assent, and that neither they nor their Heirs should
by this Example be barred of their Peerage.

No Protestation appears to have been made by any of the Lords Spiritual or
Temporal for or on the behalf of the Commons.

Or by the Commons for themselves.

So as a different manner of doing Justice can neither truly or rationally be
said to be an absolute denial of Justice, and was never believed to be so by
the Predecessors of the House of Commons in Parliament in our former Kings
Reigns, when some hundreds of their Petitions in Parliament have been answered
by, There is a Law already provided, or let the old Law stand, or the King will
provide a convenable or fitting remedy.

And is not likely if it were, as it is not to be, any Arbitrary Power, or any
temptation or inducement thereunto, to produce any Rule or encouragement to the
exercise of an Arbitrary Power in the Inferior Courts, when there is none so
weak in his Intellect, but may understand that different Courts have several
Boundaries, Methods and Forms of Proceedings, and that the Kings extraordinary
great Court and Council in His House of Peers although very just and
unarbitrary in their procedures, is so always ready to succor the Complaints
of People, as it never willingly makes it self to be the cause of it.

And cannot misrepresent the House of Peers to the King and his People, in the
Case of Mr. Fitz-Harris, or any others, when that honorable Assembly takes so
much care as it does to repress Arbitrary Power, and does all it can to protect
the whole Nation from it, and many of the House of Commons Impeachments have
been disallowed by the King and his House of Peers in Parliament without any
ground or cause of fear of Arbitrary Power, which can no where be so
mischievously placed, as in the giddy multitude whose Impeachments would be
worse than the Ostracisme at Athens, and so often overturn and tire all the
wise men and good men in the Nation as there would be none but such as deserve
not to be so styled, to manage the Affairs of the Government, subordinate to
their King and Sovereign.

To all which may be added, if the former Presidents cited to assert the Kings
Power of Pardoning as well after an Impeachment made by the Commons in
Parliament, as before and after an Impeachment received by the Lords in
Parliament, or made both by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, and after an
Impeachment received by the Lords in Parliament, or made both by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament be not sufficient that of Hugh le Despenser, Son of Hugh
le Despenser, the younger, a Lord of a great Estate, which is thus entered in
the Parliament Roll of the fifth year of the Reign of King Edward the Third,
ought surely to satisfy, that the Laws and reasonable Customs of England will
warrant it.

Anno 5 E. 3. Sir Eubule le Strange and eleven other Mainprisers, Rot. parl. 5
E. 3. n. 8.
being to bring forth the Body of Hugh the Son of Hugh le Despenser the
younger, says the Record, A respondre au prochein Parliament and de ester an
droit and affair ce and de liu en conseil soit ordine and mesuerent le Corpse
le dit Hugh devant nostre Seigneur le Roi Countes Barons and autres Grantz en
mesme le Parliament and monstrent les L'res Patents du Roi de Pardon al dit Hugh
forisfacturam vite and membrorum sectam pacis homicidia roborias Felonias and
omnes transgressiones, etc. Dated 20 Martii anno primo Regni sui Et priant a
n're Seigneur le Roi quil le vousist delivrer de las Mainprise and fair audit
Hugh sa grace and n're Seigneur le Roi eiant regard a ses dites L'res and
voilant uttroier a la Priere le dit Mons'r Eble and autres Mainpernors avaunt
dit and auxint de les Prelatz qui prierent molt especialment pur lui si ad
comande de sa grace sa delivrance. Et voet que ses Menpernors avaunt ditz and
chescun d' eux soient dischargez de leur Mainprise and auxint and le dit Hugh
soit quit and delivrers de Prisone and de guard yssint and si ho'me trove cause
devers lui autre and nest uncore trove quil estoise au droit.

And the English Translator, or Abridger of the Parliament Records, has
observed that the old usage was, that when any person being in the Kings
displeasure, was thereof acquitted by Trial or Pardon, yet notwithstanding he
was to put in twelve of his Peers to be his Sureties for his good Behavior at
the Kings pleasure.

And may be accompanied by the Case of Richard Earl of Arundel in the 22 year
of the Reign of King Richard the Second, 22 R. 2. In the Abridgment of the
Parliament Records in English said to be done by Sir Robert Cotton.
being Appealed by the Lords Appellant, and they requiring the King, that such
persons Appealed, that were under Arrest, might come to their Trial, it was
commanded to Ralph, Lord Nevil, Constable of the Tower of London to bring forth
the said Richard Earl of Arundel, then in his custody, whom the said Constable
brought into the Parliament, at which time the Lords Appellants came also in
their proper Persons. To the which Earl the Duke of Lancaster (who was then
hatching the Treason which afterward in Storms of State and Blood came to
effect against the King) by the Kings Commandment and Assent of the Lords
declared the whole circumstances; after the reading and declaring whereof the
Earl of Arundel, who in Anno 11 of that Kings Reign, had been one of the
Appellants, together with Henry Earl of Derby son of the said Duke of
Lancaster, and afterward the usurping King Henry the Fourth against Robert de
Vere, Duke of Ireland and Earl of Oxford, and some other Ministers of State,
under King Richard the Second, alleged that he had one Pardon granted in the
Eleventh year of the Reign of King Richard the Second, and another Pardon
granted but six years before that present time. And prays that they might be
allowed.

To which the Duke answered, that for as much as they were unlawfully made, the
present Parliament had revoked them.

And the said Earl therefore was willed to say further for himself at his
peril; whereupon Sir Walter Clopton, Chief Justice, by the Kings Commandment
declared to the said Earl, that if he said no other thing, the Law would
adjudge him guilty of all the Actions against him.

The which Earl notwithstanding would say no other thing, but required
allowance of his Pardons.

And thereupon the Lords Appellant in their proper Persons, desired that
Judgment might be given against the said Earl as Convict of the Treason
aforesaid.

Whereupon the Duke of Lancaster, by the Assent of the King, Bishops and Lords,
adjudged the said Earl to be Convict of all the Articles aforesaid, and thereby
a Traitor to the King and Realm, and that he should be hanged, drawn and
quartered, and forfeit all his Lands in Fee or Fee-tail, as he had the
nineteenth day of September, in the tenth year of the Kings Reign, together
with all his Goods and Chattels. But for that the said Earl was come of noble
Blood and House, the King pardoned the hanging, drawing and quartering, and
granted that he should be beheaded; which was done accordingly.

But Anno 1 Hen. 4. the Commons do pray the reversal of that Judgment given
against him, Rot. parl. 1 H. 4. n. 109. 111.
and restoration of Thomas the Son and Heir of the said Richard Earl of Arundel.

Unto which the King answered, he has showed favor to Thomas now Earl, and to
others, as does appear.

The Commons do notwithstanding pray, that the Records touching the Inheritance
of the said Richard Earl of Arundel, late imbezelled, may be searched for and
restored.

Unto which was answered, the King wills.

And their noble Predecessors in that Honorable House of Peers, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament long before that, videlicet, in the fifth
year of the Reign of King Edward the Third, made no scruple or meet point or
question in Law, whether the power of pardoning was valid and solely in the
King after an Impeachment of the Lords in Parliament, when in the Case of
Edmond Mortimer, the Son of Roger Mortimer Earl of March a Peer of great
Nobility and Estate, the Prelates, Counts, Barons, and autres gentz du
Parliament, did in full Parliament, as the Record it self will evidence,
Petition the King to restore the said Edmond Mortimer to his Blood and Estate
which were to remain unto him after the death of his said Father, Rot. parl. 5
E. 3. n. 16.
to whom it was answered by the King in these words; Et sur ce nostre Seigneur
le Roi chargea les ditz Prelates, Countes* and Barons en leur foies and ligeance
queux ils lui devoient and de puis ce que le Piere nostre Seigneur le Roi que
ore est estoit murdre per le dit Count de la March and person procurement a
ce quil avoit mesmes comdevant sa mort que eux eant regarda le Roi en tiel cas
lui consilassent ce quil devoit fair de reason audit Esmon filz le dit Count
les queux Prelates, Countes, Barons and autres (...) avys and trete enter eux
respondirent a nostre Seigneur (...) le Roi de Common assent que en regard a si
horrible fait comme de murdre (...) de terre and lour Seigneur lige quen faist
unques me avoient devant en leur temps ne nes devant venir en le eyde de dieu
quils ne scavoient uncore Juger ne conseiller ceque serroit affair en tiel cas.

Et sur ce prierent a nostre Seigneur le Roi quils poierent ent aver avisement
tanque au prochein Parliament la quelle priere le Roi ottroia and sur ce
prierent outre que nostre Seigneur le Roi feist au dit Esmon sa bone grace a
quoi il respond quil lui voloit fair mes cella grace vendroit de lui mesmes.

Sir Thomas de Berkeley (who Sir William Dugdale in his Book of the Baronage of
England, Rot. parl. 4 E. 3. n. 16.
found and believes to have been a Baron) being called to account by the King,
for the murder of his Father King Edward the Second, to whose custody at his
Castle of Barkeley, he was committed, not claiming his Peerage, but pleading
that he was at the same time sick almost to death at Bradely, some miles
distant, and had committed the custody and care of the King unto Thomas de
Gourney and William de Ocle ad eum salvo custodiendi, and was not guilty of the
murder of the King or any ways assenting thereunto Et de illo posuit se super
Patriam, had a Jury of twelve Knights sworn and impannelled in Parliament who
acquitted him thereof, but finding that he had committed the custody of the
King to the aforesaid Thomas de Gournay and William de Ocle, and that the King
extitit murderatus, a further day was given to the said Sir Thomas de Berkeley
de audiendo Judicio suo in prox. Parliamento, and he was in the interim
committed to the custody of Ralph de Nevil Steward of the Kings Household.

At which next Parliament Prierent les Prelatz* Rot. parl. 5 E* 3.
Countes and Barons a nostre Seigneur le Roi on the behalf of the said Sir
Thomas de Berkeley, that he would free him of his Bayl or Mainprize, whereupon
the King charging the said Prelates, Counts and Barons to give him their advice
therein: Le quel priere fust ottroia and puis granta nostre Seigneur le Roi de
rechef a leur request que le dit Mons'r Thomas and ses Mainpernors fusseient
delivres and discharges de lure mainprise and si estoit Jour done a dit Thomas
de estre en prochein Parliament, which proved to be a clear Dismission, for no
more afterward appears of that matter.

Neither after a fierce Impeachment in the said Parliament of 21 R. 2. against
Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury and Chancellor of England, of High
Treason, upon which he was by that injuried Prince condemned and banished, when
as the Record says, Les dits Countz prierent, au Roi ordenir tiel Jugement
verse le dit Ercevesque come le cas demand and le Roi sur ceo Recorda en le dit
Parliament que le dit Ercevesque avoit este devant lui en presence de certeines
Seigneurs and confessor que en la use de la dite Commission il sey mesprise and
lui mist en la grace du Roi surquoi, the Judgment was given against the said
Archbishop, that he should be banished and forfeit all his Lands, Goods and
Estate, when in the first year of the Reign of the usurping King H. 4. that
Archbishop not tarrying long in Exile, the minds of the Commons became so
settled on the prevailing side, there was so small or no opposition made by them
against him, as the Duke of York and Earl of Northumberland, and others of the
Blood of the said Archbishop of Canterbury did in Parliament pray the King that
the said Archbishop might have his recovery against Roger Walden, for sundry
Wastes and Spoils done by him in the Lands of the said Archbishopric, which the
King granted, and thanked them for their motion.

The Bishop of Exeter Chancellor of England at the assembling of the
Parliament, Rot. parl. 21 R. 2.
taking his Text out of the Prophecy of Ezekiel, Rexerit unus omnibus,
alleging the power that ought to be in Sovereign Kings and Princes whereby to
govern, and the Obedience in Subjects to obey, and that all alienations of his
Kingly Privileges and Prerogatives were reassumable and to be Repealed by his
Coronation Oath, Pour quoi le Roi ad fut assembler le Estatz de Parliament a
cest fair pour estre enformer si ascun droitz de sa Corone soient sustretz ou
amemuser a fin que par leur bon advis and discretion tiel remedy puisse estre
mis que le Roi puisse esteer en sa liberty ou poir Comme ses Progenitors ont
este devant lui and duissent de droit non obstante ascun ordinance au contraire
and ainsi le Roi as Tener, Et les governera, whereupon the Commons made their
Protestation, and prayed the King that it might be Enrolled, that it was not
their intent ou volunte to Impeach or Accuse any Person in that Parliament
sans congie du Roi, And thereupon the Chancellor by the Kings command, likewise
declared, That Nostre Seigneur le Roi considerant coment plusieurs hautes
offenses and mesfaits ont estre faitz par le People de son Roialme en contre
leur ligeance and l' Estat nostre Seigneur le Roi and la loie de la terre
devant ces heures don't son People estiet en grant peril and danger de leie and
leur corpse and biens and voullant sur ce de sa royalle benignite monstre and
fair grace a son dit People a fyn quilz ayent le greindre courage and volonte
de bien fair and de leure mieux porter devots le Roi en temps avenir si voet
and grante de fair and ease and quiet and salvation de son dit People une
generalle Pardon a ces liges forspries certaines pointz limitez par le samant
la suite al party forspris cyn quont persons queux plaira au Roi nomer and
tour ceux qui serront Empecher en ce present Parliament and dit austre que le
dit Roi voet que plein droit and Justice soyent faitz a Chascun de ses liges
qui en violent complandre en cest Parliament and ad ordiner and assigner
Receivers and Triers des Petitions en cest Parliament.

And did in pursuance thereof in full Parliament excuse, the Duke of York, the
Bishop of Worcester, Sir Richard le Scroop then living, William late Archbishop
of Canterbury, Alexander late Archbishop of York, Thomas late Bishop of Exeter,
and Michael late Abbot of Walton then being dead, of the Execution and intent
of the Commission made in the Tenth year of his Reign, as being assured of
their Loyalty, and therefore by Parliament restored them to their good Name.

And it is more than a little probable that the Prelates, Counts and Barons in
that Honorable House of Peers in Parliament, did well understand that the King
was a fit, and the only person to Petition unto for that Pardon, Discharge or
Dismission amounting to a Pardon, and did not think it to be either legal or
rational to Petition the People and their Fellow Subjects, upon a supposed
incredible and invisible Sovereignty, no man knows when or how radicated and
inherent in them.

The Decree of the great Ahashuerus that Reigned from India to Ethiopia, Esthe^
ca. 1, 3, 5, 8.
over one hundred twenty seven Provinces, whose Laws were holden to be
irrevocable, was reversed for the preservation of the Jewish Nation upon the
Petition of Queen Esther, and his holding out his Golden Scepter unto her.

The unquiet People of Athens now come enough under a Mohammedan Slavery, would
not again wish for Draco's bloody repealed Laws, without the mercy of a Prince
to moderate them according to the Rules of a prudent and discerning mercy.

Which made the Goodness and Wisdom of Solomon, 1 Reg. 3.
so extraordinarily eminent in his determination in the Case betwixt the two
Mothers claiming one Child.

Neither can a People ever be, or so much as think themselves to be in any
condition of happiness when their Laws shall be inflexible and hard hearted,
and there shall be no Superior Power to allay the rigidness or severity of them.

No Cities of Refuge or Asylums to fly unto, upon occasion of Misfortunes,
which God himself ordained for his Chosen People of Israel.

And therefore when Juries may err or play the Knaves, be Corrupt, Malicious
or Perjured, and Judges mistaken, our Judges have in their doubtings stayed the
Execution until they could attend the King for his determination.

Whereupon his Pardons did not seldom ensue, or a long Lease for Life was
granted to the penitent Offender, it being not amiss said by our old Bracton,
Bracton.
That Tutius est reddere rationem misericordiae quam Judicii, the Saxons in
doubtful Cases appealed to God for discovery, by Kemp or Camp, Fight, Fire or
Water Ordeal, which being now abolished and out of use, requires a greater
necessity of the right use of pardoning; Cokes Instit. 2. 315.
for Sir Edward Coke says, Lex Angliae est Lex misericordiae, like the Laws of
Scripture wherein Mercy is not opposite unto Justice but a part of it, as 1
John 19. Psalm 71. 2. Jer. 18. 7, 8, 9, 10. Ezekiel. 33. 13, 14. and it has not
been ill said, that Justitia semper mitiorem sequitur partem, for it is known
that a Judge since his Majesty's happy Restoration, who were he now living,
would wish he had made a greater pause than he did in a Case near
Brodway-Hills, in the County of Worcester or Gloucester, where a Mother and a
Son were, upon a seeming full evidence, Hanged for the Murder of a Father, who
afterward when it was too late, appeared to be living.

And Posterity by the remembrance of Matters and Transactions in Times past,
may bewail the Fate of some Ministers of State, who have been ruined by being
exposed to the Fury of the People, (who did not know how or for what they
accuse them) and left to the never to be found Piety or Wisdom of a Giddy,
Incensed and Inconsiderate accusing Multitude, and Hurrying on the reasonless
or little Wit of one another.

And consider how necessary it had been for the pious good Duke of Somerset, in
the Reign of King Edward the Sixth to have had his Pardon, when at his Trial
neither his Judges, nor the prevalency of the faction that would have rather
his Room than his Company, nor himself could remember to put him in mind to
demand the benefit of his Clergy.

Or how far it would have gone toward the prevention of that ever to be wailed
National Bloodshedding miseries and devastions, which followed the Murders of
the Earl of Strafford, and Archbishop Laud, if their Innocencies had but
demanded and made use of his late Majesty's Pardon.

Or what reason can be found why a Pardon after an Impeachment of a particular
Person by an House of Commons in Parliament, or an House of Peers joining or
consenting therewith, should not be as valid and effectual in Law, Reason and
good Conscience.

As the very many General Pardons and Acts of Oblivion, which have been granted
by our Kings and Princes to their People for Extortions of Sheriffs Bailiffs,
etc. together with many other Misdemeanors, Grievances and Offenses, often
complained of in many of our Parliaments, as the Records thereof will witness,
whereby they have acquitted and given away as much of their own just Rights and
Regal Revenues to their Subjects, than the Aids and Subsidies, which they have
Contributed toward his Preservation, and in His their own, when they have not
had a King or Prince but has been, as more especially this our present
Sovereign, Piger ad poenas ad praemia velox.

FINIS.

