A PROCLAMATION Of his Majesty The King of Spain.

For the Conservation of the Contrabando. Revocation of the Permissions.
Prohibition of the use of the Merchandises, and Fruits of the Realms of France,
England, and Portugal; and Reformation of Vestures, and Apparel, and other
things.


Published in Madrid, the 11th. of September, Anno 1657.

Translated out of Spanish.

LONDON, Printed by G. Dawson, for John Sweeting at the Angel in Pope's Head
Alley, anno 1657.

License, and Tax.
I Lewis Vazquez de Vargas, Notary of the Chamber of the King our Lord, and of
those of his Council, do certify, That by the Lords thereof, each of the
Proclamations which his Majesty commanded to be published for the conservation
of the Contrabando, Revocation of the Permissions, prohibition of the use of
the Merchandises, and Fruits of the Realms of France, England, and Portugal,
and Reformation of Vestures and Apparel, and other things, was taxed at Twelve
Quarts, and at this (and no higher price,) it maybe sold. And they also
Command, that no Printer of these Realms shall print the said Proclamation, but
he that shall have License of Don James de Canizares y Arteaga Secretary to the
King our Lord? and Notary of his Chamber, the ancientest of those of his
Council. And to the end it may appear by command of the said Lords, and at the
request of the said Don James,

I do give these presents in Madrid the 11. of September. 1657. LEWIS VAZQUEZ de
VARGAS.

DOn Philip by the grace of God King of Castil, Leon, Aragon, the two
Scicilia's, Jerusalem, Portugal, Navarra, Granada, Toledo, Valencia, Galicia,
Mallorca, Sevill, Cerdenna, Cordova, Corcega, Murcia-Iaen, the Algarves,
Algezira, Gibraltar, the Canary Islands, the East and West Indies, and Islands,
and firm land of the Ocean Seas, Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgandy,
Brabant, and Milan, Earl of Aspurgh, Flanders, Tirol, and Barcelona, and Lord
of Biscay, and Molina, etc. To the Infantes, Prelates, Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Rich-men; Priors of Orders, Commanders, Sub-Commanders, Captains of
Castles, strong houses, and others; and to those of our Counsel, President, and
Judges of our Audiences, Alchaldes, and Alguaziles of our House and Court, and
Chanceries, and to all the Corregidors, Assistants, Governors, Alcaldees, chief
and ordinary Alguaziles, Judges, Prevosts, Counsels Universities, Aldermen,
Regidors, Knights, Magistrates, Esquires, Officers, and good-men, and to all
and every of our Subjects, and Nations, of what Estate, Dignity, or
Pre-eminence soever they shall or may be, of all the Provinces, Cities, Towns,
and places of these our Realms, and Lordships, as well to those that present
are, as to such as hereafter shall be.

1. Know that by our Laws, Proclamations, and Mandats published in these
Realms, the commerce with the Realms of Portugal, France, and England is
prohibited, upon several penalties, even to the death of the Transgressors,
and loss of their Estates; And because so weighty a business has not had the
execution it requires, these Realms have sustained, and do sustain very great
damages, the silver and gold being carried out of them, and our Subjects and
vassals estates, vainly spent in useless and unnecessary things, our enemies
enjoying as much convenience and profit as they could have done in time of
peace, by the introduction of their Merchandises, as well by venue of certain
permissions that have been granted, and by the toleration and disimulation of
some, who by their own obligation, and by their places, and offices, ought to
have prevented the same, Desiring to put a stop to such great inconveniences
and disorders, and provide a remedy for them, and absolutely to shut the door
against the introduction of all sorts of Goods and Fruits of the said Realms,
which being seen by our Councils, and that which concerning the premises, the
whole Realm united in Parliament has petitioned us for, (which at present is
sitting,) and having consulted with us, it was agreed, that we ought to command
these our Letters to be given, which we will, shall have the force of a Law,
and a Proclamation set forth by Royal Authority, as if they were made and
promulgated in Parliament, whereby we do command the Laws, Proclamations, and
Mandats prohibiting Commerce with the said Three Realms to be indispencably
kept and accomplished, and the penalties put in execution which thereby are
imposed on, and established against the Transgressors of the same, which the
amplifications, and Declarations contained in this our Law and Proclamation.

2. And whereas the years past we granted several Permissions for the importing
of the Merchandises and Fruits of the said Realms, and the time limited for the
use of them, or the greatest part thereof is now expired, and we are informed,
that what they have imported without entry made in the Custome-houses, will
satisfy for what time or quantity soever they may want, and that already they
have got greater profits by the frauds they have committed. We do suspend and
determine all and every the said Licenses, and permissions which have been
given, notwithstanding it may be alleged and proved, that the term, or the
quantity thereof is not accomplished. And we do will, and it it is our pleasure
(for the motives aforesaid) that no use be made of the same for any cause or
pretense, after the day of the publication of this Proclamation, for that from
henceforth it shall be put in execution. And we do command that they remain
void and cancelled, as if they had never be granted.

3. And for as much as some persons through their great covetousness and malice
have made it their employment and practice to receive and dispatch, and
introduce unwarrantable and prohibited Goods, notwithstanding the penalties
commanded to be imposed upon them by the Laws, Proclamations, and Mandats,
touching the prohibition, and importation of these Merchandises from the said
three Realms, and thereby have made, and do make it facile to find Merchants,
and other particular persons that buy them to resell, or otherwise dispose of
them. We do will, and it is our pleasure that such dispatchers, and
introducers, Merchants, Shop keepers, Factors, Commissioners, Brokers, and
particular persons as shall buy, or have these, shall incur the penalties
expressed in one of our Mandats of the one and thirtieth of January, Anno 1650.
and in the last, which was published in these Realms, touching the prohibition
of Trade with the Realm of England.

And for that we desire this prohibition may be established so absolutely, that
no doubt may be made of our royal pleasure. We do command, that by no Council,
Tribunal, nor Committee, it shall, or may be consulted with, nor propounded
unto us to grant License, or permission against that ordained in this our
Proclamation.

5 And the execution and accomplishment of all the premises is: (for the better
prevention) to belong unto the ordinary Justice of our Realms, and to the
Surveyors, and Judges of the Contrabando, nominated by our Counsel of War, in
the form, and as is ordained in the Proclamation of the one and thirtieth of
January of the said year 1650.

6 And that a remedy may be provided for the evils aforesaid, and the door shut
against the introducing of the Fruits and Merchandises of the said Relms,
(holding the prohibition of the use of these Merchandises, the most efficatious
remedy) for their being not any that may spend them, the occasion and interest
to bring them will cease; We do Command, that no person of what estate or
pre-eminence soever he maybe, neither Man, nor Woman, shall cloth him, or her
self, nor for no cause make use of any Merchandise of Enemies Realms, of what
quality soever it may be, under the penalties imposed on the said Receivers and
Introducers thereof, expressed in the said Mandats and Proclamations. And the
Tailors and Tradesmen that shall cut, sow, or make apparel, or any other thing
that shall respect, or tend to the use and consumption of the said Merchandise
of the said Enemies Realms, shall for the first time incur the penalty of
twenty thousand Maravedis, and two years banishments out of the Kingdom; and
for the second time forty thousand Maravedis, that is, whipped on an Asses back.
and public sham.

7 And because amongst other things that have occasioned the evils experimented
in these Realms, by the nonobservance of the said prohibitions, has been the
excessive and unprofitable expenses in our Subjects, and vassals apparel,
spending and consuming their estates in these superfluities, which is that we
desire, and will now to remedy, and that every one in his estate may confine
himself to the moderation he ought to observe, according to his degree, from
whence two things will result; First, such disorders and profuce expenses will
cease; and secondly, their estates will be increased by this moderation and due
frugality, for so it is necessary for the maintenance of the State public. We
do ordain, and command, That no person, Man, nor Woman of what degree and
quality soever, he, or she may be, put on, nor wear in no kind of Apparel,
Tisshew, Cloth of Gold, nor Silver, nor Silk that has ground or mixture of
Gold or Silver, nor embrodered, nor Lace, nor Edgeing, nor Galoon, nor Twist,
nor Stiching, nor Buttons, nor Ribbins of drawn Gold or Silver, nor any other
thing wherein there is spun Gold or Silver, or true or false Plate, or Pendents
of Gold or Silver, nor other kind of Trimming of the same, Steel, or Glass,
Pearls, or seed of Pearl, nor other Stones true nor falce; But we only permit
Buttons of massy Gold or Silver to be used; Which Prohibition, nor any other,
contained in this Proclamation shall be understood of what shall be made for
Divine Worship, for that for the same may be made whatsoever shall be needful.

8 And we do permit for the honor of the Cavalry, Garments to be worn by the
Soldiers that shall be actually in Arms in the Wars, or in other acts
concerning the same, notwithstanding they be such as by this Proclamation are
prohibited, and the like at the public Feasts of the Gentry on Horseback.

9 And we do also prohibit wearing of any kind of Bone, or Woven Lace of Silk
of Thread, or putting it on Men and Women's Apparel, on Gloves, Hatbands, and
Garters, or any other thing, Vestures, and Apparel. And we do only permit plain
in Men and Women's Bands, and black only in their Mantles, being made in these
Realms of Spain, and in the other places permitted by this Proclamation.

10 For Men and Women's Apparel, they are to wear them of plain and wrought
black, and colored Velvet, Plush, Damask, Sattins, plain and stiched
Taffaties, and all other sorts of Silk, so as they be made in our Realms of
Spain, and in those of our Dominion, and in the other Provinces in amity, with
which Commerce is held; (provided all the Merchandises of this kind that shall
be imported, be of the weight, measure, mark, and lay that those wrought and
made in these Realms ought to hold, in conformity to that ordained by the 21,
22, and 23. Laws of the Twelfth Title of the Fifth Book of the Recollection,
which we command shall be kept. And they may be trimmed with Welts, Lace, or
Embrodery of Silk, so as none of these Trimmings exceeds the breadth of six
fingers: and no otherwise shall they be worn, nor made use of by any person of
what estate or quality soever he or she may be, under the penalties expressed
in this Proclamation, which shall be applied in the form therein contained.

11 And we do permit with black or colored Apparel embrodered, and embossed
Sleeves, and Belts to be worn, so as they have not in the ground, nor in the
said Embroderies, and Embossements, any thing of Gold, nor of Silver, for both
the one and the other is to be of silk.

12 And that which is prohibited and commanded touching Apparel, is also to be
understood of Stage Players, Musicioners of both Sexes, and other persons that
be in Commedies to sing and play, unto whom there is only to be permitted
plain Apparel of black and colored Silk, provided it be made in these Realms,
and in those of our Dominions, or in the Provinces in Amity.

13 We do permit the Liveries that shall be given to Pages, to be Cassocks,
Breeches, and sleeves of plain silk, made in these Realms, and in those of our
Dominions; and there shall not be any Cloaks given nor worn of silk, but of
Cloth, Rash, Bays, or some other thing, but not of silk, nor lined therewith,
but silk stockings they may wear.

14 In Liveries of Lackies, Coach men, and Sedanmen, We do Command that there
shall not be any thing but Cloth worn, without any Trimming, Lace, Galoon,
Welt, Stiching, but they shall be plain, with Buttons before their Cassocks
only. And we do permit the capes of their cloaks, breasts, and sleeves to be of
plain or wrought colored Velvet, provided they be made in Spain, and in the
Realms of our Dominions, or other Provinces in friendship with us, and colored
worsted Stockings, but not silk.

15 And all Liveries that shall be otherwise made, and worn are to be declared
as we do declare them forfeited and lost, and to be applied in manner
aforesaid; and the Tailors that shall make them, to incur the penalties
imposed; and the Servants and Lackies that shall wear them, six thousand
Maravedis, and two years banishment five Leagues from this Court. And the same
is to be observed in all the other Cities, Towns, and places of our Realms,
under the same penalty.

16 And for the wearing of all the Apparel already made contrary to that
ordained in this Proclamation, We do grant two months which shall begin from
the day of the publication hereof, (with denial of longer time) which being
expired, although they be not worn out, there shall not be any use thereof
made, and the day that any person shall be therewith apprehended, such his
apparel is to be lost, and applied by three parts, viz. to the Chamber, Judge,
and Informer.

17 And we do declare and command, That from the day of the publication of this
Law and Proclamation, there shall not, nor may not and Apparel, nor Vesture be
made, but in the manner, and with the stuffs and Trimmings therein declared;
And those that contrary hereunto shall be new made: and the Tailor that shall
cut them, workmen that shall sow them, and Embroderer that shall embroder them,
shall in cut the penalties imposed.

18 And because from henceforth the consumption of the Goods and Merchandises
of the said Three Enemies Countries that shall be found in these Territories is
prohibited, We do permit them to be sent to the Indies, so as they be Registered
in this Court within six days before one of our Council, that the President
thereof shall nominate; and in all the other Cities, Towns, and places of our
Realms, before the ordinary Justices within other six days next after the
publication hereof, and all those which shall not be Registered, (are to be
lost;) And when they shall take and carry them From the places where the
Registers shall be made, to send them to Cadiz, or to other Ports of
Andalu-Zia, to be laden in Fleets or Galleons, They are to take dispatches,
and guides of the Justices from whence they shall go, and remain bound to bring
Testimonies that the said Merchandises were laden in Fleets or Galleons, for
that it shall not be lawful to sell them for more or less, for that from
henceforth the commerce, and sale of the said Merchandises that shall be found
in being, is prohibited, and that which shall be otherwise carried away, are to
incur the penalties established against those that make use of the Goods
prohibited by this Proclamation. But it shall not be necessary to Register the
Merchandises which shall be of the Realms of our Dominions, and of the
Provinces in Amity, with which commerce is held; for although many of them are
are prohibited for apparel, coaches, and sedans, they may be permitted for
other uses, and designed for the Indies, paying the Duties, without need of a
new authority for the same.

19 And to prevent the molestation, vexation, and inconveniences, that would
happen by the Justices and Officers frowardness, to enter into men's houses to
seek and enquire, and do other diligencies to discover whether prohibited
apparel be worn: We do command that they shall not enter into any house to do
these diligencies, for they shall only make informations against the persons
that should transgress, and go with such apparel in the streets, and in other
public, places.

20 And we do also command, that from henceforth in obedience to that which a
Chapter of the Law 2 Title, 12 Book 7. of the New Recollection, does ordain,
There shall not be any Sedans made with hands of Tisshew, nor of cloth of Gold
or Silver, nor of any Silk that has any therein; nor shall their linings be
imbrodered with any thing, for they shall not exeeed Velvet, Damask, or some
other silk, and they may have fringe and lace Buttons thereof, but not of Gold
nor Silver; and the pillars of the said Sedans may be trimmed with silk Lace,
and little studs or nails.

21 And we do likewise command, according to another Chapter of the same Law 2.
and the said Title 12. Book 7. that no Coach, nor Litter shall be embrodered
with Gold, Silver, or Silk, or lined with Thisshew, cloth of Gold, nor of
Silver, nor with any silk that has any therein, nor with fringe, nor tufts,
nor any other trimming of gold or silver Lace; And that they shall be only
made of Velvet, or Damask, or of any other plain silks of those made in our
Realms, and other Dominions, and in the Provinces in amity with which commerce
is held, with silk, fringe, and galoon; and they may have the nailing gilt: but
the iron work of the Coaches shall have no guilding.

22 And we do also command, That the coverings of the said Coaches, Sedans, and
Litter shall not be of any silk, nor the Trimming of Horses, Coach, Mules, and
Littermen; and that the said coaches, and litters shall not be stitched,
notwithstanding they are of Leather or Cordovan, much less shall they have on
them any Trimming of Embrodered Leather.

23 And for the use of those already made, against that, ordained in this
Proclamation, we do grant two years time, which being expired, the Owners are
not to make use of them for any purpose. And to the end those that are, may be
known, they are to be Registered in this Court, before one of our Council that
the President thereof shall nominate within three days; and in the other
Cities, Towns, and places before the ordinary Justices thereof within the same
time, which is to begin from the day of the publication in this Court, and in
the Cities where it shall be made, and of those that shall not be Registered,
there shall not be any use made, and the day that they shall be made use of
without registring, they are to be lost, and their value applied by three
parts, viz. to the Chamber, Judge, and Informer.

24 And the Masters that make new Coaches, Litters, and Sedans, and the Workmen
that shall frame, embroder, or stitch them, contrary to that ordained in this
Proclamation, shall incur for the first time loss of the said Coaches, Littars,
and Sedans which they shall have so made, or shall make, and fifty thousand
Maravediz to be applied in the same manner; and for the second time the
pecuniary penalty shall be doubled, and four years banishment five leagues from
this Court, and from the Cities, Towns, and places where they shall transgress.

25 And we do command all Justices of our Realms so to keep, accomplish, and
execute it under penalty of deprivation of their Offices, which he shall incur,
that shall be therein remiss or negligent, or shall in any manner dissemble;
and those of our Council and Chanceries, to take particular care to punish the
said Judges in their Residences as they shall see cause, and determine, having
been remiss in the execution of this our Law, and imposing upon them such other
penalties, which (according to the quality of the fault, they shall see
convenient.

26 And whereas the observance of this Proclamation touching Vestures and
Apparel will respect the good and public Government of these our Realms, which
would be troubled with multiplicity of Jurisdictions, and so the punishments
and execution of the penalties, not passing soly through the hands of our
ordinary Justices. We do hereby give them privative Jurisdiction to take
cognizance of the cases that shall respect the punishment and execution of the
penalties of the Transgression, the use of the Vestures and Apparel, Silks, and
Goods which are to be made, and other things contained in this Reformation; and
we do command them inviolably to execute them against the Transgressors, and
the same to be done in the ordinary visiting of the Prisons, without power to
moderate the same.

27 And no Gentleman of Military Orders, Captains, or actual Soldiers, or
privileged persons of any Militia's, notwithstanding they are of our Guards,
Titular Officers, or Familiars of the Inquisition, nor any other privileged by
Law or custom, although they are not here expressed, and may be of equator
greater exemption, shall enjoy any benefit by the privileges or exemptions
they shall have by Law, or Custom, for that it has never been our pleasure to
grant them for these cases, nor that they shall be extended to these matters of
Government; And we do inhibit all Counsels, Tribunals, and Judges, that may
take cognizance of their cruses, by reason of their privileges, or places; And
we declare them incompetent, and do command it shall not be admitted any to
benefit himself by this recourse to hinder the progress of taking cognizance of
like informations, and the punishment of his transgressions, and exclude him
from the same.

28 All which our pleasure is, shall be inviolably kept, accomplished, and
executed; and we do command you to cause it to be kept, accomplished, and
executed, according, and as in these our Letters is contained, and declared;
and against the form and tenor thereof, and that which therein is contained
not to go, nor pass, nor consent to be gone, nor passed in any manner; And all
Justices of these our Realms, each in his jurisdiction shall cause it to be
kept as a Law, and Proclamation established by Royal Authority, which from
henceforth is to be binding from the Publication in this Court, and in all
other Cities, Towns, and places, from the time that it shall be published in
the heads of their Jurisdictions.

Given in Madrid the 11th. of September, Anno 1657. I the King. I Martin de
Villela, Secretary to the King our Lord, did draw it by his command. The
Licentiate D. Anthony de Contreras The Licentiate D. Christoper de Moscoso, y
Cordova. The Licentiate D. Martin Iniguez de Arnedo. The Licentiate D. Anthony
de Valdes. The Licentiate D. Laurence Ramirez de Prado. Registered. D: Peter de
Castaneda. Peter de Castaneda, High Chancellor.


Publication.
IN the Town of Madrid the 11th. of the month of September, anno 1657. before
the Gates of the Royal Palace, and Gate of Guadalaxara, where is the Trade and
Commerce of the Merchants and others, is the Licentiates Don Francis de
Quinones, Don Vincent, Banuelos, Don Francis Medrano, Don John Ramires de
Arellano, Don John Buens de Roxas, Alcaldes of his Majesty's House and Court
being present, this Law and Proclamation was published with Trumpets and Drums
by public Cryers, in loud and intelligible voices, at which were present
Bartholomew Bracco, Francio de Moscoso, John Baptist Belarde, Alguaziles of the
House and Court of the King our Lord, and many other persons; And to the end it
may appear, I do give these presents the said day, month, and year.

D. JAMES de CANIZARES y ARTEAGA.

THe Register of the Coaches, and other things, is to be made before Don
Ieronimo de Camargo one of his Majesty's Council.

FINIS.

