A BRIEF OF PROCEEDINGS BETWEEN Sr. HIEROM SANKEY AND Dr. WILLIAM PETTY. WITH
The State of the Controversy BETWEEN THEM Tendered to all Indifferent Persons.

LONDON. Printed in the Year, M. DC. L. IX.

TO THE READER.
THE Employments wherein Doctor Petty has s^rved in Ireland, have been Many
and Intricate; The Persons concerned in his well or evil Administrations,
numerous; The occasions of jealousy concerning Him, almost infinite, and
consequently the various Articles Exhibited against Him, with his Answers and
other Proceedings thereupon, must needs be tedious. You have therefore what is
most material and pertinent, of every thing relating to Sir Hierom Sankey's and
the said Doctors Proceedings, faithfully reduced into the narrowest compass
consistent with perspicuity, to the end that all lovers of Truth and Justice,
may be encouraged to unravel the perplexed Knots of this Business, and learn by
this Example to understand the Weight and Reasons of other Popular jealousies
and discontents hereafter, and withal the Error and Vanity of them, who hope to
please Multitudes, by their most cautious and upright Endeavors.

A BRIEF of PROCEEDINGS BETWEEN SIR HIEROM SANKEY AND DOCTOR WILLIAM PETTY.
On the 24th. of March 1658/9. Sir HIEROM SANKEY after an affrighting
aggravating Preface, exhibits the following Articles against Doctor WILLIAM
PETTY, in a Parliamentary Assembly of above Four hundred Honorable Persons.
Viz.

1. That he the said Doctor had received Great Bribes. 2. That he had made a
Trade of buying Debenters in vast numbers against the Statute. 3. That he had
gotten vast sums of Money, and Scopes of Land by Fraud. 4. That he had used
many foul Practices, as Surveyour and Commissioner, for Setting out Lands. 5.
That he and his fellow Commissioners, had placed some Debenters in better
places than they could claim, denying Right to others. 6. That he and his
fellow Commissioners had totally disposed of the Armies Security; the Debt
still remaining chargable on the State.
On the 21. of April, The said Doctor, being come (upon Summons) out of Ireland
Answers the said Articles, in the said Assembly to the following Effect. Viz.

To the First. THat he had acted as Secretary to the Lord Lieutenant, and as
Clerk of the Counicll of Ireland, in both which capacities he had fair
opportunities of taking Bribes, but was never taxed therewith. That as
Commissioner for distributing Lands, he shunned the receiving of any
Obligation, avoided all Bargains, but by leave, etc. to the end he might avoid
the very appearance of this evil.

To the Second. That he never bought Debenter without leave, those at dearest
rates, and of Brokers, and not till the Body of the Army was satisfied; That
none who ever sold him any, did ever complain of the least hardship put upon
them, and that it was not possible for him so to do.

To the Third. That he never received Penny from the State but according to
Contract, and not till he had past all kind of Examinations. That the Work he
has done is even now worth more then the State has paid for it, etc. That he
had no Land by his own assumption, but all by Orders from other Commissioners,
and the Council, in a way not repugnant to Law, and not at less Rates or
Considerations then others; and if there was any singularity in the manner,
'twas to his one damage only.

To the Fourth. That for the generallity of the Actions he had done, as
Commissioner and Surveyour, he hoped he might without much vanity, glory in
them; Instancing his Measuring twenty two Counties in thirteen Months,
Satisfiying twenty thousand Debenters, without alteration, using strictness
toward the greatest Persons, etc.

To the Fifith. That his fellow Commissioners were Persons of Integrity and
Ability, and that he would not prevent them of the Honor to clear themselves.

To the Sixth. That above three hundred thousand Acres of Land were yet
undisposed, and that what was already set out, had satisfied more Debt then
needed to have been charged upon it.


After the abovesaid Defense of the said Doctor, and when the said Sir Hierom
(being newly come from seeking Proofs out of Ireland) was urged in the
Parliament to instance particulars, with reference to the above Charge, He
alleged as follows:

1. That Lieutenant Colonel Flower bringing an Order for Land, The said Doctor
asked, what he would give him to set it out to him. Flower answers, 100. l. The
Doctor replied, 'twas an inconsiderable Reward, demanding half the Rents, at
length they conclude for 100. l. per annum, as a Rent Charge, The said Sir
Hierom calling the same, an Horrible bribe. 2. That Captain Sands producing
the like Order, could not have his Lands until he had given the Doctor a fair
house in Dublin, calling the same, an Inducement to a Bribe. 3. That Lieutenant
Colonel Brayfeild demanding Land, was told, his Lands were beyond the Moon. 4.
That Captain Winckworth doing the like, was told, that the Lands he desired
were kept for my Lord Deputy. 5. That the Debenters of the Soldiers commonly
amounting to five shillings two pence, the said Doctor would pay the five
shillings, but keep the two pence for himself. 6. That the said Doctor had
seven thousand Acres in the Barrony of Ballebuoy more then he had either Order
for, or Right unto. 7. That the said Doctor received 1100. l. for a Duplicate
of Straffords Survey, which never cost him 20. l. the transcribing.
To which Instances the said Doctor intended to have said. Viz.

To the First. That Flower was a vicious wretch and notoriously guilty of
Covetousness, That he by tricks, and abusing the Lord Lieutenants kindness had
trappanned him, the said Doctor, out of an Estate worth 500. l. per annum, for
a rent charge of 100. l. per annum only, which he never yet paid, and has been
the Author of all the said Doctors troubles, merely to work him out of the said
100. l. per annum; That he had been damnified by that transaction with Flower
above one thousand pounds, and that without hopes or design (from first to
last) of ever gaining any thing by him, and much less of being bribed.

To the Second. That he had done great Acts of Kindness and Charity for the
said Captain Sands, That he was to give the said Sands eight hundred acres of
Land for a House, and some imaginary benefit of an Order of his, which he
needed not; the said house not being worth 300. l. That the reason of Sands his
complaint, was his own great guilt in seeking to abuse the State, and the said
Doctor, in a most unchristian manner.

To the Third. That he does not remember any such expression as Land beyond the
Moon, but that if it were used, 'twas in kindness toward the said Liuetenant
Colonel Brayfield; That if he had not his Order served so soon as he desired,
'twas because the said Doctor could find nothing good enough for him. For the
said Doctor ever affected the person of the said Brayfield, was commanded by
the Lord Lieutenant to assist him, and was desired the same by his then Partner
and Friend, Sir Thomas Herbert.

To the Fourth. That Winkworth is a very weak mistaking Person, who had no more
wit then to think by this device to withhold the Doctor from Questioning him
for the razure of an Order made in his own case.


The others he needed only to have denied with some explication, Sir Hierom
having upon more mature thoughts declined them himself.

Sir Hierom after many threatenings of the said Doctor to question him again,
sometimes in one place, and sometimes in another, did at length upon the
twelfth of July 1659. procure the following Articles to be put into this
present Parliament, without reading them (as he himself boasted) beyond the
first Article, the which Article cunningly suggesting a fraud of about 7000. l.
got acceptance to the wh^le, and a reference into Ireland, although the chief
Witnesses (for trying all the pretended frauds of the State and Army amounting
to about twenty thousand pounds) as also authentic Copies of Records be here
in England, sufficient for that purpose.

The First of which Articles is,
That he the said Doctor had as much Land for 3480. l. as comes to 10188. l.

To which the said Doctor Answers generally, and briefly.

That it will rather appear, that he had paid 20000. l. for 8000. Acres.

2. Article.
Whereas the said Doctor had License to purchase Lands charged with more
Encumbrance than they amounted unto at the Act Rates. He has taken some
encumbered for less, some he has gotten by collusion and paid nothing, and
has wrested others out of an Officers hand of the Army.

Answer.
The Doctor has paid above 1300. l. for what many have had for four hundred
pounds, and has proceeded according to Orders, throughout the whole business.

3. Article.
Whereas Rates higher and lower then the Act Rates were put on Lands by consent
of the Persons concerned, the said Doctor has taken to himself the benefit of
the Enhancements.

Answer.
That the Doctor has no benefit by the said Enhancements, nor desires to have
any; The scope of this Article being to wind out of the States hands about
12000. l. which belongs to them.

4. Article.
That he left out of the Soldiers Lot, the chiefest seats (...) encumbered,
putting in others encumbered as clear, and afterward takes those choice seats
to himself.

Answer.
That the Design of leaving out certain Lands here mentioned was good, and
orderly, and the Doctor believes that the practice of it was so to, though he
never meddled with it, That 'twas not his Interest to abuse the said Design,
neither has he gotten any thing in consequence of the Errors complained of,
if any such be.

5. Article.
That many of the Conditions for which he had received above 8000. l. were
never performed, but that he got up his Bond and Contract concerning the same,
surreptitiously.

Answer.
This whole Article is a gross mistake of the Fact: For there were two
Contracts, by one whereof 17000. l. was due; whereof the Doctor never received
but 10600. By the other Contract about 8000. l. was due, whereof he never
received 5500. l. Moreover the defects here mentioned were neither the Doctors
faults nor profit: And the useful Overwork, he has done deserves several
thousand pounds in recompense. Lastly, his Bonds and Contract were kept from
him above nine months longer then they ought to have been, out of abundant
caution only, and at length were delivered by the consent and knowledge of the
Council, the Army, the Attorney General and Surveyor General, after many debate
concerning the same.

6. Article.
That the Doctor has received 2665. l. three times over, and 516. l. more by a
falsification, as also 421. l. and 440. l. more then in strictness he could
demand, to the couzenage of the State of 5846. l.

Answer.
What is said to have been paid thrice, was never paid once, and if he has
received any thing which in strictness of Law he might not, in Equity and
Conscience he ought to have received twice as much for those very things. As
for the 516. l. said to be forged, it is a rash mistake proceeding from too much
desire to find faults.

7. Article.
That after all these Frauds both as to Money and Land; he so amused a certain
Committee, as they allowed him 3796. l. more for nothing.

Answer.
Upon a full reveiw of all matters relating both to the Land and Money, between
the State, Army, and the said Doctor himself* a Committee of most judicious and
honest persons allowed him 3790. l. over and above all he then had, or now has
received, and even when the cry of the abovementioned frauds and many others,
was highest: Neither is any reason to the contrary yet detected.

8. Article.
That by delays, feigned scruples, and derisions he wrought men to sell him
their Debenters at under Rates, and to give him part of whatsoever he assigned
them.

Answer.
The delays here mentioned were inevitable, the derisions a frivolous
complaint; That of working men to a Composition, a very slander. The contrary
of all these Allegations being true.

9. Article.
Whereas he had greater Rates for surveying then over were given, he gave less
to his under Surveyours then was ever taken, and yet retrenched much of that
too.

Answer.
The said Under-Surveyours were not duly punished for their treacheries against
the said Doctor: They were paid more than they deserved, more than they durst
claim by Law, more than Arbitrators allowed them, and twice more than they will
have again for the like work, they were used better than they used others,
besides, the Doctor gave them more, then the State it self has since given
them, nor did they ever complain, till now they were Instigated for a supply
instead of other declined Articles.

10. Article.
That he has not walked by the Rules and Instructions given him; but slighted
them all.

Answer.
A General Slander; to which there needs only to be said, that dolosus ve^^atur
in generalibus.

11. Article.
That he withholds his original Books and Plots, as also the Duplicates of his
^air Books contrary to an Act of Parliament.

Answer.
This is a demand never till now thought fit to be made, an absurd and useless
desire; a mere device to enable some hereafter to abuse the State and subject
at their pleasure, and a pretended crime that the Doctor can make no benefit by.

Observations upon the whole Matter, Viz.
1.
That since it appeared to the World (and never before) that he the said Doctor
was like to gain by his hazardous undertaking, he never wanted some great Crime
or other: As for example, one while the returning unprofitable Land for
profitable; Another while keeping all men in the dark, Another while taking
great Bribes, of 500. l. at a time; Another while satisfying of the same
Debenters twice over; Another while suppressing Petitions at the Council, etc.
None of all which are now mentioned.

2.
It is a wonder that no Magistrate, Law, Judge nor Jury, nor no injured
Soldier or Surveyour had in four years time the skill and courage to bring him
to punishment.

3.
That though he had been Questioned, before the Council, and has had many
cases which might have been tried before the Court, set up for deciding
Controversies, between soldiers and soldiers, yet never had cheque or rebuke,
for any thing he ever did; though he ever urged all men to form their
jealousies into a Charge, as willing to be Questioned any where; yet that he
should (before any other Remedy was tried) be brought into two several
Parliaments to be punished, seems hard and needless.

4.
That this charge should be undertaken by a person of little Conversation in
these matters, One who having talked incredibly high upon his six first
Articles was forced to decline four, viz. That of bribes, buying Debenters
without license, wrong placing Debenters, and imbezelling the Armies security,
leaving only the two, that contained but general surmises. And that when he
returned out of Ireland (where he had been instructed by seven the most
diligent and subtle persons that ever acted in such a business) could
instance at his return but in seven particulars, three of which, and the
greatest, viz. The said Doctor having 7000. Acres without Order, That of
Straffords Survey, and devouring the odd pence of the Soldiers Debenters, he
was fain to quit upon further consi^erations, leaving only a few jests and
mistakes for the Parliaments Judicature, and in his last charge making three or
four Articles of one and the same matter.

5.
That the said Sir Hierom should accuse the said Doctor for persuading the
Council and Commissioners to sign Orders for his satisfaction, and for amusing
the Referrers mentioned in the seventh Article, to give him 3796. l. for
nothing, and yet never taxt any of them, for their negligence or ignorance in
reference to the Premises, nor the superior Powers for making use of such
Instruments, and for employing the said Doctor, the supposed worst of them all.

6.
That when the said Doctor l^boured to be t^yed in Ireland* before those who
had been Witness* of his Actings, (waving his privilege as a member of
Parliament for that purpose) that he should be hurried on a sudden to the
highest and last Judicature in England. That when he would go back into
Ireland, should be held in England, and endeavors used for his being sent back
thither ignominiously; And now he is in England, and desi^es to be tried here,
should be remanded into Ireland by an Order odly gotten, and as it were upon
Sir Hieroms stealing in the Articles into the House contrary to his own
promise, without so much as having them read through, before they were
referred, as himself related.

Out of all which, it is hoped no impartial Considerer of these things will
think it impossible, but that the said Doctor may be an honest man, nor will
judge him before he be heard, nor will have so little curiosity, as not to
desire he may be heard; but on the contrary will think, that a man coming from
small and unlikely beginnings to the management of many considerable Trusts, to
the favor successively of all in chief Power in his time, and to a competent
Estate, may be envied. Nor that among 20000. persons, who envy one another
Portions and Lotts, there may grow up an Epidemical malice, and a pannick fear
of strange Wrongs done and intended unto them; e^pecially it being so natural
in us all, to supplant those, to whom God has given any Eminency, either in
Riches, Power, or Parts, above our Selves, which (by the way) is often
cunningly and improperly said concerning him, to prejudice all those unto whom
he may endeavor to vindicate himself, or at least to keep Neuters, till the
bottom of the whole be laid open. And lastly, it is very probable from the
times of his Impeachment, the sparing him some years after the Body of his
Employments and Undertakings were over; the appearing of such a person as Sir
Hierom Sankey in the cause; the shifting of Articles from one nature and form
to another, the vehemence of the prosecution; the accusing him in Parliaments,
before any Remedy was sought elsewhere; the interest of the Parties; the
emptiness of the Complaints when scanned; the fewness of the miscarriages,
(though all allegations were proved,) if compared with the infinity of the
occasions from whence they arose; the Endeavors to have him Tried sometimes in
one place, sometimes in another, with the forbearance of others equally
taxable. Truly from all these Considerations, it is very probable, that some
more secret and private interest, is the true cause of the Doctors
tribulations. A strict Enquiry whereinto, would perhaps make much for the
public profit, and well become the Justice and Wisdom of the Parliament; that
the innocent Subjects and painful Servants of this Commonwealth be not
Sacrificed to private Spleen and Animosities, nor any man ruined to make good
the rash Engagements of others.

FINIS.

