A Pair of SPECTACLES FOR Mr. OBSERVER; OR, REMARKS ON THE Phanatical
Observations ON MY Lord Petre's LETTER To the KING.
THough the Reflecting upon the Errors of Popery be extremely commendable, yet
the amusing of the World with Lies, is not only mean and base, (hardening even
the Papists themselves;) but a thing also that has endangered both Church and
State, as all Loyal men of the least Capacity now plainly see, and acknowledge.
It Is not the jingle of a few words, nor is it the empty noise of Religion, that
can make an Intelligent and Awakn'd People fancy, That a Republican Observer
dreads the Deposing of Kings, or that a Regicide in temper fears the Stabbing
of them. These are Chymaera's, Phantomes, and Notions below the very reach of
the Vulgar; nay the Mythology or true English of them is as manifest as the Sun
it self in its Meridian. Yet when I remember, that the Stories of Papal
Dispensations to the Dying Members of that Communion were never more earnestly
and zealously insisted upon (by Tongue, Care, and the rest of them) than when
the King and all his known Friends were designed for Slaughter, I cannot think
it unbecoming a Faithful Subject to examine a little this Authors Comment on
the aforesaid Letter, and see whether he may not be justly suspected of having
the former Project in his Heart, since he has at first dash the same Cry in his
Mouth with the old Care of Religion in pretense, which has ushered in, and
cloak'd also the most dismal and blackest Villainies ever the Nation yet saw or
heard of.

His wise Proem is a doubt, Whether the Letter be his Lordships; Because he
thinks forsooth, That it ought to have had the Attestation of the Lieutenant,
of the Reverend Doctor Hawkins, or some other good Protestant. 2dly. Because
'twas Printed by T. B. and not by His Majesty's Printers: And 3dly. Because
it is Printed (as the Paper mentions) for one Mead, who is no known Bookseller
he says.

To these Reasons I Answer, that the Lieutenant did not only bring it to the
King, but his Lordship has to hundreds and hundreds of very Worthy Protestants
(who during his Confinement came often to him) most solemnly declared his
Innocence, together with a detestation of all Plots, and all Kingkilling or
Deposing Doctrines whatsoever. Now as for T. B. whether he were one of the
Assigns of Bill and Barker, or whether Mead be Free of the Company, I know not;
yet this I am sure of, that the Argument is very silly and weak; and if I
mistake not, the rest will be found in the same Mood and Figure* But before I
proceed, I cannot (I confess) but smile to see how Complemental and full of
Ceremony the Spark is with the aforesaid Loyal and Sober Clergyman, who,
instead of having due Respect or Reverence paid him (when Fitz-Harris's
business was on the Anvil) was nothing but Sir Reverenced, and Vilified by the
whole Cabal; and the like they would again do, not only to Him, but to the
whole Hierarchy, were their Sails a Trip, or their Out-ragious Hands and
Tongues unfettered.

Now for the Observations themselves, the first is; That a Papist for all his
Grimaces (and consequently his Lordship, if he be one) never really prayed for
the King, it being absolutely forbidden by a Synod at Dublin, as Father Walsh
the Franciscan has it (he says) in Print.

The point I confess would seem very strange, were not this an Age of Riddles;
and certainly it is at least Mystery, and a kind of Riddle too, that Papists
dare not Pray for the Welfare of their Sovereign, and yet dare Fight for it.
They can Juggle it seems with His Majesty in their Words, and remain yet real
in their Actions, even to the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes. Nay the
English Papists (for against them this shot is I suppose Levelled) have often
challenged (we find) all their Enemies in the Nation, To show any one man of
them (whether Gentle or Simple) that was ever False or Unfaithful. But I wish
for the sake of all True Protestants (who will not I am sure send the like
defiance) that Pug's Deputy, I mean this new Couranteer, had kept the Witness
concealed, his Name being I fear a little Scandalous; for the Papists here,
have not only called him all along Macedo, Liar, etc. but the whole Town knows
that he was in open War with his Order, and formally Excommunicated also for
his goodness. Yet the matter upon second thoughts may pass; for a Witness is
often the better, for a Blot in his Escutchion provided he be Advantageous to
the Brethren and their Cause.

In the next Paragraph this Munkyish Observer will have it ill Manners in the
Writer of the said Letter, for saying his Lordship has long lain under a false
and injurious Calumny, seeing his Lordship was Impeached (he says) by the
highest Court of Judicature in the Kingdom; yet he will have it, that if the
Letter be his Lordships own, it is only the word of a dying Romanist for the
concern of his Church, and that perchance He did it to gain Absolution; or that
there may be an Equivocation in the words.

As for his Lordships affronting the Parliament by protesting thus his
Innocence, I shall speak a little to it by and by; desiring the Reader to tell
me first, If this be a Crime, what do the Saints then deserve, who have Branded
that very House of Commons which Impeached his Lordship, with the Title of
Pensioners, and a thousand other Villainous Taunts and Nicknames? Now for the
business of Dispensations here mentioned (for the altering of the Phrase is
only to show his Elegance) 'twas too gross, too Childish to stand long on its
Legs; for who could imagine (when the hurry was once over, and all the
Elephants and Camels swallowed) that two or three Retailing Scriblers of this
new Faction should Monopolize to themselves the whole Secret, when as no body
else, no not the Converts from Popery ever heard of that Trick before. Besides,
how strangely odd must it appear to any thinking man, that his Holiness should
be so liberal, when 'twas Cockpit lay that he would loose by the Intrigue, and
yet permit his Pupills from time to time to suffer in their Persons and Estates
for not going to Church, even to Prayers of his own making, ( if the word of a
True Protestant were to be taken.) But the Imposture and design is now
discovered; and we know the Credit of the Kings Evidence was to be mantain'd,
to destroy both the King and Monarchy together. No wonder then that a man of
Probity in his Actions, a man without Welt or Guard in his Expressions, and a
man also that died with great Resignation and Peace, (as all the Protestants
about him can testify) should be taxed by these men of Equivocation, even when
he uses the Words of Oates's own Charge which his Lordship had it seems
formerly gotten; nay the very Words (if I be not much deceived) which the said
Oats Swore at the Bar of the Lords House against him.

His 4th. Observation (for the 3d. will follow next more methodically) is on
his Lordships affirmation, That the murdering of Kings, and the taking up of
Arms against Them, is, to his knowledge, no authorized Principle of the Popish
Religion. This makes the little Gentleman touchy, and say, That the Averment is
either delusive, or false, since Papists have Rebelled even in England and
Ireland, seeing their Councils have declared, and catagorically concluded it in
express terms; and lastly, seeing their greatest Doctors have avowed it also.

To this I first say, If owning Rebellion lawful by the determination of One or
more spiritual True-Protestant-Assemblies, (for such a Meeting, I suppose, in
our Casuist's sense is a Council) and if the asserting it by the Doctors and
Preachers of the Communion; and again, if the practicing it by the Flock in
general, makes the Position an authorized Principle of a Religion; I can tell
our said Casuist, with a vengeance, whose Religion this Doctrine is an
authorized Principle of; with this aggravation too, that 'twas never explicitly
nor implicitly disowned by the Party; nay, rather than recant, several of the
Fraternity have lately died the Devil's Martyrs for it, we know. But it is not
my Province to Accuse the Brethren, or Excuse Popery; but to Vindicate a Noble
Peer, and a Loyal Subject, who died a Christian, and hoped for Salvation by the
Merits of the Blessed Jesus only. To the business then, in God's Name.

The whole English World knows, That my Lord Petre was accused of intending the
King's Deposition and Death; nor is any body ignorant with what zeal 'twas
proclaimed through the Kingdom, That the lawfulness of it was a Popish
Principle, even a certain Tenet of that Religion. Now, seeing his Lordship
thought it (as he says in his Letter) a duty he owed to Truth and his own
Innocence, to clear himself of the Treason; was it not absolutely necessary (if
he could truly and knowingly do it) to declare the Doctrine a Calumny, and to
his knowledge to be no Principle of his Church? I say, was it not necessary for
him to do thus? especially when 'twas evident that our very believing this a
part of his Religion, infinitely strengthened the Evidence and Charge against
him?

This being his Case, and these his Motives, might he not then knowingly deny
the Principle, when several learned men had told him 'twas an aspersion; when
many zealous English Papists had, he knew, written against it; when he heard
that Books that maintained it had been censured and burnt in Popish Countries;
and especially, when he saw (even whilst he lay in Prison in a manner for the
King) that the Pope 's eldest Son, even the Popish King of France, with all
that Clergy, tell his Holiness to his face, That they detested this Doctrine;
for Princes held their Crowns from God alone; so that no Power under Heaven,
could Depose them, much more Murder them; Nay, his Lordship also knew, that
the good old Man, instead of damning his Child for the Fact, did (even since
this Declaration) send him his Blessing; which no body (I think) believes he
would have done, had His Majesty denied Transubstantiation, Purgatory, or any
real Tenet of the Popish Religion.

By this then we see, that the Council of Lateran (which imposed even
Transubstantiation on all Papists,) is far from obliging them to the deposing
Doctrine; and this Dr. Heylin (that great Champion against Popery) in his
Certamen Epistolare, plainly shows; and truly I shall much sooner follow the
Opinion of that eminent Divine, than Mr. Observer's. But still I say, that
Popery is Popery; and though Papists may be Loyal, many things in their Religion
may be yet Erroneous; nor will I be the sooner a Jew, because he is thus far in
the right, as to believe Moses and the Prophets.

So much then for this point; and now let us fall to the 3d Observation, which
is extremely remarkable and pleasant; it being on that part of the Letter which
puts Mr. Observer into an Ecstasy, and far above the Altitudes of Dol Common.

His Lordships words are these, That of the folly as well as falsehood of
Oates's Information, the sober part of Mankind are (as he conceives) ever this
sufficiently convinced. To which the Gentleman says, That the Paragraph smells
rank of the Priests Contrivance; That it arraigns the Justice of the Nation;
That it affronts His Sacred Majesty, the Pa^l^ament, the Judges, etc. calling
them in effect Fools and Madmen; That sober men are so far from being
convinced, as the Letter means, that on the contrary, Oats stands (in spite
of all the little Romish Arts) unshaken, and as firm as the Pillars of the
Earth; but the Popish Subornations and Tricks have been abundantly derected by
Providence, to their confusion, as appears in the Case of Knox and Lane. Then
to conclude, he says, That He who with deep asseverations avouches one Untruth,
cannot expect to be believed in another Affirmation; by any but Bankrupts in
Reason, and Prodigals in their Faith.

What a Rhapsody, and heap of unsorted, and (which is more) contradictory
things, has the Gentleman raked up here altogether, to his own confusion and
shame, (if a Whig had the grace to have any!) For, what an encouragement does
he give to Perjury, and any profligate wretch, if a Witness, must never be
questioned after Judgment? Magistrates and Governors are not Gods, though they
are called so; They must commit upon suspicion, and believe an Oath, when they
have no reason to doubt it, and therefore it is Justice in Judges to condemn
(even an Innocent,) if really, and in their conscience, they think him guilty.
Our very Law Books show us many sad Precedents of this Nature, without
dishonouring thereby the Government; and the Papists themselves, (though
sufferers) have had the ingenuity to own this Truth, as we see in the Lord
Castlemain's Manifesto: yet, had they been silent or dogged, Mr. Settle in his
Narrative, and the Observator also in his Loyal Treatises, have fully proved
the point, and answered all the Phanatical Objections and Pretenses. But who
could have imagined (had we not had a long and repeated experience of it) that
Claudius should rail at Debauchery, or that True-Protestants should be so
tender of the Honor of the Government, who blasphemed against all that is
Sacred, if their own Copyholds come once to be touched?

To pass by then the scandal they have cast upon Juries, by their Ignoramus's
and other Notorious Verdicts; Have they not defamed all our Courts, by
publicly decrying and disowning the Now PLOT; though Persons of Rank and Quality
have been the Witnesses; though the Condemned themselves have confessed the
Conspiracy; and though no one of them have had the impudence to deny it at their
Execution, which even in conscience he ought to have done, had he been
Innocent? Nor can any thing more unanswerably prove the Truth, Tenderness, and
exact Probity of the said Witnesses, than that so many Noted True Protestants
(who have been lately Imprisoned) are now at Liberty for want of Evidence; a
thing never heard of in the Salamanca Intrigue. Is not then Mr. Observer's
complaint against Defamation from the bottom of his heart, when all his party
have still aspersed the King, and all his best and truest Ministers?

But who could have thought this Fellow so foolish (unless Impudence and Folly
were synonimous) as to say, that no sober man questions Oats 's Evidence, but
that it stands as firm as the very Pillars of the Earth. Lord! what sport might
a man make with this high-flown and well-adapted Rhetoric, were not the Orator
too contemptible to be laughed at!

But pray Mr. Observer, since the Dr. is now so well and fully known, give me
leave to ask ye,

1st. Whether sober men do not question, but Coleman might have been known by
Candlelight, (notwithstanding the Doctor's ill eyes) since his Reverence had
such a world of intimacy with him, as he (the said Doctor) afterward alleged
at his Trial; and especially, since Coleman spoke first, as Sir Thomas Doleman
attested?

2ly. Whether sober men question not Ireland's being in London about the middle
of August, and 2d. of September, when his Journal (made out by a Crowd of
Eminent Witnesses, as well Protestants as Papists) shows, That he left the Town
on the 3d. of August, and returned not till the 14th. of September?

3ly. Whether sober men do not question, if poor creeping Pickering (who would
have started at a Titmouse) were appointed to shoot the King with chewed silver
Bullets; Or whether Groves ever showed the Doctor his Collectors Book of
Peter Pence; a thing that would not have raised 500 l. had all the Papists in
England paid their Quota?

4ly Whether sober men do not question Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's going in his
dejection, to the Doctor for Spiritual Comfort?

5ly. Whether sober men do not question old Whitebread's beating and cuffing
the Doctor, when he feared that he (the said Doctor) would betray the Plot?

6ly. Whether sober men do not question the Whitehorse-Consult, since the
Doctor could not tell Mr. Langhorn, whether he (the Dr.) came from Dover on
horseback or by Coach; since the Mistress of the said House (a Protestant)
disowned any such Assembly, since Mrs. Groves, and her Sister, and a Protestant
Maid, declared, that the Doctor was no Longer of theirs in April 78. and since
Sir Thomas Preston, Sir John Warner, and Mr. Hildesley, were proved not to
accompany the Dr. (as he said,) in his Journey?

7ly. Whether Sober men do not question Sir George Wakeman's giving (in
terminis) an Acquittance for 5000 l. (in part of 15000 l.) to Kill the King.
And whether they question not the Doctors knowing of all that Treason which he
Accused Sir George of at his Trial, when Sir Philip Lloyd witnessed, That the
said Doctor solemnly protested to the King and Council, that he had no Treason
to Charge him with.

8ly. Whether Sober men question not the Doctors Averment at my Lord
Castlemain's Trial, That he remembered not to have said he saw his Lordships
Divorce, since four times before he openly declared (twice of which was upon
Oath) That he had seen it in Mr. Strange's Hand. And again, whether they
question not the Spanish Fathers sending the Doctor (in the time of his very
Embassy and Negotiation) to show the Boys the way to School; as it appears (by
his Lordships Manifesto and Trial) he had Sworn.

9ly. Whether Sober men question not if the Lords (without Turbervil's help)
would in Lord Stafford's Trial have given Credit to the Doctor, having rejected
his Testimony against the Queen; For accusing her after he had Sworn, that he
had no more to say against any body in or out of the House.

10ly. Whether Sober men do not question the Doctor's whole Evidence in
Colledg's Trial, except it be, That he and Savage, ( as he Swears,) disputed
about the Existence of a God, and the Immortality of the Soul.

11ly. Whether Sober men do not question whether the Doctor be a Doctor or no.

To conclude with twelve Good men and True, or a full Jury of Questions; (for
the Venire it self is Infinite;) I say 12ly. Whether any Sober or Drunken men,
do think that my Lord Petre had ever a Commission or Patent to be Lieutenant
General of an Army, and therefore Mr. Observer be pleased to remember your late
Aphorism; to wit, That he that will avouch with the highest Asseveration one
Notorious Untruth, cannot be expected to be believed in his other Affirmations,
by any but a Bankrupt in his Reason, and a Prodigal in his Faith.

Let me Sir then end with this Advertisement, that you may write against Romish
Fopperies as long as you please, if that be the real drift of your Zeal; for no
good Protestant will ever vindicate Popery, though he may an Innocent and Loyal
Papist; especially when your Design, and that of your Party, is to Blacken the
King, to Subvert the Government both in Church and State, and to destroy all
His Majesty's True and Faithful Protestant Subjects.

I must here tell the Reader, (though late) that having forgotten the business of
Knox and Lane, he is to remember, that their Accuser as to any Popish practice,
was Dangerfield, the most Infamous Recorded Villain upon Earth; And therefore
let him judge now of the Evidence.

Printed for Thomas Price, Anno Dom. MDCLXXXIV.


